Table of Contents
Title 1 General Provisions for Use of Code of Ordinances
Chapter 1 Use and Construction of Code of Ordinances
Chapter 2 Enforcement of Ordinances; Issuance of Citations
Chapter 3 City Logo
Title 2 Government and Administration
Chapter 1 City Government; Elections
Chapter 2 Mayor; Common Council
Chapter 3 Municipal Officers and Employees
Chapter 4 Boards, Commissions and Committees
Chapter 5 Ethics Standards
Title 3 Finance and Public Records
Chapter 1 Finance
Chapter 2 Special Assessments
Chapter 3 Public Records
Chapter 4 Disposal of Lost, Abandoned and Surplus Property
Title 4 Administrative Determinations Review
Chapter 1 Review of Administrative Determinations
Title 5 Public Safety
Chapter 1 Law Enforcement
Chapter 2 Fire Protection
Chapter 3 Fire Prevention Code; Hazardous Materials
Chapter 4 Regulation of Alarm Systems
Chapter 5 Emergency Management
Title 6 Public Works
Chapter 1 Grades
Chapter 2 Streets and Sidewalks
Chapter 3 Driveways
Chapter 4 Trees and Shrubs
Chapter 5 Stormwater Management
Chapter 4 Illicit Discharges and Connections
Title 7 Licensing and Regulation
Chapter 1 Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
Chapter 2 Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
Chapter 3 Cigarette Licenses
Chapter 4 Direct Sellers
Chapter 5 Hotel-Motel Room Tax
Chapter 6 Taxicabs
Chapter 7 Regulation and Licensing of Fireworks
Chapter 8 Garage Sales
Chapter 9 Amusement Arcades
Chapter 10 Regulation of Non-Metallic Mining
Chapter 11 Transient and Temporary Public Entertainments
Chapter 12 Parades, Special Events and Special Road Use Events
Chapter 13 Pawn Brokers and Secondhand Article Dealers
Chapter 14 Licensees to Pay Local Claims; Appellate Procedures
Chapter 15 Weights and Measures Regulations
Chapter 16 Junk Dealer Licenses
Chapter 17 Manufactured/Mobile Home Communities
Chapter 18 License Replacement Fees
Chapter 19 Refund of License and Permit Fees
Chapter 16 Marches and Public Assemblies
Title 8 Health and Sanitation
Chapter 1 Health and Sanitation
Chapter 2 Pollution Abatement
Chapter 3 Refuse Disposal and Collection
Chapter 4 City Cemetery
Title 9 Public Utilities
Chapter 1 Water Utility Regulations and Rates
Chapter 2 Sewer Utility Regulations and Service Charges
Chapter 3 Miscellaneous Utilities Regulations
Chapter 4 Cable Television
Chapter 5 Private and Special Franchise Ordinances
Chapter 6 Stormwater Utility Regulations and Rates
Title 10 Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Chapter 1 Traffic and Parking
Chapter 2 Bicycles
Chapter 3 Snowmobiles
Chapter 4 All-Terrain Vehicles and Off-Road Motor Vehicle Operations
Chapter 5 Abandoned and Junked Vehicles
Chapter 6 Neighborhood Electric Vehicles
Chapter 6 Golf Carts
Title 11 Offenses and Nuisances
Chapter 1 State Statutes Adopted
Chapter 2 Offenses Against Public Safety and Peace
Chapter 3 Offenses Against Property
Chapter 4 Offenses Involving Alcoholic Beverages
Chapter 5 Offenses by Juveniles
Chapter 6 Public Nuisances
Title 12 Parks and Recreation
Chapter 1 Park Regulations
Chapter 2 Regulation of Boating
Chapter 3 Bulkhead Lines
Title 13 Zoning
Chapter 1 General Provisions
Chapter 2 Zoning Districts
Chapter 3 Special Districts
Chapter 4 General Land Use Performance Standards
Chapter 5 Conditional Uses
Chapter 6 Accessory Uses and Miscellaneous Standards
Chapter 7 Mobility Standards
Chapter 8 Development Review Procedures
Chapter 9 Subdivision Regulations
Title 14 Reserved For Future Use
Title 15 Building Code
Chapter 1 Building, Plumbing, Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning and Electrical
Codes
Chapter 2 Construction Site / Excavation Erosion Control
Chapter 3 Fair Housing
Chapter 4 Minimum Housing and Property Maintenance Code
Chapter 5 Grievance Procedures Regarding Access to Public Buildings by
Handicapped Persons
Chapter 6 Permits Conditioned Upon Tax Payments
Title 1 General Provisions for Use and Code of Ordinances
Chapter 01 Use and Construction of Code of Ordinances
Division 1 Authority
1.01.11 Title of Code; Citation
A. These collected Ordinances shall be known and referred to as the "Code of Ordinances, City of
Onalaska, Wisconsin." References to the Code of Ordinances, City of Onalaska, Wisconsin, shall be cited
using a Title, Division, Section breakdown as follows: "Sec. 1.01.11, Code of Ordinances, City of
Onalaska, Wisconsin." This Code may also be referred to by the shortened title “Onalaska Code.”
1.01.12 Principles of Construction
A. The following rules or meanings shall be applied in the construction and interpretation of ordinances
codified in this Code of Ordinances unless such application would be clearly inconsistent with the plain
meaning or intent of the ordinances:
1. Acts by Agents. When an ordinance requires an act be done by a person, who may be legally
performed by an authorized agent of that principal person, the requirement shall be construed to
include all acts performed by such agents.
2. City. The City of Onalaska, La Crosse County, Wisconsin.
3. Code and Code of Ordinances. The words "Codes," "Municipal Code" and "Code of Ordinances"
when used in any section of this Code shall refer to this Code of Ordinances of the City of Onalaska
unless the context of the section clearly indicates otherwise.
4. Computation of Time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by these Ordinances,
the day of the act or event from which the period of time begins to run shall not be included, but the
last day of the period shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday. If the
period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays shall be excluded in the computation. As used in this Section, "legal holiday" means any
statewide legal holiday specified by state law and any other City holiday designated by the Common
Council.
5. County. The County of La Crosse, Wisconsin.
6. Delegation of Authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some
other City officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize
the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
7. Fine. The equivalent of the word "forfeiture," and vice versa.
8. General Rule. All words and phrases shall be construed according to their plain meaning in common
usage. However, words or phrases with a technical or special meaning shall be understood and
construed according to that technical or special meaning if such is the intent of the Ordinances.
9. Joint Authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three (3) or more City officers or
employees shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers of other persons.
10. Person. Any of the following entities: natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations,
bodies politic or any other entity of any kind which is capable of being sued.
11. Repeal. When any ordinance having the effect of repealing a prior ordinance is itself repealed, such
repeal shall not be construed to revive the prior ordinance or any part thereof, unless expressly so
provided.
12. Singular and Plural. Every word referring to the singular number only may extend and be applied to
several persons or things as well as to one person or thing, provided these rules of construction shall
not be applied to any provisions which shall contain any express language excluding such
construction or when the subject matter or context of such provisions may be in conflict thereto.
13. Tense. The use of any verb in the present tense shall not preclude the interpretation of the verb in the
future tense where appropriate.
14. Wisconsin Statutes. The term "Wisconsin Statutes" and its abbreviation as "Wis. Stats." shall mean,
in these Ordinances, the Wisconsin Statutes as of the adoption of this Code, as amended or
renumbered from time to time.
15. Wisconsin Administrative Code. The term "Wisconsin Administrative Code" and its abbreviation as
"Wis. Adm. Code" shall mean the Wisconsin Administrative Code as of the adoption of this Code, as
amended or renumbered from time to time.
1.01.13 Conflict of Provisions
A. If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each chapter shall control
as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter.
B. If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is
more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more
general provision.
1.01.14 Severability
A. If any provision of this Code of Ordinances is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by
reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any other provisions of these Ordinances.
1.01.15 Effective Date of Ordinances
A. Code of Ordinances. The Code of Ordinances, City of Onalaska, Wisconsin, shall take effect from and
after passage and publication as provided by state law.
B. Subsequent Ordinances. All Ordinances passed by the Common Council subsequent to the adoption of
the Code of Ordinances, except when otherwise specifically provided, shall take effect from and after their
publication.
1.01.16 Repeal of General Ordinances
A. Ordinances Repealed. All general Ordinances heretofore adopted by the Common Council are hereby
repealed. This shall not include any Ordinances or parts of Ordinances or resolutions relating to the
following subjects and not conflicting with the provisions of this Code, except that some of the following
provisions may be amended by this Code of Ordinances:
1. Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right
established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance;
2. Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or any
contract or obligations assumed by the City;
3. The administrative Ordinances or resolutions of the City not in conflict or inconsistent with the
provisions of the Code;
4. Any appropriation ordinance or resolution;
5. Any right or franchise granted by the Common Council to any person, firm or corporation;
6. Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing,
paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City;
7. Any ordinance or resolution establishing or prescribing the street grades of any streets in the City;
8. Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or special
assessments therefor;
9. Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City;
10. Any ordinance annexing property to the City;
11. Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, maintenance, demolition,
moving or removal of buildings or other structures;
12. Unified Development Code and Building Codes.
13. Charter ordinances.
14. The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the City of whatever name or description.
15. Water and sewer rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main construction.
B. Effect of Repeals. The repeal or amendment of any provision of this Code or of any other Ordinance or
resolution of the Common Council shall not:
1. Affect any rights, privileges, obligations or liabilities which were acquired or incurred or which had
accrued under the repealed or amended provision, unless the City has expressly reserved the right to
revoke such right, privilege, obligation or liability.
2. Affect any offense, penalty or forfeiture, or prosecution for any offense, or levy of any penalty or
forfeiture which has arisen prior to the repeal or amendment of the relevant provision of any
ordinance or resolution. The preceding sentence shall not preclude the application of a lesser penalty
or forfeiture if the new amending or repealing provision contains such a lesser penalty or forfeiture.
The procedure for prosecution of any violations of Ordinances repealed or amended shall be
conducted according to the procedure set forth in the new amending or repealing provision or other
procedure currently in effect.
1.01.17 General Penalty
A. General Penalty. Except where a penalty is provided elsewhere in this Code, any person over the age of
eighteen (18) years who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of such
violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows: Any person, upon conviction for violating any
provision of this Code for which another penalty is not provided, may be required to forfeit not more than
Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00).
1. First Offense - Penalty. Any person over the age of eighteen (18) years who shall violate any
provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor
more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), together with all costs, surcharges, penalty assessments,
and any other taxable item of cost as provided for by the laws of the State of Wisconsin as applicable
to forfeiture actions that are in effect at the time of the offense, and any other taxable costs as
imposed by any other provision of this code. In default of payment of such forfeiture and costs may
have their driving privilege suspended per Sec. 345.45(1)(b), Wis. Stats., or be imprisoned in the
County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid or both, but not exceeding six (6) months.
2. Second and Subsequent Offenses - Penalty. Any person over the age of eighteen (18) years who
is found guilty of violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code who has previously been
convicted of a violation of the same ordinance or part of an ordinance within three (3) years from the
date of the last offense to the date of the current offense shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less
than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each such offense,
together with all costs, surcharges, penalty assessments, and any other taxable item of cost as
provided for by the laws of the State of Wisconsin as applicable to forfeiture actions that are in effect
at the time of the offense, and any other taxable costs as imposed by any other provision of this
Code. In default of payment of such forfeiture and costs may have their driving privilege suspended
per Sec. 345.47(1)(b), Wis. Stats., or be imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs
are paid or both, but not exceeding six (6) months.
B. Continued Violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a
separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action to
prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code.
C. Other Remedies.
1. The City shall have any and all other remedies afforded by the Wisconsin Statutes in addition to the
forfeitures and costs of prosecution above.
2. Execution or assessment against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to pay a forfeiture
and costs of prosecution upon the order of any court for violation of any ordinance of the City, the
court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the defendant has been
released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for said forfeiture
and costs. In the alternative, upon authorization of the court imposing any such forfeiture and costs,
such sum as remains unpaid shall be assessed against any real property owned by the defendant
within the City and shall be added to the City's portion of the property tax liability.
3. In addition to any forfeiture imposed under this Section or any other penalty section of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Onalaska, the City may institute an action or proceeding to enjoin any
violation; and such violation or any nonpayment of any forfeiture and costs shall constitute the basis
for revocation or denial of any and all licenses and permits wherein the City is the issuing authority.
D. Time to Pay. Any forfeiture and costs imposed as a penalty pursuant to this Section or any penalty
provisions of this Code shall be payable forthwith if so ordered by the court; however, the court may, in its
discretion, allow reasonable time for payment, or reasonable payment plans, considering the defendant's
ability to pay, and the court shall allow any time for payment or payment plan as provided for by any state
law applicable at the time of imposition of the forfeiture.
E. Alternative Juvenile Dispositions and Sanctions.
1. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an Ordinance, the Court is authorized to impose any of the
dispositions listed in Secs. 938.343 and 938.344 Wis. Stats., in accordance with the provisions of
those Statutes, as amended from time to time.
2. For a juvenile who violates a condition of a dispositional order of the Court under Secs. 938.343 or
938.344, the Court is authorized to impose any of the sanctions listed in Sec. 938.355(6)(d) Wis.
Stats. in accordance with the provisions of those Statutes, as amended from time to time.
3. This section is enacted under the authority of Sec. 938.17(2)(cm) Wis. Stats.
1.01.18 City Clerk to Maintain Copies of Documents Incorporated by Reference
A. Whenever any standard code, rule, regulation, statute or other written or printed matter is adopted by
reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth herein and the City Clerk shall
maintain in their office a copy of any such material as adopted and as amended from time to time.
Materials on file in the office of the City Clerk shall be considered public records open to reasonable
examination by any person during the office hours subject to such restrictions on examination as the City
Clerk imposes for the preservation of the material.
1.01.19 City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
A. There shall be a City of Onalaska Fee Schedule approved at a minimum annually by the Common
Council which shall set forth all of the fees charged by the City of Onalaska.
Chapter 02 Enforcement of Ordinances; Issuance of Citations
Division 1 Enforcement
1.02.11 Method of Enforcement
A. The City of Onalaska hereby elects to use the citation method of enforcement of ordinances. All City
officers and other city personnel charged with responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances are hereby authorized pursuant to Sec. 66.0113, Wis. Stats., to issue citations for violations
of this Code of Ordinances, including ordinances for which a statutory counterpart exists.
1.02.12 Citations
A. Enforcement proceedings under this Code in Municipal Court may be initiated by the use of a compliant
or citation as authorized by Sec. 800.02, Wis. Stats. In addition to peace officers, the Zoning
Administrator, Fire Chief, Building Inspectors, City Engineer and City Attorney as well as designated
employees under their supervision, are authorized to issue citations for violations of the Municipal Code
which are directly related to their official responsibilities.
1.02.13 Schedule of Deposits
A. The schedule of cash deposits shall be established for use with citations issued under this Chapter by the
Common Council according to the penalty provision of this Code.
B. Deposits shall be made in cash, money order or certified check to the City Treasurer’s office which shall
provide a receipt therefor.
1.02.14 Procedure
A. Section 66.119(3), Wis. Stats., relating to violator's options and procedure on default, is hereby adopted
and incorporated herein by reference.
1.02.15 Non-Exclusivity
A. Other Ordinance. Adoption of this Chapter does not preclude the Common Council from adopting any
other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or
other matter.
B. Other Remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the City or any authorized
officer from proceeding under any other ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to enforce
any ordinance, regulation or order.
Chapter 03 City Logo
Division 1 Form and Use of City Logo
1.03.11 Form of Official City Logo
A. The City of Onalaska has adopted the logo set forth below as its official city logo (the “Official City Logo”)
depicted below is a stylized portrayal of the sun, water (lake), cattails, sunfish and sky (air). The words
“Onalaska Wisconsin Est. 1851” are integrated into the design. This Official City Logo shall be used by
the City of Onalaska and its departments only in their official capacity and shall not be used by others.
1.03.12 Use of Official City Logo
A. The Common Council finds that the Official City Logo as set forth herein above is a symbol of the
authority and jurisdiction of the City, and as such, are valuable assets of the City and its citizens. The
Common Council desires to insure that only appropriate uses are made of the Official City Logo.
B. The Official City Logo may not be used by individuals, groups or organizations other than the City.
C. No person shall use a symbol that imitates the Official City Logo or that is deceptively similar in
appearance to the Official City Logo.
1.03.13 Violation
A. Any person who violates this Chapter is deemed to have committed a civil infraction as set forth in
Chapter 1.01.17 of the Code of Ordinances and shall be punishable by a penalty of up to Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate
violation. The City’s right to prosecute under this Section shall not affect its rights to pursue civil or
injunctive relief under federal or state laws, or any other relief available under the law.
Title 2 Government and Administration
Chapter 01 City Government; Elections
Division 1 Authority
2.01.11 City Government
A. Mayor-Council Government. The City of Onalaska is a body corporate and politic with the powers of a
municipality at common law and governed by the provisions of Chs. 62 and 66, Wis. Stats., laws
amending those chapters, other acts of the legislature and the Constitution of the State of Wisconsin. The
City of Onalaska operates under the Mayor-Council form of government under Ch. 62, Wis. Stats.
B. Division of Responsibilities.
1. Legislative Branch. The Common Council is the legislative branch of City Government. Its primary
business is the passage of laws in the form of ordinances or resolutions which shall prescribe what
the law shall be, not only in relation to the particular facts existing at the time, but as to all future
cases arising under it. The Common Council shall fix the salaries of all officers and employees of the
City, and be charged with the official management of the City's financial affairs, its budget, its
revenues and the raising of funds necessary for the operation of the City.
2. Executive Branch. The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer. They shall take care that all City
ordinances and state laws are observed and enforced and that all City officers, boards, committees
and commissions discharge their duties.
2.01.12 Official Newspaper
A. The official newspaper of the City of Onalaska shall be the Coulee Courier.
2.01.13 Aldermanic District Boundaries
A. Number of Aldermanic Districts. The City of Onalaska shall be divided into three (3) Aldermanic
Districts.
B. Boundaries. The Aldermanic Districts shall be numbered and bounded as shown on the City of Onalaska
Aldermanic District and Ward Map on file in the office of the City Clerk. The Common Council shall modify
the City of Onalaska Aldermanic District and Ward Map when required by Sec. 5.15(2), Wis. Stats.
2.01.14 Appointment of Election Officials
A. There shall be a minimum of three (3) election inspectors for each polling place at each election.
Additional election inspectors may be appointed to serve at any poll where election day registration
makes it necessary. Pursuant to Sec. 7.30 Wis. Stats., the City Clerk or their designee may allow for the
selection of two (2) or more sets of officials to work at different times on election day and permit the City
Clerk or their designee to establish different working hours for different election officials assigned at the
same polling place.
2.01.15 Elections
A. Annual City Election. The annual City election shall be held on the first Tuesday in April or such day as
otherwise set forth by the Wisconsin Legislature for the spring election.
B. Polling Hours. The polls for all elections shall open at 7:00 a.m. and close at 8:00 p.m.
C. Polling Places. The designated polling place for all Wards and Council Member Districts of the City of
Onalaska shall be at City Hall, and such sites as designated by the Common Council.
D. Combining Wards. Wards may be combined for voting purposes if the Electors in the combined wards
vote for the same offices, per Sec. 5.15(6)(b), Wis. Stats.
2.01.16 Non-Partisan Primary for City Offices
A. Whenever three (3) or more candidates file nomination papers, candidates for elective City offices shall
be nominated by a non-partisan primary conducted pursuant to Sec. 8.11, Wis. Stats. Such candidate
shall file with their nomination papers a declaration that they will qualify for the office to which they may
be elected.
2.01.17 Severability
A. Should any section, subsection, clause, or provision of this Title be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Title in whole or in any part
thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid.
Chapter 02 City Administration
Division 1 Common Council and Committees
2.02.11 Common Council
A. The Council Member(s) of the City shall constitute the Common Council. The Common Council shall be
vested with all the powers of the City not specifically given some other officer, as well as those powers set
forth elsewhere throughout this Code.
B. The Common Council has the power to preserve order at its meetings, compel attendance of Council
Members and may fine or expel for neglect of duty. The Common Council shall be judge of the election
and qualification of its members.
2.02.12 Council Members
A. Election, Term, Number. The City shall have six (6) Council Members in addition to the Mayor, who is a
member of the Common Council by virtue of their office as Mayor. The six (6) Council Members shall
constitute the Common Council. Two Council Member(s) shall be elected from each Council Aldermanic
District. One (1) Council Member(s) from each of the three (3) Council Aldermanic Districts shall be
elected at the annual City election in the even-numbered years, and one (1) each of said Council
Members shall be elected at the City election in the odd-numbered years, all to hold office for a period of
two (2) years.
B. Appointment as Mayor. A Council Member shall be eligible for appointment as Mayor to fill an unexpired
term.
2.02.13 President of the Council
A. The Common Council at its first meeting subsequent to the regular election and qualification of new
members shall, after organization, annually choose from its members a President of the Council (“Council
President”) who, in the absence of the Mayor, shall preside at meetings of the Council and, during the
absence or inability of the Mayor, shall have the powers and duties of the Mayor, except that they shall
not have power to approve an act of the Common Council which the Mayor has disapproved, by filing
objections with the City Clerk. When so officiating, the Council President shall be referred to as "Acting
Mayor." The Council President shall be elected for a one (1) year term of office.
2.02.14 Standing Committees; Action on Committee Reports
A. Standing Committees. At the organizational meeting of the Common Council in each year following the
annual election, the Mayor shall appoint three (3) Council Members to each of the following committees,
subject to Council confirmation, the respecting general duties of which shall be as follows, and to make
whatever recommendations to the Council as they deem appropriate or as may be directed by the
Council:
1. Administrative Committee (licenses, administrative regulations and functions, recreation, City
Cemetery).
2. Finance and Personnel Committee (personnel administration, compensation, bond programs, risk
management, financial claims against the City).
3. Utilities Committee (light, power, water, transportation, sewer).
4. Judiciary Committee (ordinances, resolutions, legal claims against the City).
B. Committee Chairpersons. The chairperson of each committee shall be designated by the Mayor. No
Council Member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive years as a chairperson of a standing
committee. Each member shall serve as appointed unless excused by a majority of the members of the
Council. All Council Members shall serve on at least one (1) standing committee. The Mayor shall be an
ex-officio member of each standing committee.
C. Committee of the Whole; Special Committees.
1. If any issue requires committee review by more than one (1) committee, this issue may be referred to
the entire Common Council meeting as a "Committee of the Whole."
2. The Mayor may declare the entire Council a Committee of the Whole for informal discussion at any
meeting or for any other purpose, and shall ex-officio be chairman of the same.
3. The Mayor may, from time to time, appoint such special committee or committees as may deem
advisable or as provided for by motion or resolution stating the number of members and object
thereof to perform such duties as may be assigned to them.
D. Reference and Reports.
1. The Mayor may refer new business coming before the Common Council to the appropriate
committee, unless otherwise referred or disposed of by motion of the Council.
2. Formal committee recommendations will be placed on the agenda for Council action only if they are
submitted to the City Clerk within the deadlines set forth by the Clerk’s office and a minimum of thirty
six (36) hours prior to the meeting at which action is requested.
E. Cooperation of City Officers. All City officers shall, upon request of the chairman of the committee,
confer with the committee and supply to it such information as may be requested in connection with any
matter pending before the committee.
2.02.15 Powers of the Common Council
A. General. The Common Council shall be vested with all the powers of the City not specifically given some
other officer. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Common Council shall have the management and
control of the City property, finances, highways, streets, navigable waters and the public service, and
shall have the power to act for the government and good order of the City, for its commercial benefit and
for the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public, and may carry its powers into effect by
license, regulation, suppression, borrowing, taxation, special assessment, appropriation, forfeiture,
imprisonment and other necessary or convenient means. The powers hereby conferred shall be in
addition to all other grants and shall be limited only by express language.
B. Construction of Powers. Consistent with the purpose of giving to cities the largest measure of selfgovernment
in accordance with the spirit of the home rule amendment to the Constitution, the grants of
power to the Common Council in this Section and throughout this Code of Ordinances shall be liberally
construed in favor of the rights, powers and privileges of cities to promote the general welfare, peace,
good order and prosperity of the City and its inhabitants.
2.02.16 Cooperation with Other Municipalities
A. The Common Council, on behalf of the City, may join with other villages, towns, cities, counties or other
governmental entities in a cooperative arrangement for executing any power or duty in order to attain
greater economy or efficiency, including joint employment of appointive officers and employees and joint
purchasing programs.
2.02.17 Rules of the Common Council and its Sub-Committees
A. The Common Council and members of its sub-committees shall follow the “Rules of the Common Council
and its Sub-Committees” as adopted by the Common Council and as may be amended from time to time.
2.02.18 Vacancy in the Office of the Common Council
A. In the event of a vacancy in the office of the Common Council such vacancy shall be filled pursuant to
Sec. 17.23 Wis. Stats. Where the Common Council appoints a successor, the procedure for appointment
of a successor shall be as follows:
1. The Mayor shall provide notice to the Common Council that a vacancy has occurred at the first
meeting after the Mayor is informed or provided notice of the vacancy. At the time of the decision to
fill a vacancy in the Common Council, the Common Council shall determine whether the appointed
successor shall serve until the end of the current term or whether a special election shall occur
pursuant to Secs. 8.50 and 17.23, Wis. Stats.
2. Upon the Common Council voting to fill the vacancy by appointment, the Council may direct the
medium used to publicize the vacancy. The Mayor will announce that resumes and letters of interest
from individuals interested in filling the vacancy shall be accepted in the office of the City Clerk for
twenty-one (21) days following the meeting (“Application Period”).
3. Following the 22nd day after the Mayor’s announcement of the vacancy, the City Clerk shall make all
resumes received from individuals interested in the vacancy available to the Common Council and
the Mayor following the closure of the Application Period. The City Clerk will schedule joint Mayor and
Common Council interviews with all eligible candidates in a timely fashion.
4. The Mayor shall recommend an individual to fill the vacancy in the Common Council at the first
Common Council meeting following the closure of the Application Period.
5. The Common Council shall vote in a public ballot on the approval of the appointment of the individual
recommended by the Mayor.
6. If the Common Council does not approve the appointment of the individual recommended by the
Mayor, the Mayor shall recommend an alternate candidate. This process shall continue until a
successor is approved by majority vote.
2.02.19 Salary and Expenses
A. Salary. Commencing on April 20, 2021, upon election alderpersons shall be compensated Six Thousand
Dollars ($6,000.00) per calendar year paid monthly while holding office. At the beginning of the each term
thereafter, the compensation shall increase by the same percentage as approved by the Council for the
full-time non-union positions for the preceding two years. The Common Council President, upon election,
shall receive an additional salary of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per month for the execution of their
duties as Council President. At the beginning of each election as Common Council President thereafter,
the compensation shall increase by the same percentage as approved by the Council for the full-time
non-union positions for the preceding year. Commencing upon election in 2021 and 2022 depending on
election year, alderpersons shall no longer receive the budgeted expense allotment.
Division 2 Mayor
2.02.21 Mayor
A. Election. The Mayor shall be elected in even-numbered years for a term of four (4) years.
B. Duties.
1. The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive officer of the City. They shall take care that City ordinances
and the State Statutes are observed and enforced.
2. The Mayor shall, from time to time, provide the Council such information and recommend such
measures as they may deem advantageous to the City. When present, they shall preside at the
meetings of the Council.
3. The Mayor shall have such other duties and responsibilities as are prescribed in the Wisconsin
Statutes.
4. The Mayor shall vote in the event of a tie vote by the Common Council.
C. Signatory for Grants-In-Aid. The Mayor is authorized without approval of the Common Council to
execute applications to State or Federal agencies for financial grants-in-aid for lawful purposes. This shall
be done on the condition that such applications shall not bind the City to an expenditure of funds and a
report that such an application, including the reasons therefor, shall be made to the Common Council
within thirty (30) days after execution by the Mayor. The Council, within thirty (30) days of the receipt of
the report, may, upon majority vote of all members, cause the application to be withdrawn.
D. Veto Power. The Mayor shall have the veto power as provided by State law as to acts of the Council. All
Council acts shall be submitted to the Mayor by the City Clerk, and shall be in force upon their approval,
evidenced by their signature, or upon their failing to approve and disapprove within five (5) days, which
fact shall be certified thereon by the City Clerk. If the Mayor disapproves, they shall file their objection
with the City Clerk, who shall present it to the Council at its next meeting. A two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the
members of the Council shall be necessary to make the act effective, notwithstanding the objection of the
Mayor.
2.02.22 Salary
A. Salary. Commencing on April 16, 2024, the Mayor shall be compensated Twenty Three Thousand
Dollars ($23,000.00) per calendar year paid monthly while holding office. Commencing with each new
term, the compensation shall increase by the same percentage as approved by the Council for the fulltime
non-union positions for the four years prior. Commencing on April 16, 2024 the Mayor shall no longer
receive the budgeted expense allotment.
Division 3 Meetings
2.02.31 Meetings of the Common Council
A. Annual Organization Meeting. Following a regular City election, the Common Council shall meet on the
third Tuesday of April for the purpose of organization.
B. Regular Meetings. Regular meeting of the Common Council shall be held on the second Tuesday of
each calendar month, at the hour of 7:00 p.m. for each month of the year. Any regular meetings falling
upon a legal holiday shall be held on the next following secular day, at the same hour and place, or as
otherwise designated by majority vote of the Common Council. All meetings of the Council shall be held
in the Onalaska City Hall when practicable, including special meetings, unless another location is
designated by the Common Council at a previous meeting. Meetings may be held telephonically or via
videoconference subject to open meetings law when necessitated by an emergency declared under Title
5 of the City Ordinances.
2.02.32 Special Meetings
A. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by two (2) Council Members upon notice of the time and
purpose thereof being delivered at least twenty-four (24) hours before the meeting to each member of the
Council by written electronic notice delivered personally to each member or left at the member’s usual
abode at least twenty-four (24) hours before the meeting unless an affirmative waiver of notice has been
received. Any special meeting attended by all Council Members shall be a regular meeting for the
transaction of any business that may come before such meeting.
B. The Mayor may call a special meeting, without notice, at a regularly convened Council meeting if all
members are present. A special meeting may also be called if all members consent in writing to the
holding of such a meeting. If written consent is obtained, it shall be filed with the City Clerk before the
commencement of the meeting.
C. Non-governmental parties requesting a special meeting of the Council shall pay a fee as set forth on the
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule for such a meeting.
2.02.33 Open Meetings
A. Except as provided in Sec. 19.85, Wis. Stats., all meetings of the Common Council, committees thereof,
and boards, committees and commissions, shall be open to the public.
2.02.34 Quorum
A. Two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the Common Council shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number
may adjourn if two-thirds (2/3rds) is not present or compel the attendance of absent members. The Mayor
shall not be counted in computing a quorum. No action shall be taken unless a quorum is present.
B. The Council may, by a majority vote of those present, adjourn to a specific date and hour.
C. When the Council is required to take action at a regularly scheduled or special Council meeting and
cannot defer such action to the next regularly scheduled Council meeting, and it is known that the number
of the Council members required to establish a quorum or take such action cannot be physically present
at the meeting, any such absent member may be present at and participate in the meeting via
teleconference or videoconference as if the member were present in person. When it appears to the City
Clerk that the requisite number of Council members will not be physically present at a meeting where
such action is required, the City Clerk shall notify those members who will not be present to ascertain
whether they wish to be present via teleconference or videoconference. The City Clerk or their designee
shall then make all necessary arrangements to enable member(s) who wish to be present via
teleconference or videoconference to do so.
2.02.35 Presiding Officers
A. Presiding Officer. The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Common Council. In the absence of
the Mayor, the President of the Council shall preside. In case of absence of the Mayor and President of
the Council, the City Clerk shall call the meeting to order and the senior Council Member present shall be
the president pro tem.
B. Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order, and
conduct the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in the
current edition of Robert's Rules of Order, unless otherwise provided by statute or by these rules. Any
member shall have the right to appeal from a decision of the presiding officer. An appeal shall be
sustained by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members present excluding the Mayor. In the absence of the
City Clerk, the presiding officer shall appoint a Clerk pro tem.
2.02.36 Order of Business
A. Order of Business. At all regular meetings, the order of business shall be according to the tentative
agenda prepared by the City Clerk and distributed to the Mayor and the members of Common Council no
later than the Monday preceding the regular meeting. The Mayor, City Officers or any two Members of
Council may elect to place something on the agenda. Any items being placed on the Agenda shall be
submitted to the City Clerk in a timely fashion. Generally, the following order may be observed in the
conduct of all meetings of the Council.
1. Call to Order/Roll Call.
2. Pledge of Allegiance.
3. Public Input.
4. Report from the Mayor.
5. Consent Agenda.
6. Recap of Items Pulled from the Consent Agenda.
7. Business from committees, boards and commissions.
8. Finance & Personnel Committee
9. Judiciary & Administrative Committees
10. Board of Public Works
11. Plan Commission
12. Utilities Committee
13. Parks, Recreation and Library Board
14. Other sub-committees, boards and commissions which shall be listed in alphabetical order.
15. Reports by City Administrator, City Clerk, City Attorney, Officers and Departments.
16. Any Items for Closed Session.
17. Any other business permitted by law.
18. Adjournment.
B. Order to be Followed; Citizen Comments. No business shall be taken up out of order unless by
unanimous consent of all Council Members and in the absence of any debate whatsoever. The Mayor or
presiding officer may impose a time limit on the length of time citizens may address the Council.
C. Roll Call; Procedure When Quorum Lacking. As soon as the Council shall be called to order, the City
Clerk shall proceed to call the names of the members, noting who are present and who are absent and
record the same in the proceedings of the Council. If it shall appear that there is not a quorum present,
the fact shall be entered on the record and the Council shall adjourn.
Division 4 Robert’s Rules and Meeting Conduct
2.02.41 Conduct of Deliberations
A. A roll call shall be used with all questions, upon request of a Council Member or as required by law.
B. A voice vote shall be used with all motions not requiring a roll call.
C. All aye and nay votes shall be recorded in the official minutes.
D. Except as provided below, the Common Council shall in all other respects determine the rules of its
procedure, which shall be governed by the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Revised , which is
hereby incorporated by reference, unless otherwise provided by ordinance or Statute, except when
otherwise limited or modified by this Code of Ordinances;
1. No Council Member shall address the Council until they have been recognized by the presiding
officer. They shall thereupon address themselves to the presiding officer and confine their remarks to
the question under discussion.
2. When two (2) or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the presiding officer shall name the
member who is to speak first.
3. No person other than a Council Member shall address the Council except under order of business,
except that citizens may address the Council with the permission of the presiding officer as to matters
which are being considered by the Council at the time.
4. No motion shall be discussed or acted upon unless and until it has been seconded. No motion shall
be withdrawn or amended without the consent of the person making the same and the person
seconding it.
5. The Mayor shall not vote except in the case of a tie. When the Mayor does vote in case of a tie, their
vote shall be counted in determining whether a sufficient number of the Council has voted favorably
or unfavorably on any measure. A majority vote of all members of the Council in favor of any
proposed ordinance, resolution or appointment shall be necessary for passage or approval, unless a
larger number is required by ordinance or State Statute. Except as otherwise provided, a majority
vote of those present shall prevail in other cases.
6. Any member of the Council may demand a roll call vote. On confirmation of appointments and on the
adoption of any measure assessing or levying taxes, appropriating or disbursing money, or creating
any liability or charge against the City or any fund thereof, the vote shall be by roll call. A member of
the Council may not change their vote on any question after the result has been announced.
7. When a question is under discussion, the following motions shall have precedence in the order listed:
a. To adjourn.
b. To recess.
c. To lay on the table.
d. To move the previous question.
e. To postpone to a day certain.
f. To refer to a committee.
g. To amend.
h. To postpone indefinitely.
2.02.42 Reconsideration and Rescission of Questions
A. Reconsideration. It shall be in order for any member, if in the majority, to move for the reconsideration of
any vote in question at the same meeting or at the next succeeding regular adjourned meeting. A motion
to reconsider being put and lost shall not be renewed. If the motion for reconsideration is brought at the
succeeding Council meeting, it must appear on the agenda, due to open meeting law requirements.
B. Rescission. A motion for rescission may be heard at the next succeeding regular meeting of the Council
or the Sub-Committees which undertake the action proposed for rescission provided that such motion is
on the Agenda for such meeting and specifies exactly what action the Council or Sub-Committee will be
asked to take. A motion for rescission requires a two-thirds (2/3rds) vote. After the Council action in
question has been published it cannot be rescinded.
2.02.43 Call for the Previous Question
A. Any member desirous of terminating the debate may call the previous question when the question
announced by the Mayor shall be "call the main question." If a majority of the members present vote in
the affirmative, the main question shall be put to a vote without further debate, and its effect shall be to
put an end to all debate and bring the Council to a direct vote, first upon the pending amendment and
then upon the main question.
2.02.44 Amendment of Rules
A. The rules of this Chapter shall not be rescinded or amended unless the proposed amendment or motion
to rescind has laid over from a regular meeting, and then it shall require a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the
members of the Council.
2.02.45 Suspension of Rules
A. Any of the provisions of Divisions 3-5 of this Chapter, may be suspended temporarily by a recorded vote
of two-thirds (2/3) of the Council members present at any meeting.
Division 5 Ordinances
2.02.51 Introduction of Business, Resolutions and Ordinances; Disposition of
Communications
A. Ordinances to be in Writing. All ordinances submitted to the Council shall be in writing and shall begin
with a title introducing the same. Any written material introduced may be referred to the appropriate
committee pursuant to Sec. 2.02.14. Any member of the Council may require the reading in full of any
Ordinance or resolution at any time it is before the Council.
B. Subject and Numbering of Ordinances. Each Ordinance shall be related to no more than one (1)
subject. Amendment or repeal of ordinances shall only be accomplished if the amending or repealing
ordinance contains the number and title of the ordinance to be amended or repealed, and title of
amending and repealing ordinances shall reflect their purpose to amend or repeal.
C. Notice.
1. The Common Council may take action on an ordinance only if it appears on the written agenda for the
meeting at which action is requested.
2.02.52 Publication and Effect of Ordinances
A. All general ordinances of the City and all regulations imposing any penalty shall be published in the
official paper of the City and shall be immediately recorded, with the affidavit of publication, by the City
Clerk. A printed copy of such ordinance or regulation and published or purporting to be published therein
by direction of the Common Council shall be prima facie proof of due passage, publication and recording
thereof.
B. All ordinances shall take effect and be in force from and after passage and publication, unless otherwise
provided and published copies thereof shall have appended the date of first publication.
Chapter 03 Municipal Officers and Employees
Division 1 General Provisions
2.03.11 General Provisions
A. General Powers. Officers shall have the powers and duties prescribed for like officers of cities, towns
and villages, except as otherwise provided, and such powers and duties as are prescribed by law and
except as to the Mayor, shall perform such duties as shall be required of them by the Council. Officers
whose powers and duties are not enumerated in Ch. 62, Wis. Stats. shall have such powers and duties
as are prescribed by law for like officers or as are directed by the Council.
B. Rules. All officers and departments may make the necessary rules for the conduct of their duties and
incidental proceedings.
C. Applicability of Ethics Statutes. The general laws for the punishment of bribery, misdemeanors and
corruption in office shall apply to City officers.
D. Legal Representation. Whenever any City official in their official capacity proceeded against or obliged
to proceed before any Civil Court, Board, Committee or Commission, to defend or maintain their official
position, or because of some act arising out of the performance of their official duties, and they have
prevailed in such proceedings, or the Council has ordered the proceedings discontinued, the Council may
provide for payment to such official such sum as it sees fit, to reimburse them for the expenses
reasonably incurred for costs and attorney's fees.
E. Comptroller, Street Commissioner and Constable Eliminated. As provided in Sec. 62.09(1)(b), Wis.
Stats., the offices of Comptroller, Street Commissioner and Constable are hereby eliminated.
2.03.12 Eligibility for Office
A. No person shall be elected by the people to a City office who is not, at the time of their election, a citizen
of the United States and of this State, and an elector of the City, and in case of a ward office, of the ward,
and actually residing therein or is not eligible by State Statute to hold office.
B. An appointee by the Mayor, requiring to be confirmed by the Council, who shall be rejected by the
Council, shall be ineligible for appointment to the same office for one (1) year thereafter.
C. No member of the Common Council shall, during the term for which they are elected, be eligible for an
office or position which, during such term, has been created by, or the selection to which is vested in, the
Council, provided that the Council may be represented on City boards or commissions where no
additional remuneration is paid such representative except as otherwise provided by the laws of the State
of Wisconsin.
2.03.13 Removal from Office
A. Elected Officials. Elected officials may be removed by the Common Council as provided in Secs. 9.10,
17.12 and 17.16, Wis. Stats.
B. Appointed Officials. Appointed officials may be removed as provided in Secs. 17.12, and 17.16, Wis.
Stats.
2.03.14 Custody of Official Property
A. City officers must observe the standards of care imposed by Sec. 19.21, Wis. Stats., with respect to the
care and custody of official property.
2.03.15 Oath of Office; Bonds/Insurance of Officers
A. Oath. Every person elected or appointed to any statutory office shall take and file their official oath within
ten (10) days after the notice of their election or appointment.
B. Bonds. The City Clerk, and such other statutory officers as the laws of Wisconsin or the Common Council
may direct, shall execute and file an official bond in such form as the Council may determine. The Council
may at any time require new or additional bonds of any officer. All official bonds must be approved by the
Mayor and, when so approved, then be filed within ten (10) days after the officer executing the same shall
have been notified of this election or appointment. Official bonds shall be filed with the City and shall be
recorded in a book kept for that purpose. Such bonds shall be paid for by the City. If the Council does not
require any or all of these officials to execute and file an official bond, the council shall obtain a
dishonesty insurance policy or other appropriate insurance policy that covers such officials, in an amount
determined by the council, in lieu of the bond requirement.
2.03.16 Procedure-Making Authority
A. Authorization for Department Heads. Heads of departments of the City including, without limitation by
enumeration, the City Administrator, City Attorney, City Clerk, City Treasurer, Chief of Police, Director of
Public Works, Fire Chief, Human Resources Director, Parks and Recreation Director, and Zoning
Administrator, may make procedures, regulations or directives for the administration of their departments
in line with the policies of the Council, but not for the conduct of the general public.
B. Approval of Rules. Any proposed departmental procedures, regulation or directive other than those
proposed by the Police or Fire Department, shall be referred to the City Administrator for review. The
Police and Fire Departments shall report to the Mayor utilizing the subsequent process. The City
Administrator or Mayor shall either approve the proposed rule, or return the proposed rule to the
Department along with suggested revisions in a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed two (2) weeks.
All rules shall be consistent with City Ordinances, resolutions and applicable City Personnel Rules,
Policies and Regulations. Any rule or part thereof returned by the Mayor or City Administrator to the
Department Head shall be deemed to be unacceptable and not in force.
C. Time of Taking Effect. All proposed procedures, regulations or directives shall be effective at the
direction of the Department Head, unless returned by the City Administrator or Mayor, or the Common
Council acts by resolution to nullify such procedures. In emergency situations requiring immediate action,
procedures may become effective immediately; but all procedures so enacted shall be reported to the
City Administrator or Mayor within twenty-four (24) hours, with the reasons for the necessity for the
immediate implementation. All emergency procedures are temporary in nature and must be formally
presented to become permanent.
Division 2 Officers
2.03.21 Officers
A. Appointment by Council. The City of Onalaska, pursuant to Sec. 62.09 and 66.01, Wis. Stats., hereby
elects not to be governed by those portions of Ch. 62, Wis. Stats., which are in conflict with this Section.
The following offices shall be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the Common Council for an
indefinite term, subject to removal by a two-thirds (2/3rd) vote of the Common Council for incompetency,
misconduct, inefficiency or failure to perform duties:
1. Attorney
2. City Clerk
3. Engineer
4. Financial Services Director
5. Treasurer
6. Public Works Director
7. Director of Parks & Recreation
8. Zoning Administrator
9. Director of Inspections
B. Duties. The holder of any City office may be assigned additional duties or appointed to additional offices
as the Common Council may direct from time to time. Any reference in this Code of Ordinances to a
particular office shall be construed to refer to the holder of that office regardless of whether that individual
also has been assigned additional duties or also holds additional duties.
C. Compensation. Compensation of each office shall be determined by the City’s current wage scale.
D. Deputies. City officers may appoint Deputies subject to confirmation by a majority of all the members of
the Common Council. Deputies shall act under the respective City Officer and shall during the temporary
absences or disability of the City Officer or during a vacancy in such office, perform the duties of said City
Officer.
E. Other Officials. The Mayor shall have the authority to appoint such other officials as are created from
time to time by law or by the Common Council, whose appointments shall be confirmed by a majority vote
of the Common Council and whose terms of office and compensation, if any, shall be prescribed by the
Council.
2.03.22 Chief of Police
A. Appointment.
1. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Police and Fire Commission and shall hold the office,
subject to suspension or removal by the Police and Fire Commission for cause. The Chief of Police
shall within six (6) months after commencement of employment, or following any required
probationary period, whichever is later, establish and maintain residence at a distance not greater
than fifteen (15) miles from the nearest corporate boundary of the City.
2. The compensation to be paid the Chief of Police for their services, the hours of active duty, rest days,
vacation periods and any such similar benefits shall be determined by the Common Council from time
to time.
B. Duties. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for performing the duties required under State law and
the job description for the position of Chief of Police adopted by Common Council and as may be
amended from time to time.
2.03.23 Fire Chief
A. Appointment.
1. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Police and Fire Commission and shall hold the office, subject
to suspension or removal by the Police and Fire Commission for cause. The Fire Chief shall within six
(6) months after commencement of employment, or following any required probationary period,
whichever is later, establish and maintain residence at a distance not greater than fifteen (15) miles
from the nearest corporate boundary of the City.
2. The compensation to be paid the Fire Chief for their services, the hours of active duty, rest days,
vacation periods and any such similar benefits shall be determined by the Common Council from time
to time.
B. Duties. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for performing the duties required under State law and the job
description for the position of Fire Chief adopted by Common Council and as may be amended from time
to time.
2.03.24 Assessor
A. Appointment.
1. The City of Onalaska hereby elects not to be governed by those portions of Sec. 62.09(3)(b) WIs.
Stats. relating to the method of selection of the City Assessor which are in conflict with this Section.
2. The City Assessor, or assessing firm, shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the
Council. The Assessor's term shall commence on the first day of the month succeeding their
appointment. The City Assessor shall have an indefinite term of office, subject to removal for cause
by a two-thirds (2/3rds) vote of the Common Council.
3. A corporation or an independent contractor may be appointed as Assessor. The corporation or
independent contractor so appointed shall designate the person responsible for the assessment. The
designee shall file the official oath under Sec. 19.01, Wis. Stats., and sign the affidavit of the
Assessor attached to the assessment roll under Sec. 70.49, Wis. Stats.
4. No Assessor shall be appointed unless said Assessor is certified by the Wisconsin Department of
Revenue as qualified to perform the functions of the office of Assessor.
B. Duties. The Assessor shall perform all duties required of such office as provided by law and such other
duties as are requested to be executed by such person by the Common Council from time to time.
C. Definition. For purposes of this Section, "independent contractor" means a person who either is under
contract to furnish appraisal and assessment services or is customarily engaged in an independently
established trade, business or profession in which the services are offered to the general public.
D. Confidentiality of Information.
1. Whenever the Assessor, in the performance of the Assessor’s duties, requests or obtains income and
expense information pursuant to Sec. 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., or any successor statute thereto, then,
such income and expense information that is provided to the Assessor shall be held by the Assessor
on a confidential basis, except, however, that the information may be revealed to and used by
persons: in the discharging of duties imposed by law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office
(including, but not limited to, use by the Assessor in performance of official duties of the Assessor’s
office and use by the Board of Review in performance of its official duties); or pursuant to order of a
court. Income and expense information provided to the Assessor under Sec. 70.47(7)(af), unless a
court determines that it is inaccurate, is, per Sec. 70.47(7)(af), not subject to the right of inspection
and copying under Sec. 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
2. The several sections of the ordinance are declared to be severable. If any section or portion thereof
shall be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unlawful or unenforceable, such
decision shall apply only to the specific section or portion thereof directly specified in the decision,
and shall not affect the validity of any other provisions, sections or portions thereof of the ordinance.
The remainder of the ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. Any other ordinances whose
terms are in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed as to those terms that
conflict.
2.03.25 Weed Commissioner
A. The Weed Commissioner shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to Council confirmation. The term of
office of the Weed Commissioner shall commence on the first day of May following their appointment. The
Weed Commissioner shall take the official oath, which oath shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk,
and shall hold office for one (1) year. The Weed Commissioner shall hold office pursuant to and fulfill the
duties set out in state law.
2.03.26 City Administrator
A. Office and Purpose. The office of City Administrator is created, to be an officer of the City, pursuant to
Sec. 62.09(1)(a), Wis. Stats. The City Administrator shall be the chief operating officer of the City, shall
administer City departments to implement the policies set by the Council, and be responsible for the
efficient coordination of all City departments, boards and commissions. The Common Council may adopt
a job description for the City Administrator and amend it from time to time, and the City Administrator shall
substantially comply with the requirements of the job description. It is the intent that the City Administrator
shall have the clear authority to coordinate and administer the day-to-day operations of municipal
government as specified in this Section.
B. Appointment and Termination. At any time there is a vacancy in the office of City Administrator, a
nominee for the office shall be selected by a selection committee. The selection committee may delegate
any duties of the selection process to City staff or working groups and may appoint nominating
committees or interview panels as necessary. The selection committee shall negotiate the basic terms of
the nominee's employment contract, and the final contract shall contain such additional provisions as are
determined by the Common Council, City Attorney and Human Resources. The nominee and the
proposed terms of the employment contract shall be presented to the Council, which shall then confirm or
reject the nominee and the proposed terms of the nominee's employment contract. Confirmation shall be
by simple majority vote. Upon confirmation by the Council, the Mayor shall execute the employment
contract and the nominee shall assume the office. If the Common Council does not confirm either the
nominee or the proposed terms of the employment contract, then the selection committee shall either
begin searching for another nominee or attempt to re-negotiate the terms of the employment contract to
which the Council objects, and shall continue until a nominee and a contract have been confirmed by the
Council and an employment contract has been executed by the Mayor on behalf of the City. Selection
and confirmation of the City Administrator shall be based solely on merit, including education, training,
general fitness for office and experience in municipal administration.
C. Term. The City Administrator shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject to removal at any time by a
two-thirds (2/3rds) vote of the Council.
D. Contract. The City Administrator’s employment contract shall be in writing and shall specify that
employment is at-will.
E. Organizational Level. The City Administrator, as chief operating officer, is delegated the Mayor's
executive authority to administer independently the operations of certain City departments, as defined
below, and is therefore subordinate to, and performs duties at the request of, the Common Council. The
City Administrator is superior to, and has direct authority over, the heads of the City departments which
are under the City Administrator’s direction.
F. Specific Duties. The City Administrator shall perform the following duties, in addition to the duties
attendant to the office and as specified in the City Administrator's job description:
1. Administer the operations of, and have direct authority over the heads of the following City
departments: Assessor; Finance; Information Technology; Planning; Parks and Recreation; Public
Works; and all other City departments and offices the oversight of which is not given to other City
officials.
2. Coordinate the operations of, and facilitate the cooperation of all City departments, commissions and
boards to maximize the efficiency of implementation of policies set by the Council, regardless of
whether the City Administrator has direct authority over the departments, commissions or boards.
G. Annual Review. The City Administrator shall undergo an annual performance review consistent with the
review cycle for all exempt employees. The review shall be conducted by the Common Council President
and Finance & Personnel Chair; if they are one and the same, then another Council member, other than
the Council President shall be chosen by the Council President. The Mayor and Human Resources
Director will serve as advisors during the review. The Council President shall request input from the
remaining Council members for the review committee one (1) month prior to the review being completed.
The Council President shall prepare a report to the Council of the results of the review, identify specific
goals to address performance deficiencies, and recommend other appropriate actions to be taken,
including salary adjustments.
H. Acting City Administrator. The City Administrator may designate a City officer to act as City
Administrator in the City Administrator’s absence from office for reasons of illness, vacation, business or
any other reason for a period of more than three (3) days. The City Administrator may appoint a Deputy
City Administrator subject to confirmation by a majority of all the members of the Common Council. The
Deputy Administrator shall act under the City Administrator and shall during the temporary absences or
disability of the City Administrator or during a vacancy in such office, perform the duties of City
Administrator.
Division 3 Joint Municipal Court
2.03.31 Joint Municipal Court
A. Established. Pursuant to Ch. 755 Wis. Stats., there is hereby created and established a municipal court
designated "Joint Municipal Court” for the City of Onalaska, Town of Campbell, Town of Holland, Town of
Shelby, Village of Bangor, Village of Holmen, Village of Rockland and the Village of West Salem,
(hereinafter referred to individually as “Member Municipality” and collectively as “Member Municipalities”).
B. Municipal Court Committee. There is hereby created a Municipal Court Committee. The Municipal Court
Committee shall be comprised of one representative of each member municipality who shall be appointed
by the Mayor, President or Chair of the member municipality, subject to confirmation by the respective
governing body, and in addition, one (1) member who shall be a Police Chief of a member municipality.
The Chief’s position shall be replaced on a yearly basis by means of rotation among the chiefs. Chiefs will
rotate as follows: Onalaska, Campbell, Shelby, Bangor, Holmen, and West Salem. In the event a Member
Municipality not listed above has a Police Chief, they shall be added to the rotation. In order to assure
participation and continuity of representation, each member municipality may appoint an alternate
representative who shall act on committee matters in the absence of the representative. The term for
each municipal member representative, other than Chief, shall be for two (2) years.
C. Creation and Qualification of the Position of Municipal Judge. Pursuant to Ch. 755, Wis. Stats., the
office of Municipal Judge is hereby created. Eligibility for the office of Municipal Judge shall be as follows:
To be eligible for the office of Municipal Judge a person must be a qualified elector of a Member
Municipality.
D. Election and Term of Municipal Judge. The position of the municipal judge shall be by election. The
municipal judge shall be elected at large at the spring election, for a four (4) year term, commencing on
May 1st succeeding their election. Electors of the Member Municipalities shall be eligible to vote for the
municipal judge of the Joint Municipal Court.
E. Creation of the Position of Clerk of the Municipal Court. Pursuant to Ch. 755, Wis. Stats., the office of
the Clerk of the Joint Municipal Court is hereby created. Said Clerk shall take the position upon hire by
the City of Onalaska and written appointment by the municipal judge. One member of the Joint Municipal
Court Committee, selected by the Chair, shall participate in the interviews for the hiring of the Municipal
Court Clerk. Training and compensation of said clerk shall be as determined by the City of Onalaska after
consideration of any recommendation by the Municipal Court Committee.
F. Salary of Municipal Judge. The municipal judge shall receive a fixed salary and municipal judge's
training pursuant to Sec. 755.18, Wis. Stats., the salary to be determined by the City of Onalaska after
consideration of the recommendation of the Municipal Court Committee, subject to Sec. 755.04, Wis.
Stats., which shall be in lieu of fees and costs. The salary may be increased for a new term prior to the
beginning of the term of the judge or for the second year of the term of the judge, but shall not be
decreased during the term of the judge. The salary shall be paid in monthly installments. No salary shall
be paid to the municipal judge for any time during their term for which they have not executed and filed
the official bond and oath as required by this Section.
G. Bond and Oath of Municipal Judge. The municipal judge shall, after election to fill a vacancy, take and
file the official oath as prescribed in Sec. 755.03, Wis. Stats., with the City Clerk of the City of Onalaska.
In lieu of an official bond, the Member Municipalities shall collectively maintain the Municipal Court Judge
on a dishonesty insurance policy or other appropriate insurance policy that covers the judge and a copy
of the policy shall be provided yearly to the Joint Municipal Court Committee.
H. Oath of Municipal Court Clerk. The Municipal Court Clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of the
office take and file the official oath as prescribed in Sec. 19.01 Wis. Stats., with the City Clerk of the City
of Onalaska. The City of Onalaska shall provide a copy of the sworn oath to the other Member
Municipalities.
I. Jurisdiction of Municipal Judge. The municipal judge shall have jurisdiction as provided in Article VII,
Secs. 755.045 and 755.05, Wis. Stats., and as otherwise provided by state law. In addition, it shall have
exclusive jurisdiction over actions in the municipalities that are parties to the agreement and seeking to
impose forfeitures for violations of municipal ordinances, resolutions and by-laws.
J. Joint Municipal Court.
1. Location. The Joint Municipal Court's location shall be the City of Onalaska City Hall. The time(s) of
the municipal court shall be determined by the municipal judge and the Municipal Court Committee.
2. Vacancies. If the municipal judge is temporarily absent, sick or disabled, the provisions of Sec.
800.06(1), Wis. Stats., shall apply, and if the municipal judge becomes incompetent, unable or fails to
act, or in the event of a vacancy, the provisions of Sec. 800.06(2), Wis. Stats., shall apply. Any
substitute municipal judge designated or assigned hereunder shall be compensated as authorized by
Sec. 800.065(3), Wis. Stats.
3. The municipal judge shall satisfy all continuing education requirements for municipal judges.
4. Upon the proper and timely written request for substitution of the municipal judge, the provisions of
Sec. 800.05, Wis. Stats., shall apply.
5. The procedures of the Joint Municipal Court shall be in accord with the applicable Wisconsin
Statutes, this Chapter and the Joint Municipal Court Agreement entered into between the Member
Municipalities. The Joint Municipal Court shall abide by the Wisconsin Rules of Evidence and shall
abide by the Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule. In non-traffic matters, each Member Municipality
shall draft a bond schedule, which shall become effective upon approval by the Member
Municipality’s governing body. No bond shall exceed the maximum penalty which could be imposed
for the ordinance violation.
K. Fees and Costs.
1. The municipal judge may impose punishment and sentences as provided by Ch. 800 and 938 Wis.
Stats., and as provided in the ordinances of the Member Municipalities that are parties to the
agreement. The Treasurer of the City of Onalaska and the Municipal Court Clerk certifies the monthly
accounting with the State of Wisconsin. Such reports are available by request to each Member
Municipality.
2. The municipal judge shall collect a fee for Court Costs on each separate matter, whether it is on
default of appearance, a plea of guilty or no contest, on issuance of a warrant or summons or the
action is tried as a contested matter. For the purposes of this section, the “Court Costs” for matters
adjudicated by the Coulee Region Joint Municipal Court shall be at the maximum rate allowed
pursuant to Sec. 814.65, Wis. Stats., or its successor or replacement.
L. Withdrawal from Joint Municipal Court. Any member municipality may withdraw from this Agreement
by giving notice in writing to the Municipal Court Committee no later than September 30th of any year.
Upon giving such notice, the member municipality's participation in the joint municipal court shall
terminate on December 31st of said year.
M. Statutes Adopted by Reference. Chs. 755 and 800, Wis. Stats. as may be amended, are hereby
adopted by reference.
N. Contempt of Court. The municipal judge, after affording an opportunity to the person accused to be
heard in defense, may impose as sanction authorized under Sec. 800.12, Wis. Stats., and may impose a
forfeiture therefore not to exceed Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) or upon nonpayment of the forfeiture
and the assessments thereon, a jail sentence not to exceed seven (7) days.
Chapter 04 Boards and Commissions
Division 1 General Provisions for Boards
2.04.11 Board of Review
A. Composition. The Board of Review shall consist of the Mayor, City Clerk, and three (3) Council Members
appointed by the Mayor. The Board of Review members, except members who are full-time employees
or officers of the City of Onalaska, shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the Common
Council.
B. Duties. The duties and functions of the Board of Review shall be as prescribed in Secs. 70.46 and 70.47,
Wis. Stats.
C. Board's Duty. The Board shall carefully examine the assessment roll and correct all apparent errors in
description or computation. It shall add all omitted property but shall not raise or lower the assessment of
any property except after hearing, as provided by the Statutes.
D. Confidentiality. Whenever the Assessor, in the performance of the Assessor’s duties, requests or
obtains income and expense information pursuant to Sec. 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats. or any successor
statute thereto, then, such income and expense information may be revealed to and used by such
persons: in the discharging duties imposed by law; in the discharge of duties imposed by office (including
but not limited to, use by the Assessor in performance of official duties of the Assessor’s office and use by
the Board of Review in performance of its official duties); or pursuant to order of a court. Income and
expense information provided to the Assessor under Sec. 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., unless a court
determines that it is inaccurate, is, per Sec. 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats. confidential and not a public record
and therefore is not subject to the right of inspection and copying under Sec. 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
E. Severability. The several sections of this ordinance are declared to be severable. If any section or
portion thereof shall be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unlawful or
unenforceable, such decision shall apply only to the specific section or portion thereof directly specified in
the decision, and shall not affect the validity of any other provisions, sections or portions thereof of the
ordinance. The remainder of the ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. Any other ordinances
whose terms are in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed as to those terms
that conflict.
2.04.12 Board of Public Works
A. The Board of Public Works shall consist of the Director of Public Works, the Mayor, the Financial Services
Director, and two (2) Council Members along with an alternate Council Member. The two (2) Council
Members shall be annually appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council at the
organizational meeting. The alternate Council Member shall serve when either of the regular Council
Members are absent or must withdraw on grounds of conflict of interest. The Board of Public Works shall
perform those duties prescribed in this Code of Ordinances and Sec. 62.14, Wis. Stats.
2.04.13 Board of Zoning Appeals
A. Establishment. A Board of Zoning Appeals shall be appointed as specified in Sec. 62.23(7)(e), Wis.
Stats. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five (5) members, appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the Common Council. The member of the Common Council who serves on the Plan
Commission shall serve as an alternate member. The Mayor shall designate one (1) of the members
chairperson.
B. Powers. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the City's Unified
Development Code and Building Code.
2. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of City Unified Development Code, Floodplain
Regulations, and Building Code upon which the Board of Zoning Appeals is required to pass.
3. To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of the City's Unified
Development Code as described in Section 13.05.23.
4. The Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or may modify any order,
requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made regarding the premises.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter on which it is required to pass, or to effect any variation in the requirements
of the City's Unified Development Code and Building Codes.
C. Meetings and Rules. All meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call of the
chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. All hearings conducted by the said Board
shall be open to the public. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in
the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure
not in conflict with this Section or with applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
2.04.14 Parks, Recreation & Library Board
A. Appointments. The Parks, Recreation & Library Board shall consist of seven (7) members including six
(6) citizens from the City of Onalaska and one (1) Council Member. The members of this Board shall be
appointed for terms of three (3) years, except that the Council Member shall be annually appointed by the
Mayor subject to confirmation by the Council. Any Board member may be reappointed and may serve an
unlimited number of consecutive terms. In addition to the members set forth above, a student
recommended by the Onalaska High School administration may be appointed to the Board in an advisory,
non-voting capacity for a term of one (1) year.
B. Compensation; Oaths. No compensation shall be paid for service on the Board. Members shall take an
official oath as prescribed by Sec. 19.01, Wis. Stats., to be filed with the City Clerk.
C. Powers and Duties. The Board shall have all the powers conferred by law under Sec. 27.08, Wis. Stats.
and Sec. 43.54, Wis. Stats. and shall be charged with all the duties so required such as recommend,
oversee work, and oversee funds of all parks, park and recreational facilities, playgrounds, and
recreational activities as part of properties within the City. The Parks, Recreation & Library Board is
specifically empowered and directed:
1. To govern, manage, control, improve and care for all public parks located within, or partly within and
partly without, the corporate limits of the City and secure the quiet, orderly and suitable use and
enjoyment thereof by the people; also to adopt rules and regulations to promote these purposes.
2. To acquire in the name of the City for park purposes by gift, purchase, devise, bequest or
condemnation, either absolutely or in trust, money, real or personal property, or any incorporeal right
or privilege, provided gifts to the City of money or other property, real or personal, either absolutely or
in trust, for park purposes shall be accepted only after they have been recommended by the Board to
the Common Council and approved by said Common Council by resolution.
3. With prior Council approval, to buy or lease lands in the name of the City for park purposes within or
without the City and, with the approval of the Common Council, to sell or exchange property no longer
required for its purpose.
4. To serve as liaison between the City and the County library system library board.
5. To have the powers necessary and convenient for the effective and efficient management, control,
supervision and operation of the City park system, park and recreation facilities and recreation
programs, subject to budgetary approval by the Common Council.
6. To coordinate library related activities of the City and the County library system and ensure the City’s
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the library is carried out in the manner which best
serves the interest of the residents of the area.
7. To have jurisdiction of the parks and playgrounds throughout the City and assume full responsibility
for the equipping, developing and maintaining the physical facilities of the park system.
8. To establish such rules and regulations to promote the quiet, orderly and suitable use of the City
parks and playgrounds as the Board shall deem necessary.
9. And such other and further duties as may be necessary for the proper carrying out of the purposes of
said Board.
D. Public Recreation Program. The Parks, Recreation & Library Board shall determine the recreational
needs and shall have jurisdiction over the public recreation program of the City.
E. Record. The Parks, Recreation & Library Board shall keep a written record of its proceedings to include
all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk.
F. Finance.
1. Budget. The Board shall assist in preparing an annual budget for submission to the Common
Council, which budget shall reflect the Board's recommendations as to maintenance or acquisition of
City parks, open spaces, park and related facilities, recreation programs and equipment, summer or
seasonal employees, etc. Said annual budget request shall contain estimates as to revenues to be
derived from recreation programs or activities as well as estimated expenditures for operating the
parks and recreation system.
2. Deposits. All revenues and income from the operation of Park and Recreation Programs shall be
deposited with the City Treasurer.
3. Monetary Contributions. All monies donated to the City specifically for park or recreation use shall
be deposited in City accounts as a non-lapsing fund or reserve for such specific use.
2.04.15 Community Development Authority
A. Findings and Declaration of Necessity. The Common Council hereby finds and declares that a need
for blight elimination, community development, housing programs and projects exist in the City and that a
community development authority functioning within the City constitutes an effective and efficient means
for carrying out such programs and projects. The necessity in the public interest for the provisions of this
Section is also declared as a matter of legislative determination.
B. Creation of Community Development Authority; Status as Public Body. Pursuant to Sec. 66.1335
Wis. Stats. (entitled “Housing and Community Development Authorities”), there is hereby created a
community development authority, which shall be known as the “Community Development Authority of
the City of Onalaska.” The Community Development Authority (the “CDA”) is deemed a public body and
a body corporate and politic, exercising necessary public powers, and having all the powers, duties and
functions conferred on redevelopment authorities, community development authorities, housing
authorities and housing authorities for elderly persons by applicable law.
C. Composition of Governing Body; Powers Vested in Commissioners; Compensation. The CDA shall
consist of seven (7) resident persons having sufficient ability and experience in the field of urban renewal,
community development, and housing, who shall serve as the governing body (the “Commissioners”) of
the CDA. In addition to the members set forth above, a student recommended by the Onalaska High
School administration may be appointed to the Commission in an advisory, non-voting capacity for a term
of one (1) year. The powers of the CDA shall be vested in, and exercised by, the Commissioners in office
from time to time.
D. Compensation; Oaths. No compensation shall be paid for service on the CDA. Citizen members shall
take the official oath as required by Sec. 19.01, Wis. Stats., said oath to be filed with the City Clerk.
E. Appointment, Confirmation and Term of Commissioners; Vacancies. The Commissioners of the
CDA shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Common Council as follows:
1. Two (2) of the Commissioners shall be members of the Common Council, one (1) of which shall be a
member of the Finance and Personnel Committee and the other shall not be a member of the
Finance and Personnel Committee. Each of the Common Council Commissioners shall serve with full
voting rights. The remaining five (5) Commissioners of the CDA shall be selected with preference to
the following qualifications: (1) background in finance, banking, accounting, financial investments or
any combination thereof, (2) legal, paralegal or real estate law background or any combination
thereof, (3) background in either real estate, real estate development, commercial and residential
construction or property management or any combination thereof, (4) background in the Onalaska
business community and Onalaska community organizations and (5) background in either
manufacturing, business start-ups or other related background.
2. All Commissioners who are not members of the Common Council shall be appointed for terms of four
(4) years. A Commissioner who is not a member of the Common Council shall hold office until their
successor has been appointed and qualified, unless such Commissioner’s term is vacated earlier
because of their change of residence, removal, resignation, incapacity or death.
3. Vacancies occurring during any term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term and new
appointments or reappointments of Commissioners shall be made, in the same manner in which the
original appointments were made.
4. The Mayor of the City of Onalaska shall be a non-voting ex-officio member of the Community
Development Authority.
F. Evidence of Appointment. The records maintained in the office of the City Clerk reflecting that the City
Clerk administered the oath of appointment of the Commissioner. Such record shall be conclusive
evidence of the due and proper appointment of the Commissioner if such Commissioner has been duly
confirmed as herein provided and has duly taken and filed the official oath before entering upon their
office.
G. Removal of Commissioners. A Commissioner may be removed from office by the Mayor by
incompetency, inefficiency, neglect of duty or misconduct in office, but such Commissioner shall be
removed only after they shall have been given a copy of the charges at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing thereon and had an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel. In the event of the removal
of any Commissioner, a record of the proceedings, together with the charges and findings thereon, shall
be filed in the office of the City Clerk. To the extent applicable, the provisions of Sec. 17.16, Wis. Stats.,
relating to removal for cause shall apply to any such removal.
H. Meetings; Quorum; Bylaws. All meetings of the CDA shall be held in compliance with the provisions of
Subch. IV of Ch. 19, Wis. Stats. and this Code of Ordinances. Four (4) Commissioners shall constitute a
quorum of the CDA for the purpose of conducting its business and exercising its powers and for all other
purposes. Action may be taken by the CDA upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the Commissioners
present at any meeting of the CDA at which a quorum is present. No vacancy in the membership of the
CDA shall impair the right of a quorum to exercise the powers and perform the functions of the CDA. The
CDA may adopt and from time to time amend or repeal such bylaws and other rules and regulations not
inconsistent with applicable law as it deems necessary in the performance of its functions.
I. Selection of Officers, Agents and Employees.
1. The CDA shall annually elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the Commissioners.
Vacancies occurring in the office of Chairperson or Vice Chairperson shall be filled from among the
Commissioners for the unexpired portion of the term.
2. The CDA may employ technical experts and such other officers, agents and employees, permanent
and temporary, as it may require from time to time in the performance of its duties and functions,
within the limits of the funds available for such purpose. The CDA may delegate to one (1) or more of
its agents or employees such powers or duties as may deem proper.
3. The employees of the CDA shall be selected and serve under the provisions of the City’s civil service
system and shall be subject to pertinent civil service and personnel policies established for City
employees with equivalent duties and responsibilities unless the CDA:
a. Adopts and approves hiring, personnel and employment policies;
b. Resolves to apply and maintain hiring, personnel and employment policies; and
c. The CDA provides sixty (60) days’ notice of the adoption of the policies and resolutions set forth
above.
4. The CDA may call upon the City Attorney for such legal services as it may require, and may also
retain specialists to render legal services as required by the CDA from time to time. The CDA may
also contract with the City or any other agency or entity, public or private, for the provision of any
necessary staff services associated with or required by the CDA in the performance of its duties or
functions which could be performed by the staff of the CDA.
J. City Assistance to CDA.
1. The CDA is authorized to call upon any department, board, commission or agency of the City for
assistance and cooperation in the performance of CDA's duties and functions. All City departments,
boards, commissions and agencies are hereby authorized and directed to cooperate with, and furnish
assistance to, the CDA in the performance of the CDA's duties and functions to the extent that such
cooperation does not interfere with or disrupt the priorities and work programs of the City agency.
2. In the event that any department or commission or agency shall have good cause for failing to comply
with the request of the CDA for assistance, the matter shall be referred to the Mayor's office and, if
deemed necessary, to the Common Council for adjudication.
3. In addition, the CDA may contract with the City of Onalaska for performance of such services as may
be required by the authority in the performance of its functions. In the event assistance is provided by
the department, board, commission or agency of the City, whether by contract or not, the CDA shall
agree to compensate the City of Onalaska for all services rendered to the authority.
K. Interested Commissioners or Employees. No Commissioner or employee of the CDA shall acquire any
direct or indirect interest in any project or in any property included or planned to be included in any such
project, nor shall they have any direct or indirect interest in any contract or proposed contract for
insurance, materials or services to be furnished or used in any such project. If any Commissioner or
employee of the CDA owns or controls a direct or indirect interest in any property included or planned to
be included in any such project, they shall immediately disclose the same in writing to the CDA and such
disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes of the CDA, and such Commissioner or employee shall not
participate in any action by the CDA relating to such property. Failure to so disclose such interest shall
constitute misconduct in office.
L. Powers and Duties of CDA.
1. The CDA shall have all powers, duties and functions set out in Secs. 66.1201, 66.1213 and 66.1333
Wis. Stats. for housing and redevelopment authorities and as to all housing projects initiated by the
CDA it shall proceed under Secs. 66.1201 or 66.1213, Wis. Stats. as applicable and as to all projects
relating to blight elimination, slum clearance, urban renewal and redevelopment programs, it shall
proceed under Secs. 66.1301 to 66.1327, 66.1333, 66.1337 or 66.1105, Wis. Stats., as determined
appropriate by the Common Council on a project by project basis.
2. The CDA may, upon the direction of the Common Council, act as agent of the City in planning and
carrying out community development programs and activities funded under the Federal Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and any or all community development programs
and activities initiated by the CDA and approved by the Mayor and Common Council shall be
undertaken and carried out pursuant to such Act and other applicable law.
3. The CDA may, upon the direction of the Common Council, act as agent of the City in performing any
or all acts, except the development of the general plan of the City, which may otherwise be performed
by the Plan Commission under Secs. 66.1301 to 66.1327, 66.1333, 66.1337 or 66.1105 Wis. Stats.
4. In addition to the foregoing powers, duties and functions, the CDA shall have such other powers,
duties and functions related to community development as are conferred on it by the Common
Council from time to time.
M. Annual Budget. An annual budget shall be established by the CDA, which budget shall be subject to
approval of the Finance and Personnel Committee and the Common Council.
N. Annual Report. The CDA shall coordinate with City Staff to include a summary of their yearly activities in
the annual Planning Department report.
O. Evidence of Authority. A certified copy of this Section shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be
prima facie evidence of the CDA's right to transact business, and such ordinance shall not be subject to
challenge because of any technicality. In any suit, action or proceeding commenced against the CDA, a
certified copy of such ordinance shall be deemed conclusive evidence that the CDA is established and
authorized to transact business and exercise its powers hereunder and pursuant to Sec. 66.1335, Wis.
Stats.
P. Construction. All powers, duties and functions of a community development authority, as set forth in
Sec. 66.1335, Wis. Stats., are deemed to have been granted to the CDA as though set forth in this
Section, except as to those powers, duties and functions which are subject to further authorization and
direction of the Common Council, as set forth herein.
Q. Committees. The CDA shall create related committees and boards on an as needed basis to assist in
the implementation of the powers and duties of the CDA as set forth above including but not limited to
those powers conferred to a redevelopment authority as set forth in Sec. 66.1335, Wis. Stats. and such
other duties, powers and functions related to community development as are conferred on it by the
Common Council.
Division 2 General Provisions for Commissions
2.04.21 Police and Fire Commission
A. The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall consist of five (5) citizens who are residents of the
City, three (3) of whom shall constitute a quorum. The Mayor shall annually appoint at the organizational
meeting one (1) member for a term of five (5) years, subject to confirmation by the Council. No
appointment shall be made which will result in more than three (3) members of the board belonging to the
same political party. The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings. The Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners shall have the power and authority prescribed by Sec. 62.13, Wis. Stats., and this Code
of Ordinances.
2.04.22 Plan Commission
A. Composition. The Plan Commission shall consist of seven (7) members as follows: the Mayor, one (1)
Council Member, Director of Public Works, and four (4) citizens.
B. Appointment. The Common Council member shall be appointed by the Mayor each April and confirmed
by the Common Council for a period of one (1) year and the four (4) citizen members shall be appointed
by the Mayor for a term of three (3) years.
C. Organization of Commission. The Mayor shall appoint a presiding officer each year, which can be the
Mayor or any member of Plan Commission and the Commission shall select by election a vice-chairman,
secretary and such other officers as may in their judgement be necessary.
D. Record. The Plan Commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings to include all actions taken,
a copy of which shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum
but all actions shall require the affirmative approval of a majority of all of the members of the Commission.
E. Duties.
1. The Master Plan.
a. The Plan Commission may make, adopt and, as necessary, amend, extend or add to the master
plan, subject to Common Council confirmation, for the physical development of the City including
areas outside of its boundaries which, in the Plan Commission's judgment, bear relation to the
development of the City. The master plan, with the accompanying maps, plats and descriptive
and explanatory matter, shall show the Commission's recommendations for such physical
development, and may include, among other things without limitation because of enumeration,
the general location, character and extent of streets, highways, freeways, street grades,
roadways, walks, parking areas, public places and areas, parks, parkways, playgrounds, sites for
public buildings and structures, and the general location and extent of sewers, water conduits and
other public utilities whether privately or publicly owned, the acceptance, widening, narrowing,
extension, relocation, removal, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing
public ways, grounds, places, spaces, buildings, properties, utilities, routes or terminals, the
general location, character and extent of community centers and neighborhood units, and a
comprehensive zoning plan.
b. The Plan Commission may adopt the master plan as a whole by a single resolution, or as the
work of making the whole master plan progresses, may from time to time by resolution adopt a
part or parts thereof, any such part to correspond generally with one or more of the functional
subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan. The adoption of the plan or any part, amendment or
addition, shall be by resolution carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of all the
members of the Plan Commission, subject to confirmation by the Common Council. The
resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive matter, and other matters intended by the
Commission to form the whole or any part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on
the adopted plan or part thereof by the identifying signature of the Mayor and the City Clerk, and
a copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the Common Council. The purpose and
effect of the adoption and certifying of the master plan or part thereof shall be solely to aid the
Plan Commission and the Common Council in the performance of their duties.
2. Mandatory Referrals to Commission. The Common Council or officer of the City having final
authority thereon shall refer to the Plan Commission, for its consideration and report before final
action is taken by the Council, public body or officer, the following matters: the location, acceptance,
extension, alteration, vacation, abandonment, sale, acquisition of land for or lease of land for any
street, alley or other public ways (along with other appropriate City boards or commissions), park,
playground, airport, area for parking vehicles, or other memorial or public grounds; the location,
extension, abandonment or authorization for any public utility whether publicly or privately owned; all
plats of lands in the City or within the territory over which the City is given platting jurisdiction by Ch.
236, Wis. Stats.; the location, character and extent or acquisition, leasing or sale of lands for public or
semi-public housing, slum clearance, relief of congestion, or vacation camps for children; and the
amendment or repeal of any land use ordinance. Unless such report from the Commission is made
within thirty (30) days, or such longer period as may be stipulated by the Common Council, the
Council or other public body or officer may take final action without it.
3. Miscellaneous Powers. The Plan Commission exercises final review and approval of site
development plans and requests for conditional use permits and has the authority to make those
decisions which the City of Onalaska Unified Development Code (Title 13) has given the Plan
Commission the authority to make. The Plan Commission may make reports and recommendations
relating to the plan and development of the City to public officials and agencies, public utility
companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations and citizens. It may recommend
to the Common Council programs for public improvements. All public officials shall, upon request,
furnish to the Plan Commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require
for its work. The Plan Commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions,
may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary
monuments and markers thereon. In general, the Plan Commission shall have such powers as may
be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning in cooperation with
the Common Council.
F. Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same
manner as appointment for the full term.
G. Compensation; Oaths. No compensation shall be paid for service on the Commission. Citizen members
shall take the official oath as required by Sec. 19.01, Wis. Stats., said oath to be filed with the office of the
City Clerk.
2.04.23 Room Tax Commission
A. Membership and Organization. The Room Tax Commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall
be selected as follows: One (1) member of the Common Council; one (1) member shall be a
representative of the Wisconsin hotel and motel industry; three (3) members shall be citizens residing in
the City of Onalaska. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to Common Council approval.
Strong consideration shall be given to citizens members who are business owners or have experience in
tourism and hospitality industries. All members of the Commission shall serve for a one (1) year term from
the date of appointment. Any vacancies occurring on the Room Tax Commission shall be filled by
appointment by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common Council. Any person so appointed
shall serve the balance of the term of the person causing the vacancy. The Commission shall choose a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and such other officers as it deems appropriate.
B. Meetings. Meetings may be held under call of the Chairperson of the Commission or if requested in
writing by three (3) members of the Commission filed with the City Clerk in which event, the City Clerk
shall notify all members of the coming meeting. At least twenty-four (24) hours’ notice shall be allowed
under this procedure. The City Clerk shall give written notice of each meeting to the Mayor and to all
members of the Room Tax Commission. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. Such regular
meetings shall be open to the public.
C. Powers. The Room Tax Commission shall require for all organizations, whether private or governmental,
who receive funds hereunder, an annual accounting of the application of all room tax funds designated for
tourism development and tourism promotion (“Tourism Funds”). The Room Tax Commission shall
designate the use of all Tourism Funds of the City of Onalaska.
D. Statutory Authority. The Room Tax Commission shall be the entity in which room tax is allocated for
the City of Onalaska pursuant to Sec. 66.0615, Wis. Stats., as may be amended.
E. Compensation; Oaths. No compensation shall be paid for service on the Commission. Members shall
take an official oath as prescribed by Sec. 19.01, Wis. Stats., to be filed with the office of the City Clerk.
F. Annual Budget. An annual budget shall be established by the Room Tax Commission in conjunction with
the Financial Services Director, which budget shall be subject to approval of the Finance and Personnel
Committee and the Common Council.
2.04.24 Historic Preservation Commission
A. Composition and Appointment. A Historic Preservation Commission is hereby created, consisting of up to
eight (8) members but no less than seven (7) members. The membership shall consist of one (1) Council
Member; and up to seven (7) citizen members. Where possible, preference shall be given to have three (3)
of the citizen members have one (1) or more of the following backgrounds: real estate, property
development or construction, attorney, architecture, land use or planning, history or local historian. In
addition, the Common Council may appoint an ex-officio member of the Ho Chunk Nation or other Native
American Nation having cultural history in Onalaska. The ex-officio member shall serve a three (3) year
term. Each member shall have, to the highest extent practicable, a known interest in historic preservation.
The Mayor shall appoint the Commissioners subject to confirmation by the Common Council.
B. Appointment, Confirmation and Term of Commissioners; Vacancies. The Commissioners of the
Historic Preservation Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Common Council
for three year terms.
1. A Commissioner shall hold office until their successor has been appointed and qualified, unless such
Commissioner's term is vacated earlier because of their change of residence, removal, resignation,
incapacity or death.
2. Vacancies occurring during any term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term, and new
appointments or reappointments of Commissioners shall be made, in the same manner in which the
original appointments were made.
C. Powers and Duties of Historic Preservation Commission. The Commission shall have the power,
subject to the procedures set forth Section 13.02.45, to designate structures and historic sites and to
recommend designation of Historic Districts within the City limits.
D. Compensation; Oaths. No compensation shall be paid for service on the Commission. Members shall take
an official oath as prescribed by Sec. 19.01, Wis. Stats., said oath to be filed with the office of the City
Clerk.
2.04.25 Municipal Harbor Commission
A. Creation. Pursuant to a resolution by the City of Onalaska Common Council, there shall be a Municipal
Harbor Commission (the “MHC”) pursuant to Sec. 30.37, Wis. Stats.
B. Composition of Governing Body. The MHC shall consist of seven (7) resident persons who shall serve
as the governing body (the “Commissioners”) of the MHC.
C. Appointment, Confirmation and Term of Commissioners; Vacancies. The Commissioners of the
MHC shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Common Council, as follows:
1. The appointments of the seven (7) Commissioners shall be made for terms of three (3) years. A
Commissioner shall hold office until their successor has been appointed and qualified, unless such
Commissioner's term is vacated earlier because of their change of residence, removal, resignation,
incapacity or death.
2. Vacancies occurring during any term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term, and new
appointments or reappointments of Commissioners shall be made, in the same manner in which the
original appointments were made.
D. Compensation; Oaths. No compensation shall be paid for service on the Commission. Citizen members
shall take the official oath as required by Sec. 19.01, Wis. Stats., said oath to be filed with the office of the
City Clerk.
E. Filing of Certificate of Appointment. A certificate of the appointment or reappointment of any
Commissioner shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk. Such certificate shall be conclusive evidence
of the due and proper appointment of the Commissioner if such Commissioner has been duly confirmed
as herein provided and has duly taken and filed the official oath before entering upon their office.
F. Meetings; Quorum; Bylaws. All meetings of the MHC shall be held in compliance with the provisions of
Subch. IV of Ch. 19, Wis. Stats. and this Code of Ordinances. Four (4) Commissioners shall constitute a
quorum of the MHC for the purpose of conducting its business and exercising its powers and for all other
purposes. Action may be taken by the MHC upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the Commissioners
present at any meeting of the MHC at which a quorum is present. No vacancy in the membership of the
MHC shall impair the right of a quorum to exercise the powers and perform the functions of the MHC. The
MHC may adopt and from time to time amend or repeal such bylaws and other rules and regulations not
inconsistent with applicable law as it deems necessary in the performance of its functions.
G. Selection of Officers, Agents and Employees.
1. The MHC shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from among the Commissioners.
Vacancies occurring in the office of Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson shall be filled from among the
Commissioners for the unexpired portion of the term.
2. The MHC may employ technical experts and such other officers, agents and employees, permanent
and temporary, as it may require from time to time in the performance of its duties and functions,
within the limits of the funds available for such purpose. The MHC may delegate to one (1) or more of
its agents or employees such powers or duties as may deem proper.
3. The MHC may call upon the City Attorney for such legal services as it may require, and may also
retain specialists to render legal services as required by the MHC from time to time. The MHC may
also contract with the City or any other agency or entity, public or private, for the provision of any
necessary staff services associated with or required by the MHC in the performance of its duties or
functions which could be performed by the staff of the MHC
H. Duties and Powers. The purpose of the MHC is to provide for the development and operation of harbors
and the preservation of navigable waterways within the City of Onalaska. The City of Onalaska Municipal
Harbor Commission has the powers and shall perform all duties set forth in Secs. 30.37 and 30.38, Wis.
Stats., which are hereby incorporated by reference.
I. Relationship to Other Municipal Board and Commissions. The MHC shall make recommendations to
the Onalaska Common Council. The MHC shall function independently from the Onalaska Common
Council except when incurring debt, obtaining real property, selling real property or taking any action
requiring Common Council approve pursuant to Sec. 30.38, Wis. Stats.
Division 3 Meetings; Public Notices; and Residency Requirements
2.04.31 General Provisions Regarding Meetings and Public Notices
A. Regular Meetings; Public Notice. Every Board, Committee and Commission created by or existing
under the ordinances of the City shall:
1. Fix a regular date, time and place for its meeting;
2. All meeting notices shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk who shall cause the notice to be
published and posted in full compliance with the Open Meeting Law Requirements.
3. Post, at the City Hall, an agenda of the matters to be taken up at such meeting.
4. Record all proceedings conducted in meeting.
B. Special Meetings. Nothing shall preclude the calling of a special meeting or with dispensing with the
publication of notice or such posting of the agenda, for good cause, but such special meetings shall
nonetheless comply in all respects with the provisions of Secs. 19.81 to 19.89, Wis. Stats.
2.04.32 Residency Required for Service on Boards or Commissions
A. No person not a resident of and not residing in the City of Onalaska shall be appointed in a voting
capacity to any City board or commission. Any board or commission member who moves from the City
shall immediately be removed from such board or commission. This residency requirement shall not apply
to any City of Onalaska employees who hold a seat on any City board or commission as a result of their
employment with the City or any individual who sits on a board or commission as a result of their seat with
a third-party organization or as representative of a particular industry in Onalaska.
Chapter 05 Ethical Standards
Division 1 Administration
2.05.11 Declaration of Policy
It is declared that high ethical standards among City officers and employees are essential to the conduct of
good representative government and that a code of ethics for the guidance of public officers and employees
will help them avoid conflicts with improved standards of public service and will promote and strengthen the
confidence of the residents of the City in their public officers and employees. The purpose of this Chapter is to
establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such City officers and employees by setting forth
those acts or actions that are incompatible with the public interest and which compromise, or appear to
compromise, public trust in the fairness, independence and integrity of City officers and employees and their
official actions.
2.05.12 Statutory Standards of Conduct
A. The provisions of the following Sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, as from time to time amended, are
made a part of this Chapter and shall apply to all public officers and public employees whenever
applicable, to wit:
1. Sec. 946.10. Bribery of Public Officers and Employees.
2. Sec. 946.11. Special Privileges from Public Utilities.
3. Sec. 946.12. Misconduct in Public Office.
4. Sec. 946.13. Private Interest in Public Contract Prohibited.
2.05.13 Definitions
A. Anything of value. Any money or property, favor, service, payment, advance, forbearance, loan, or
promise of future employment, but does not include compensation and expenses paid by the city, fees,
and expenses which are permitted and reported under Sec. 19.56 Wis. Stats., political contributions which
are reported under Ch. 11, Wis. Stats., or hospitality extended for a purpose unrelated to state business
by a person other than an organization.
B. Associated. When used with reference to an organization, includes any organization in which a person or
a member of their immediate family is a director, officer or trustee, or owns or controls, directly or
indirectly, and severally or in the aggregate, at least ten percent (10%) of the outstanding equity.
C. Gift. The payment or receipt of anything of value without valuable consideration.
D. Organization. Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, trust.
E. Public Officer. Those persons serving in statutory elected or appointed offices provided for in Ch. 62,
Wis. Stats., and all members appointed to boards, committees and commissions established or appointed
by the Mayor, Chairperson and/or Common Council, whether paid or unpaid.
F. Public Employee. Any person excluded from the definition of a public officer who is employed by the
City.
Division 2 General Provisions
2.05.21 Specific Conflicts of Interest
A. Use of Public Property. No public officer or employee shall use or permit the use of City vehicles,
equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are
available to the public generally or are provided as City policy for the use of such officer or employee in
the conduct of official business, as authorized by the Common Council or authorized board, commission
or committee.
B. Conflicts of Interest. Except as provided herein, no public officer or public employee shall engage in any
business transaction with the City, or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is
incompatible with the proper discharge of their official duties or will tend to impair their independence or
judgment or action in the performance of their official duties.
C. Disclosure of Interest. Any public officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest, including
employment, in any business entity entering into, proposing to enter into or bidding on any transaction
with the City, or as part of their official duties will be making an official decision or recommendation
significantly affecting a business competitor, client or regular customer, shall disclose such interest to the
membership of the Common Council (or committee, board or commission thereof, as appropriate) to be
recorded in the minutes of that body. Upon such disclosure, it is advised that the public officer or
employee abstain from voting on the matter and from participating in the discussion of the matter.
D. Representing Private Interests before the Common Council or City Agencies. No public officer or
employee, including persons or firms engaged to provide professional services to the City, shall
represent, for compensation, private interests before the Common Council or any City board, commission
or committee without disclosure of the private business relationship and explicit consent of the Common
Council.
E. Disclosure of Confidential Information. No public officer or employee shall, without proper
authorization of the Common Council, disclose confidential information concerning the property,
government or affairs of the City, nor shall they use such information to advance the financial or other
private interest of themselves or others.
F. Gifts and Favors. No public officer or employee shall accept anything of value whether in the form of a
gift, service loan or promise from any person, who, to their knowledge, has a direct financial interest in
any transaction or official business with the City, which may tend to impair their independence of
judgment or action in the performance of their official duties. However, it is not a conflict of interest for any
public officer or employee to receive a gift or gratuity that is an unsolicited item of nominal intrinsic value,
such as a meal, up to Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) in value, and that is not intended to influence the
official or employee.
G. Disclosure of Interest in Legislation. To the extent that a member of the Common Council or any public
officer or employee of the City of Onalaska, whether paid or unpaid, participates in the discussion of or
gives official opinion to the Council on any legislation before the Council, they shall publicly disclose the
nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other private interest they have in such legislation.
2.05.22 Nepotism
A. Public Officers.
1. A public officer may not use their public office to obtain employment of the officer’s spouse or a
dependent relative (Sec. 19.5(2); 19.59(1)(a), Wis. Stats.). However, if the officer is not involved in
the hiring, promotion or conditions of employment, a qualified spouse or dependent may be hired or
promoted.
2. The State Board of Ethics recommends that officers do not advocate for or hire or promote, or
exercise jurisdiction, supervision or direction over someone the officer is related to as a parent,
grandparent, child, grandchild, sibling, parent-in- law, grandparent-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,
uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, or spouse.
B. Public Employees.
1. The City of Onalaska permits members of the same family to work for the City. The City will not,
however, consider or accept employment applications from individuals whose employment would
result in a supervisor/subordinate relationship or a possible conflict of interest.
2. Relatives are defined as: parent, spouse, child, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, cousin,
in-law or step-relative, or any person with whom the employee has a close personal relationship, such
as a domestic partner, romantic partner, or co-habitant.
3. If a conflict develops during the course of employment, Human Resources will evaluate the situation
on a case by case basis. If needed, supervision may be shifted to another supervisor to eliminate the
conflict and/or one (1) employee may have to transfer to another department or resign.
2.05.23 Confidentiality of Public Officers or Employees
A. Confidential information is, at the time of a proposed disclosure, information where the City’s interests in
its confidentiality or in the City’s effective functioning outweigh an interest in free speech to disclose same.
Confidential information includes but is not limited to information where the disclosure is prohibited by
common law, or state or federal law or statute unless the release of same is ordered pursuant to a lawful
order of a court or the informed consent of the subject, as applicable; and, information that is subject to
the exemptions of a governmental body to meet in open session under Sec. 19.85, Wis. Stats., unless
release is authorized by the legal custodian or other proper legal authorization is given. For purposes of
this Section information shall include knowledge imparted orally, recordings, and written documents or
records marked confidential.
B. No officer or employee may intentionally use or intentionally disclose confidential information concerning
the property, government or affairs of the City gained in the course of or by reason of their official position
or activities, nor shall such officer or employee use such information to advance the financial or other
private interests of such officer or employee or others.
2.05.24 Advisory Opinions
A. Any individual, either personally or on behalf of an organization or governmental body, may request of the
office of the City Attorney, an advisory opinion regarding the proprietary of any matter to which the person
is or may become a party. Any appointing officer, with the consent of a prospective appointee, may
request of the City Attorney an advisory opinion regarding the proprietary of any matter to which the
prospective appointee is or may become a party. The City Attorney shall review a request for an advisory
opinion and may advise the person making the request. Advisory opinions and requests therefore shall be
in writing. It is prima facie evidence of intent to comply with this Section when a person refers a matter to
the City Attorney and abides by the advisory opinion, if the material facts are as stated in the opinion
request. Except as provided below, the City Attorney may not make public the identity of an individual
requesting an advisory opinion or of individuals or organizations mentioned in the opinion.
B. The City Attorney replying to a request for an advisory opinion may make the opinion public with the
consent of the individual requesting the advisory opinion or the organization or governmental body on
whose behalf it is requested and may make public a summary of an advisory opinion issued under this
subsection after making sufficient alterations in the summary to prevent disclosing the identities of
individuals involved in the opinion. A person who makes or proposes to make public the substance of or
any portion of an advisory opinion requested by or on behalf of the person waives the confidentiality of
the request for an advisory opinion and of any records obtained or prepared by the office of the City
Attorney in connection with the request for an advisory opinion.
Division 3 Enforcement
2.05.31 Sanctions
A. A determination that a public official or public employee’s actions constitute improper conduct under the
provisions of this Section may constitute a cause for removal from office, termination of employment,
suspension, reprimand, removal from committee assignment, sanctioning, censuring or other appropriate
disciplinary action as permitted by law subject to any collective bargaining agreements or meet and confer
resolution. As an alternative or in addition to the sanctions imposed herein, any person violating the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a non-reimbursable forfeiture of no less than One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) nor more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation.
2.05.32 Enforcement and Collective Bargaining Agreements
A. Any person having concerns or complaints related to these Ethical Standards can bring their concern or
complaint to the office of the Human Resources Department. Upon receipt of a concern or complaint, the
Human Resources Director, the City Administrator and/or the Mayor and the applicable Department Head
or in the case of a concern or complaint with respect to a committee or committee member, the applicable
Committee Chairman, shall meet to investigate and make a determination with respect to the concern or
complaint and if necessary determine the appropriate level of disciplinary action. In the event that an
employee, covered under a collective bargaining agreement, is allegedly involved in a violation of these
Ethical Standards, the terms and conditions set forth in the applicable collective bargaining agreement
shall prevail in the administration and interpretation of this Ethical Standards Chapter.
Chapter 06 Review of Administrative Determinations
Division 1 Authority
2.06.11 Adoption by Reference
A. The provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 68.01—68.03, 68.05—68.14, commonly known as the "Municipal
Administrative Procedure" laws, which govern the review of administrative determinations by a
municipality, or its governing body, boards, commissions, officers or employees, are hereby adopted by
reference and made applicable to the review of administrative determinations by the city, or its governing
body, boards, commissions, officers or employees, except as such are in conflict or inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter and as are inapplicable by their nature.
Title 3 Finance
Chapter 01 Finance
Division 1 Finance Administration
3.01.11 Fee for Returning Checks with Insufficient Funds; Reimbursement of Collection
Costs
A. Insufficient Fund Fee. There shall be a Thirty Dollar ($30.00) fee for processing checks made payable to
the City that are returned because of insufficient funds in the account in question.
B. Collection. Collection costs and attorney’s fees shall be added to the principal amounts of unpaid bills
owed to the City that are placed with collection agencies.
3.01.12 Duplicate Treasurer’s Bond Eliminated.
A. Bond Eliminated. The City of Onalaska elects not to give the bond on the bond for the City Treasurer
provided for by Sec. 70.67(1), Wis. Stats.
B. City Liable for Default of Treasurer. Pursuant to Sec. 70.67(2), Wis. Stats., the City shall be obligated
to pay, in case the City Treasurer shall fail to do so, all state and county taxes required by law to be paid
by such City Treasurer to the County Treasurer.
3.01.13 Public Depositories
A. The Common Council shall designate the public depository or depositories within this state within which
City funds shall be deposited, and when the money is deposited in such depository in the name of the
City, the Financial Services Director and bondsman shall not be liable for such losses as are defined by
state law. The Financial Services Director shall invest said money and the interest arising therefrom shall
be paid into the City Treasury. Pursuant to state law, designated public depositories shall be required to
pledge U.S. Treasury Notes equal in amount to any uninsured balance on the City’s deposit. State Law
Reference: Ch. 34 and Sec. 62.12(7), Wis. Stats.
3.01.14 Claims against the City
A. Payment of Claims. In addition to, and in lieu of the other methods provided by statute for the payment
of claims against the City, financial claims against the City may be paid from the City Treasury after the
Common Council shall have audited and approved each such claim as a proper charge against the
Treasury and shall have endorsed their approval thereon, after having determined that the following
conditions have been complied with:
1. That funds are available therefor, pursuant to the budget approved by the Council;
2. That the item or service covered by such claim has been duly authorized by the proper the proper
official, department head or board or commission;
3. That the item or service covered by such claim has been duly authorized by the property official,
department head, or board or commission;
4. That the item or service has been actually supplied or rendered in conformity with such authorization;
5. That the claim is just and valid, pursuant to law. The Financial Services Director may require the
submission of such proof and evidence to support the foregoing in their discretion as they deem
necessary.
3.01.15 Temporary Investment of Funds Not Immediately Needed
A. The Financial Services Director may invest any City funds not immediately needed pursuant to Secs.
66.04(2) and 219.05, Wis. Stats.
3.01.16 Facsimile Signatures
A. In lieu of the personal signatures of the City Clerk and Mayor, there may be affixed on order checks the
facsimile signatures of such persons adopted by them and approved by the Common Council, but the use
of the facsimile signature shall not relieve such official from any liability to which they are otherwise
subject, including the unauthorized use thereof.
3.01.17 Accounts Receivable
A. Receiving Money. The Financial Services Director or their deputies shall not receive any money into the
Treasury from any source except on account of taxes levied and collected during the fiscal year for which
they may then be serving, without giving a receipt therefor in the manner specified by the Common
Council.
B. Receipts. Upon the payment of any money (except for taxes as herein provided), the Financial Services
Director shall make out a receipt in duplicate for the money so received. The Financial Services Director
shall charge the amount thereof to the Treasury and credit the proper account. The payment of the
money to any receiving agent of the City or to the City or to the Financial Services Director shall be
safeguarded in such manner as the Common Council shall direct.
C. Billing Procedures. Billings by the City may be paid within thirty (30) days after billings without interest.
Thereafter, interest may be charged at the rate of one and one-half percent (1½ %) per month or any
fraction thereof, until the fifteenth (15th) day of November. Bills not paid on or before the fifteenth (15th) of
November shall have added to the total amount due one and one-half percent (1½ %) of said charges
shall be entered on the tax role as a special charge and become a lien upon real estate.
3.01.18 Statement of Special Assessments
A. Any party may obtain a Statement of Special Assessments from the City Clerk with respect to the
following information necessary for transfers of real property including:
1. The amount of outstanding special assessments;
2. Deferred assessments;
3. Changes in assessments;
4. Amount of taxes;
5. Outstanding water and sewer bills;
6. Current water and sewer bills;
7. Contemplated improvements;
8. Floodplain status; and
9. Violations of the building and health codes.
B. The Statement of Special Assessments shall be provided in a form prepared by the City Clerk upon
payment of the fee as set forth in the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. A minimum of forty-eight (48) hours
is required for preparation of a Statement of Real Property Status.
3.01.19 Annual Audits
A. A firm of certified public accountants shall be employed each year by the City, subject to the confirmation
of the Common Council to conduct a detailed audit of the City's financial transactions and its books, and
to assist the Financial Services Director in the management of the City's financial affairs, including the
City's public utilities. These auditors shall be employed on a calendar-year basis.
Division 2 City Budget
3.01.21 Fiscal Year
A. The calendar year shall be the fiscal year.
3.01.22 City Budget
A. Departmental Estimates. On or before October 1 of each year, each officer, department, board and
committee shall file with the Financial Services Director an itemized statement of disbursements during
the preceding fiscal year, and a detailed statement of the receipts and disbursements on account of any
special fund under the supervision of such officer, department, board or committee during such year, and
of the conditions and management of such fund; also detailed estimates of the same matters for the
current fiscal year and for the ensuing fiscal year. Such statements shall be presented in the form
prescribed by the City and shall be designated as “Departmental Estimates,” and shall be as nearly
uniform as possible for the main division of all departments.
B. Consideration of Estimates. The Financial Services Director and Administrator shall consider such
departmental estimates in consultation with the Department Head and recommend to the Common
Council’s Finance and Personnel Committee a budget amount for such department or activity. The
Finance and Personnel Committee and Common Council shall assist the Financial Services Director and
Administrator in developing a proposed budget for submission to the Common Council.
C. Proposed Budget. On or before November 1, the Finance and Personnel Committee shall prepare and
submit to the Common Council a proposed budget presenting a financial plan for conducting the affairs of
the City for the ensuing calendar year. The budget shall include the following information:
1. The expense of conducting each department and activity of the City for the ensuing fiscal year and
last preceding fiscal year, with reasons provided for increase and decrease recommended as
compared with appropriations for the current year.
2. An itemization of all anticipated income from the City from sources other than general property taxes
and bonds issued, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the City from each of the
same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year.
3. An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general property taxes which, with income
from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures.
4. Such other information as may be required by the Common Council and by state law.
D. Copies of Budget. The Financial Services Director shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the
budget summary thus prepared for distribution to citizens. The entire fiscal budget shall be available for
public inspection in the Office of the Financial Services Director during regular office hours.
E. Budget Hearing.
1. The Financial Services Director shall submit to the Council at the time the annual budget is submitted
the draft of an appropriation ordinance providing for the expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal
year. Upon the submission of the proposed appropriation ordinance to the Council, it shall be deemed
to have been regularly introduced therein.
2. A summary of such budget and notice of the time and place where such budget and detail is available
for public inspection and notice of the time and place for holding the public hearing thereof shall be
published in the official newspaper of the City at least fifteen (15) days prior to the time of such public
hearing.
3. Not less than fifteen (15) days after the publication of the proposed budget and the notice of hearing
thereof, the public hearing shall be held at the time and place stipulated, at which time any resident or
taxpayer of the City shall have an opportunity to be heard on the proposed budget. The budget
hearing may be adjourned from time to time.
4. A majority vote of the Common Council is required to adopt the proposed budget and appropriation
ordinance.
F. Budget Resolutions. The Common Council, by resolution, shall appropriate out of the receipts of the City
of Onalaska for the budget year, including monies received from the general property tax, the amounts
set forth in the budget as adopted by Common Council in November of each year, which shall be
incorporated herein by reference.
G. Tax Levies. The Common Council, by resolution, shall establish the amounts levied on taxable property
within the City of Onalaska each year, which shall be incorporated herein by reference. The City Clerk is
hereby authorized and directed to spread the aforesaid levies on the current tax roll of the City.
3.01.23 Budget Changes
A. Upon recommendation of the Finance and Personnel Committee, the Common Council by resolution may
at any time, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire membership, transfer any portion of an unencumbered
balance of an appropriation to any other purpose or object. Notice of such transfer shall be given by
publication within ten (10) days thereafter in the official newspaper of the City.
3.01.24 City Funds to Be Spent in Accordance with Appropriation
A. No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the City, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of
money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when
changed as authorized by Section 3.01.23 of this Division. At the close of each fiscal year, any
unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation;
but appropriations may be made by the Common Council, to be paid out of the income of
the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed
within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was
made shall have been accomplished or abandoned.
3.01.25 Compensation of City Officials and Employees
A. The salaries, wages, and other compensation of City officials and employees of the City of Onalaska are
established by resolution of the Common Council and incorporated herein by reference.
Chapter 02 Special Assessments
Division 1 General Provisions
3.02.11 Common Council Authority to Levy Special Assessments
A. The City of Onalaska by resolution of its Common Council may levy and collect special assessments
upon property in a limited and determinable area for special benefits conferred upon such property by any
municipal work or improvement and may provide for the payment of all or any part of the cost of the work
or improvement. In addition to other methods approved by law, special assessments for any public work
or improvement or any special charge for current services may be levied in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
B. The amount assessed against any property for any work or improvement which does not represent an
exercise of the police power shall not exceed the value of the benefits accruing to the property therefrom,
and for those representing an exercise of the police power, the assessment shall be upon a reasonable
basis as determined by the Common Council.
C. The favored procedure in the City for proceeding with making specially assessable public improvements
as generally set forth in this Chapter is not intended in any way to disregard or to bar proceeding under
other methods provided by law for making of public improvements and for the levying of assessments
therefor. Nor is this Chapter intended to be an exhaustive, detailed recodification of the state law under
said statutory section. Detailed requirements still require reference to said statutory section and the
subsections thereunder. The purpose hereof is to generally define and establish local procedures.
D. State Law Reference: Secs. 66.0703 and 66.0717, Wis. Stats.
3.02.12 Costs that May be Paid by Special Assessment
A. The cost of any work or improvement to be paid in whole or in part by special assessment on property
may include the direct and indirect cost thereof, the damages occasioned thereby, the interest on bonds
or notes issued in anticipation of the collection of the assessments, a reasonable charge for the services
of the administrative staff of the City and the cost of any architectural, engineering and legal services, and
any other item of direct or indirect cost which may reasonably be attributed to the proposed work or
improvement. The amount to be assessed against all property for any such proposed work or
improvement shall be apportioned among the individual parcels in the manner designated by the
Common Council.
3.02.13 Exemptions; Deductions
A. If any property deemed benefited shall by reason of any provision of law be exempt from assessment
therefor, such assessment shall be computed and shall be made part of the total project cost.
B. Corner Lot Credit. A parcel of land against which has been levied a special assessment for the sanitary
sewer or water main laid in one (1) of the streets upon which it abuts shall be entitled to such deduction or
exemption as the Common Council determines to be reasonable and just under the circumstances of
each case when a special assessment is levied for the sanitary sewer or water main laid in the other
street upon which such corner lot abuts. Under any circumstances the assessment will not be less than
the long way of such lot. The Common Council may allow a similar deduction or exemption from special
assessments levied for any other public improvement.
3.02.14 Special Assessment for Public Improvements Process
A. Preliminary Resolution. Public improvements carried out pursuant to Sec. 66.0703, Wis. Stats., and this
Chapter shall be initiated by a preliminary resolution presented to the Board of Public Works and then
Council by the Director of Public Works, which resolution shall declare the Council's intention to exercise
its assessment powers for such municipal purpose(s), describe the same, the limits of the proposed
assessment district, the number of installments in which special assessment may be paid or that the
number of installments will be determined at hearing thereon, and direct the Director of Public Works to
make a report thereon. After adoption of such preliminary resolution by the Common Council, copies
thereof shall be forwarded by the City Clerk to the Director of Public Works. The City Clerk shall forthwith,
after adoption of such preliminary resolution, obtain a list of the names and addresses of all interested
persons, if with reasonable diligence their names and addresses may be obtained, and forward the same
to the Director of Public Works. Upon receipt of copy of such preliminary resolution, the Director of Public
Works shall prepare the report thereon.
B. Report. The report required under Section 3.02.14.A above shall consist of:
1. Preliminary or final plans and specifications;
2. An estimate of the entire cost of the proposed work or improvement;
3. An estimate, as to each parcel of property affected, to include:
a. The assessment benefits to be levied;
b. The damages to be awarded for the property taken or damages;
c. The net amount of such benefits over damages or the net amount of such damages over benefits
4. A statement that the property against which the assessments are proposed is benefited, where the
work or improvements constitute an exercise of the police power. In such case, the estimates
required under Section 3.02.14.B.3 above shall be replaced by a schedule of the proposed
assessments.
5. A copy of the report when completed shall be filed with the City Clerk for public inspection.
C. When the Common Council determines by resolution that the hearing on the assessments be held
subsequent to the completion of the work or improvement or rendering of the service, the report required
by Sec. 66.0703(5), Wis. Stats., and A. and B. above shall still contain a statement of the final cost of the
work, service or improvement in lieu of an estimate of the cost.
D. Notice Requirements. On the completion and filing of the report and final resolution with the City Clerk
required in Section 3.02.14.B.5 above, the Director of Public Works shall prepare a Notice of Hearing,
which notice shall comply with Sec. 66.0703(7)(a), Wis. Stats., and state the nature of the proposed or
approved work or improvement, the general boundary lines of the proposed assessment district and the
place and time at which the report may be inspected. In publishing the Notice of Hearing, the City Clerk
shall set the place and time at which all interested persons, their agents or attorneys may appear before
the Common Council or Board of Public Works and be heard concerning the matters contained in the
preliminary resolution and report. Such notice shall be signed by the City Clerk who shall cause the same
to be published at least once in the official newspaper and shall mail a copy of such notice at least ten
(10) days before the hearing to every interested person whose post office address is known or can be
ascertained with reasonable diligence. The hearing shall commence not less than ten (10) days and not
more than forty (40) days after the publication or mailing of said notice.
E. Waiver of Notice, Assessments Under. The Council may, without any notice of hearing, levy and
assess the whole or any part of the cost of any municipal work or whole or any part of the cost of any
municipal work or improvement as a special assessment upon the property specifically benefited thereby
whenever notice and hearing thereon is in writing waived by all the owners of property affected by such
special assessment. In such cases, the procedure shall be the same as herein before provided excepting
for the noticing and holding of public hearing thereon.
F. Council Actions after Hearing.
1. Work or improvement previously authorized, approved or completed prior to the filing of the report or
hearing:
a. If the work or improvement has not been previously authorized or approved, the Common Council
shall approve the work or improvement and by resolution direct that the same be done and paid
for in accordance with the report finally approved.
b. If the work or improvement has been approved by the Common Council or work commenced or
completed prior to the filing of the report or prior to the hearing, then the Common Council shall
by resolution confirm the report as made or modified and provide for payment in whole or in part
by assessment.
2. After the hearing the Council may:
a. Approve, disapprove, modify or re-refer the report to the Director of Public Works with such
directions as it deems necessary to change the plans and specifications as to accomplish a fair
and equitable assessment.
b. Continue the public hearing, preliminarily approve plans and specifications and, if the project
requires advertising for bids, authorize and direct the advertisement therefor with a date certain
for consideration and taking action thereon, inclusive of action on said report and action on final
resolution.
3. If an assessment be made against any property and an award of compensation or damage be made
in favor of the property, the Common Council shall assess only the difference between such
assessment of benefits and the award of compensation or damage.
G. Final Resolution. The City Clerk shall publish the final resolution. After the publication of the final
resolution, any work or improvement provided for and not yet authorized shall be deemed fully authorized
and all awards of compensation or damage and all assessments made shall be deemed duly and
properly made, subject to the right of appeal by Sec. 66.0703(12), Wis. Stats., or any other applicable
provision of law.
H. Issuance of Special Assessment. As soon as the assessable cost of such work or improvement is
finalized, the Finance Department shall issue the special assessments for each property affected and
specifying the manner in which payment is to be made and shall send copy of the respective assessment
affecting each property to each owner's post office address that is known or can be obtained with
reasonable diligence.
I. Council’s Power to Amend, Cancel or Confirm Special Assessment. If, after completion or after the
receipt of bids, the actual cost of any work or improvement is found to vary materially from the original
estimate, or the assessment is void or invalid for any reason, or if the Common Council determines to
reconsider an assessment, it is empowered, after giving notice as required above to amend, cancel or
confirm any prior assessment; and notice of this amending, canceling or confirming be given by the City
Clerk as provided above.
J. Waiver. The Common Council may, without notice or hearing, levy and assess all or any part of the cost
of any work or improvement upon the property benefited if notice and hearing is waived in writing by
property owners affected.
3.02.15 Special Circumstances
A. Combined Assessments. If more than a single improvement is undertaken, the Common Council may
combine the assessments as a single assessment on each property affected except that the property
owner may object to any one or more of said improvements.
B. Cost of Improvement Less than Assessment. If the cost of the work or improvement is less than the
assessment levied, the Common Council without notice or hearing shall reduce each assessment
proportionately. If the assessment has been paid either in part or in full, the City shall refund the property
owner such overpayment.
3.02.16 Appeals; Appealed Assessments Payable When Due
A. Any person against whose property a special assessment is levied under this Chapter may appeal
therefrom in the manner prescribed by Sec. 66.0703(12) of the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, within
forty (40) days of the date of the final determination of the Common Council.
B. Pursuant to Sec. 66.60(t), Wis. Stats., it shall be a condition to the maintenance of any appeal that any
assessment appealed shall be paid when due and payable, and upon default in payment any such appeal
shall be dismissed.
3.02.17 Payment of Special Assessments; Special Assessments a Lien on Property
A. Payment of Special Assessments.
1. Without Interest. Upon receipt of copy of special assessment, any person may pay the same in full,
without interest, if paid to the City Treasurer within the grace period therein allowed and as allowed in
the final resolution.
2. Installments. As set forth in the final resolution, the Common Council may allow any special
assessment, when they exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), to be paid in equal installments,
equivalent to the length of time of any bond issuance that is issued for said improvements (the
“Financing”), together with interest at the rate determined by the Common Council, uniform with other
City special assessments, at a rate equal to one percent (1%) over the interest rate for the Financing
together with engineering and administrative fees equal to seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of the
project cost shall be added to the Special Assessment cost..
3. After Grace Period. If any special assessment, or any part thereof, remains unpaid following the
running of the grace period specified for payment without interest, at time of preparation of the first
tax roll thereafter, the same together with interest computed thereon at the interest rate established in
the final resolution and in said certificates computed thereon from the date of levy (i.e. date of final
resolution) or the finalizing of assessable costs whichever is later, shall be entered in such tax roll in
such manner as directed in said final resolution and certificate; thereafter, if the same be payable in
installments, subsequent installments together with interest at said rate computed on declining
balance shall be entered in subsequent tax rolls until fully paid. This provision is in no way intended to
prohibit the prepayment of the balance owning at any time on principal together with interest to the
date of payment only.
B. Assessment as Lien. Pursuant to Subsection (13) of Sec. 66.0703, Wisconsin Statutes, any special
assessment levied under this Chapter shall be a lien on the property against which it is levied on behalf of
the City. The Common Council shall provide for the collection of such assessments and may establish
penalties for payment after the due date. The Common Council shall provide that all assessments not
paid by the date specified shall be extended upon the tax roll as delinquent tax against the property and
all proceedings in relation to the collection of such delinquent taxes shall apply to such assessment,
except as otherwise provided by statute.
C. Special Assessments Non Transferrable. Special assessments shall not be transferred to a new owner
and shall be immediately due and payable to the City when the parcel of real estate is sold, assigned, or
conveyed.
3.02.18 Special Charges Permissible
A. In addition to all other methods provided by law, special charges for current services may be imposed by
resolution by the Common Council by allocating all or part of the cost of the property served. Such
resolution setting forth the property location, the current service rendered by the City and the special
charge therefor or cost thereof. Such resolution for special charges may include snow and ice removal,
weed elimination, street scaling, repair of sidewalks or curb and gutter, garbage and refuse disposal,
sewer and water service and tree care or removal. The provision for notice of such charges shall be
optional with the Common Council except that in the case of street, sidewalk (except sidewalk repairs as
part of the yearly Sidewalk Program Repairs), curb or gutter repair, a Class 1 notice published in the
official City newspaper at least twenty (20) days before the hearing or proceeding and a copy of such
notice mailed to every interested person whose post office address is known, at least ten (10) days before
the hearing or proceeding. Such notice shall specify that on a certain date a hearing will be held by the
Common Council as to whether the service in question shall be performed.
B. Special charges for current services shall not be payable installments. If not paid within the period fixed
by the Common Council in said resolution, such delinquent special charges, pursuant to Section
3.02.07.C, shall become a lien on said property as of the date of such delinquency and shall automatically
be extended upon the current or next tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property, as provided by Sec.
66.0627, Wis. Stats., and all proceedings in relation to the collection, return and sale of property for
delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such special charge. Notice of special charges for current
services need not be given except as required by Sec. 66.0627, Wis.Stats., as amended.
C. Section 3.02.04.A of this Chapter shall not be applicable to the proceedings under this Section.
3.02.19 Miscellaneous Provisions
A. If any assessment or charge levied under this Chapter is invalid because such Statutes are found to be
unconstitutional, the Common Council may thereafter reassess such assessment or charge pursuant to
the provisions of any applicable law.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, or this or other ordinance or resolution, it is specifically
intended and provided by this Chapter that the City may levy special assessments for work or
improvement against the property benefited either before or after the approval of the work plans and
specifications, contracting for the work or completing the work or improvement.
Chapter 03 Disposal of Lost, Abandoned and Surplus Property
Division 1 Authority
3.03.11 Disposal of Surplus City Property
A. Definitions.
1. "Surplus City Property" is that property which is owned by the City of Onalaska and which has no
further usefulness to the City. An item of property shall be considered to have no further usefulness
when:
a. The item or its function has been totally replaced by other City property and no probable future
function exists for it; or
b. The City no longer performs the service for which the item was purchased and no other service
can reasonably be provided by the item; or
c. The item is no longer able to reliably or economically perform the work required of it.
2. Surplus property as defined in this Chapter shall not include land or buildings but shall include fixtures
and such salvage as may be taken from a building without structural damage when such fixtures and
salvage are not part of a demolition contract. Surplus City property shall not include property which is
obtained by the City as a result of abandonment or loss by the property's original owner. Surplus City
property shall not include items of property which are traded in for newer items. Surplus City property
shall not include library materials used by the public library for lending purposes.
B. Determination of Surplus City Property.
1. Whenever an item of City property is determined to be surplus City property on the basis that the City
no longer performs the service for which the item was purchased, the Financial Services Director and
applicable Department Head shall determine whether or not the item is surplus City property.
C. Disposition of Surplus City Property.
1. Whenever it is determined that an item of property is surplus City property, it shall be disposed of in
accordance with the City’s Finance Policy Manual or as required by law.
3.03.12 Lost and Abandoned Property
A. City Custody of Lost or Abandoned Property.
1. Property which appears to be lost or abandoned, discovered by officers or turned in to the Chief of
Police by citizens shall be disposed of according to this Section.
2. Lost and abandoned property will be examined by the Chief of Police for identifying marks in an
attempt to determine the owner. If identifying marks are present, they shall be used by the Chief of
Police to attempt to contact the owner to return the property. If no identifying marks are present, the
property shall be taken into custody by the Chief of Police.
3. No City employee shall keep for their own use property found in the course of duty, nor take
possession of property during off-duty hours when the discovery was made while on duty.
4. The Chief of Police shall permit citizens to claim lost property if they can provide sufficient proof that
they are rightful owners.
5. No City employee shall receive any lost, stolen, abandoned or other unclaimed property from the
Chief of Police, unless that person receives a written receipt signed by the Chief of Police, a copy of
which shall remain with the Financial Services Director.
B. Disposal Procedures.
1. Classes of Property. All property which has been abandoned, lost or remained unclaimed for a
period of thirty (30) days after the taking of possession of the same by the City shall be disposed of
as follows, except that if the property is usable for City operations, the property need not be sold at
auction, but may become the property of the City.
a. Vehicles. Vehicles shall be disposed of as set forth in the applicable provisions, of this Code of
Ordinances.
b. Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages. Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages shall be destroyed.
c. Firearms, Ammunition and Explosives. Firearms or ammunition shall be returned to their
rightful owner, destroyed, or transferred to the State Crime Laboratory, the division of law
enforcement services of the Department of Justice, the Federal Bureau of Investigation or the
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms bureau of the U.S. Department of Treasury. Any explosive,
flammable, or other material proving a danger to life or property may be disposed of immediately
upon taking possession thereof. The Chief of Police and the Fire Chief, after consulting with the
County Sheriff’s Department, are hereby authorized to determine the disposal procedure,
provided, however, that any such procedure will attempt to return to its rightful owner any such
material which appears to have been stolen.
d. Other Property with a Fair Market Value of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or Less. An item
of property with a fair market value of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or less shall be destroyed
or sold at public auction. Perishable property which deteriorates to a fair market value of less than
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) shall be destroyed.
e. Other Property with a Fair Market Value of Over One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). An item of
property with a fair market value of more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) shall be sold at
public auction or by sealed bid.
f. Illegal Property. Property which cannot be legally possessed shall be destroyed.
2. Disposal by Auction or Sealed Bid.
a. Whenever any property under this Section is sold by public auction or sale or by sealed bid, such
auction or the awarding of bids shall be preceded by a Class 2 notice describing the property and
arranging the time and place for the auction or bid submission; such notice shall be published in
the official City newspaper. The property auctioned or sold by sealed bid shall be sold in as-is
condition to the highest bidder. No sale or auction shall occur until the Chief of Police has
determined that the property has no value to any probable investigation or legal proceeding. The
Department Head responsible for the property shall determine the time in which the successful
bidder shall remove the property. In the event the property is not removed within that time, the
property shall revert to the City and the amount of the bid be forfeited to the City.
b. Any City official selling property under this Section shall maintain for two (2) years an inventory of
any property not disposed of by auction or sale by sealed bid and shall include a record of the
date and method of disposal, any payment received for the property, and the name and address
of the person acquiring the property.
3. Lost Property. Property which is found by persons and delivered to the Chief of Police for the
purpose of locating the former owner shall not be considered abandoned or unclaimed under this
Section until thirty (30) days after mailing to the person finding the property a notice that they may
claim ownership of said property. The Chief of Police shall determine what portion, if any, of the
property or its value shall be given the finder. This provision shall not apply to any City employee
finding property in the regular course of their employment.
4. Payment to City Treasury. All sums received from the sale of property under this Section shall be
paid to the City Treasury.
3.03.13 Unclaimed Funds
A. Unclaimed Funds. On or before January 10 of every odd-numbered year, the City of Onalaska Finance
Director or its designee, shall file with the treasurer of La Crosse County a written report under oath giving
the names and the last-known addresses of all persons for whom the City of Onalaska Treasurer holds
money or security, and which has not been claimed for at least one (1) year, and showing the amount of
the money or the nature of the security in detail. A duplicate report shall also be mailed to the Wisconsin
Department of Financial Institutions. Upon receiving the reports the La Crosse County Treasurer shall
cause to be published a Class 3 notice, under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., on or before February 1 of the same
year, which contains the names and last-known addresses of the owners of the unclaimed money or
security that has a value of at least Ten Dollars ($10.00), and shall state that unless the owners call for
and prove their ownership of the money or security, within six (6) months from the time of the completed
publication, the City of Onalaska Treasurer shall give possession or control of the money or security to
the La Crosse County Treasurer. At the end of the six (6) months from the time of the completed
publication, the La Crosse County Treasurer shall also take possession or control of all money or security
of persons for whom the City of Onalaska Treasurer holds money or security, and which has not been
claimed for at least one (1) year, if the money or security has a value of less than Ten Dollars ($10.00).
B. Unclaimed Funds in County Possession. Any money or security which the La Crosse County
Treasurer has taken control over under Section (A.) above and has had in its possession or control for
more than one (1) year shall, to the extent possible, be deposited into the La Crosse County general
revenue fund. Pursuant to Sec. 59.66(2)(a)1(am), Wis. Stats., money or security deposited pursuant to
this section may remain in the County’s general revenue fund or may be used by La Crosse County until
the money or security is paid or delivered to its owner or becomes property of the county. If within ten (10)
years from the time any such money or security is delivery to La Crosse County, the owner of the money
or security proves to the satisfaction of the La Crosse County Treasurer the owner’s right to the
possession of the money or security, it shall be paid or delivered to the owner. If no such proof is made,
then at the end of the ten (10) year period the money or property shall become the property of the county.
Nothing in these sections shall be construed to deprive the owner of any such property of the owner’s
right to proceed by court action for the recovery of such money or security from the treasurer.
C. Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section, shall upon conviction, be fined not less than
Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned for not less than thirty
(30) days nor more than six (6) months.
Title 4 Public Records
Chapter 01 Public Records
Division 1 Authority
4.01.11 Definitions
A. Authority. Any of the following City entities having custody of a City record: an office, elected official,
agency, board, commission, committee, council, department or public body corporate and politic created
by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted sub-unit of the foregoing, any court
of law, or any other person or entity so designated by Sec. 19.32(1) Wis. Stats.
B. Custodian. That officer, department head, or employee of the City designated under Section 4.01.13 or
otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any City records or file, deposit or keep such records
in his or her office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such public records and who is
required by this Section to respond to requests for access to such records.
C. Record. Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or electromagnetic information is
recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics, which has been created or is being
kept by an authority. "Record" includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps,
charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), and computer printouts.
"Record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared for the
originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is
working; materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have no relation to his or
her office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in
the possession of an authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or which are
available for inspection at a public library.
4.01.12 Declaration of Policy
A. A representative government is dependent on upon an informed electorate and therefore it is the policy of
the City of Onalaska that all persons are entitled to the greatest possible information regarding the affairs
of their government and the official acts of those officers and employees who represent them. Further,
providing persons with such information is an essential function of government and an integral part of the
routine duties of officers and employees whose responsibility it is to provide such information. To that
end, this ordinance shall be construed in every instance with a presumption of complete public access,
consistent with the conduct of governmental business. The denial of public access generally is contrary to
the public interest and only in exceptional cases may access be denied. Therefore, the City of Onalaska
adopts and incorporates, as though fully set forth herein, the provisions of Wisconsin Public Records
laws, Secs. 19.31 through 19.39 Wis. Stats. The provisions of this Chapter are intended to supplement,
not to replace or supplant, the Wisconsin Public Records laws.
4.01.13 Records Custodian(s)
A. Custodians. The City Clerk is the legal custodian of the records of the Common Council as a body politic
and for all Common Council boards, committees and commissions. Each alderperson shall be the
custodian of their individual official records, such as their correspondence, memorandums and e-mail.
Any alderperson may designate, in writing, the City Clerk to act as the official custodian of the
alderperson’s individual official records. For every Department, the Department Head is the custodian of
records for their Department or Agency. Every custodian of records shall designate in writing one (1) or
more employees to act in their absences as an alternate custodian of such records.
B. Duties of Custodians. Custodians are vested with the full legal power to render decisions and carry out
the duties of the City under this Ordinance. Each custodian shall establish procedures for handling
records and shall see that all of their employees entrusted with records are informed of these procedures.
Prior to providing access to or a copy of any records, the custodian shall review the records to determine
that the records are responsive to the requests, whether any redactions are required or whether access
should be denied as to any record. If a custodian has any question about granting or denying a request to
inspect or copy any record, they shall consult with the City Attorney.
C. Public Records Training. Each custodian and alternate custodian shall receive training regarding public
records laws as soon as practicable upon receiving these duties. Custodians and alternate custodians are
personally responsible for keeping current with any developments or advancements in records keeping
and the Wisconsin Public Records Laws.
4.01.14 Public Access to Records
A. Form of Request. The Wisconsin Public Records Law dictates that certain actions must be taken with
regards to oral requests for records and that certain more formal actions are taken in response to written
requests for records. However, the state law does not expressly state how to respond to the following
methods of communication. Therefore, requests made by the following means shall be responded to as
follows:
1. E-mail. A request made by e-mail may be responded to via e-mail or in writing and shall have all of
the formalities as though the request was made in writing.
2. Voice-mail. A request made by voice-mail shall be responded to as though it were made orally.
3. Instant Messaging/Text Messaging. A request made in either such manner shall be treated as an
oral request.
B. Treatment of Certain Data as Records. The Wisconsin Public Records Law provides little or no
guidance as to whether the raw and perishable data of the following technologies qualify as records that
must be maintained. Therefore the Onalaska Common Council determines the following status of these
technologies
1. E-mail. The data in an e-mail message may constitute a public record and is subject to maintenance
as a public record. The data in an e-mail is subject to the same analysis under the public records
statutes as an equivalent paper or hard copy record. The Information Technology Department is
responsible for ensuring that all e-mails are properly preserved for such analysis.
2. Voice-mail. A voice-mail message is not a public record and voice-mail messages do not have to be
maintained as public records. These messages are the functional equivalent of phone conversations.
Phone conversations clearly are not public records. Additionally, these messages also share many of
the attributes of "personal notes" which are not public records either. Finally, these messages cannot
be indexed or maintained in any manner that would allow for their easy classification, searching or
retrieval.
3. Instant Messaging (IM)/Text Messaging (TM). Except as set forth in this paragraph and in
Subparagraph 4.01.14.B.9. and 10. hereof, the data involved in IM/TM communications is not subject
to maintenance as a public record. IM/TM has all of the attributes of instantaneous exchange of
ideas, as does a regular telephone conversation. Furthermore, the data exchange has the same
technological issues as to capturing and storage of data that is present with regards to voice-mail with
an additional concern - the raw data is often only briefly stored or not stored at all by the third party
vendors or hosts that provide these services. Thus, this technology is even closer to a true telephone
conversation than are voice-mails. Therefore, City employees and officials shall refrain from using
such services for official communications purposes or for matters that would result in a public record if
another format such as email or written communications were employed, unless the employee or
official preserves a copy of such communications by either copying them to their email account,
downloading the communications to their City computer, making a computer file of the
communications or by printing and retaining a copy of such communications.
4. Voice Over the Internet Protocol (VOIP). The City does not monitor nor record the data associated
with the conversations that occur over VOIP. Such conversations are the very same real time voice
communications as standard telephone conversations that are not public records. The only difference
between these communications is the medium employed in transmitting the voice communications
from one (1) participant in the conversation to all others involved in the conversation.
5. Audio, Video, Data Transmissions & Communications. Although audio, video, data and radio
transmissions and communications may be processed through City computers, the City does not
routinely copy the data nor maintain records of such communications. Whenever the City copies,
records or maintains copies or recordings of such communications or transmissions, those copies
may constitute public records that are subject to records requests and which must be maintained
according to the appropriate records retention schedule. The La Crosse County 9-1-1 Dispatch center
is the custodian for police and fire radio communications.
6. Photo/Audio/Video Recordings. Unless otherwise provided herein, are public records subject to
requests and must be maintained according to the retention schedules published herein.
a. Rewritable Recording Systems. Those systems where the recordings are routinely overwritten
by newer recordings, such as in continuous loop videotape or digital video written to a camera's
hard drive or memory, such data does not constitute a record unless it is further downloaded,
printed or separately preserved to memorialize some event or proceeding. Until such time as
these recordings are downloaded, printed or separately preserved, these recordings do not have
to be preserved and, as the recording equipment programs/protocols may dictate, can be
overwritten, erased or otherwise destroyed. However, if such data is downloaded, printed, or
separately preserved it shall be treated as a record and shall be retained in accordance with the
retention schedules.
b. Recordings Made for the Purpose of Preparing Minutes of Meetings. In accordance with
Sec. 19.21(7), Wis. Stats., any tape recording of a meeting, as defined in Sec. 19.82(2), Wis.
Stats., by any City body as defined by Sec. 19.82(1), Wis. Stats., to include each City board,
commission and committee, may be destroyed, overwritten, or recorded over no sooner than
ninety (90) days after the minutes have been approved and published if the purpose of the
recording was to take minutes of the meeting.
7. Electronic Document Files. Where records, as that term is defined in Sec. 19.32(2), Wis. Stats.,
exist in an electronic format only, such electronic records shall be maintained according to the
appropriate retention schedule. Where both hard copy (i.e., paper) and electronic copies of a record
exist they shall each be subject to public records requests. However, when the custodian has
designated, pursuant to Subparagraph 9. electronic records as the official records, only the electronic
copy shall be retained and made available for inspection under the public records laws. Where the
custodian has not made such a designation, only the hard copy shall be subject to inspection as a
public record and the electronic copies shall be treated and disposed of as draft documents that do
not need to be maintained beyond creation of the final hard copy
8. Electronic logs/Temporary Data Files. These logs and temporary data files provide detailed
information about the design and functionality of the City's computer network. These logs are
routinely overwritten on a daily basis due to the high volume of traffic that is being logged.
Unrestricted access to these logs and files would constitute a breach of system security and leave the
system vulnerable to exploitation and hacking. In order to ensure network security, these logs are
available to Information Technology Department authorized staff only. These determinations apply to
the following types of logs and data files:
a. Syslogs for Network Electronic Devices. All logs created by network devices such as firewalls,
routers, switches, etc., which are used for monitoring and trending computer network traffic
patterns and/or detecting unauthorized network traffic.
b. Network Server Security, Application and Event Logs. These logs are used to monitor activity
on City network servers including successful/unsuccessful login attempts, file system access,
hardware performance, etc. These logs provide detailed information about City network account
ID's, file system structure, and hardware profiles.
c. Network Security Appliance Logs. All logs created by network security devices such as the
anti-virus appliance, anti-SPAM appliance, content filtering appliance, etc., which are used to
monitor specific types of unauthorized or malicious traffic on the City network. These logs identify
specific network traffic patterns and/or protocols that are allowed or disallowed on the City
network.
d. Application Logs. These logs are used to monitor activity on various database applications, but
do not contain specific audits of database transactions. These logs can contain version
information, program variables, and programming logic.
9. Emerging Technologies and Records Retention. As new information technologies emerge the
Information Technologies Department shall evaluate these technologies and their benefit to City
operations. The City shall consider whether any of these technologies provide the capacity to archive
public records created by these technologies. Whenever it is economically and practically feasible to
archive records created by such technologies that archiving shall be incorporated into any
deployment of said technologies. Whenever the technologies do not provide for such archiving
capabilities the Information Technology Department shall consider whether the benefits of employing
such technologies outweigh the risks that some public records may not be retained by deployment of
such technologies. Where such benefits outweigh these risks City employees shall refrain from using
such technologies for official communications purposes or for matters that would result in a public
record if another format such as email or written communications were employed. In the event that
such technologies are used for such communications purposes the employee shall preserve a copy
of such communications by either copying them to their email account, downloading the
communications to their City computer, making a computer file of the communications or by printing
and retaining a copy of such communications. The Information Technology Department shall also
ensure that, as soon as practical and economically feasible, archiving systems are obtained for any
information technology that is deployed without an archiving system.
C. Access to Records; Fees.
1. Format for Delivery of Records:
a. Same Format as Record Exists & Redacted Records. Except as otherwise provided by law,
any requester may receive or inspect a record in the very same format in which the City maintains
the record. However, whenever it is necessary to redact or excise portions of a record in order to
comply with the Wisconsin Public Records Laws, the redactions shall be made with the
assistance of the Information Technology Department. Whenever electronic redaction or
excisions cannot be done in a secure manner that preserves such redactions and prevents the
viewing of the redacted information then such redactions should be made by hand, not
electronically, and the requestor shall only receive a hard copy, not an electronic copy, of the
redacted record. A requestor may not be charged for the time necessary to review a record and
to redact or excise non-releasable materials.
b. E-mailing Records. When practicable and unless another form has been specifically requested,
records shall be e-mailed to the requestor. There shall not be any reproduction charge for emailing
records, however, such records may still be subject to payment of a location fee as
established in Sec. 19.35(3)(c), Wis. Stats.
2. Reproduction Fees. The City of Onalaska shall adopt, at a minimum annually, a schedule of fees for
the reproduction of records that shall be used by every department. Such schedule shall include the
following provisions and considerations:
a. Fees imposed upon a records requestor may not exceed the actual, necessary and direct costs of
reproducing and/or transcribing of the record, unless a fee is otherwise specifically established or
authorized by state or federal law.
b. If the record exists in such a format that it cannot be easily reproduced, such as a mock-up of a
building, then the custodian may photograph the record and may charge the requestor for the
actual, necessary and direct costs of such photographing and photographic processing.
c. No charge for copying records of one hundred (100) pages or less.
d. Full cost of reproduction for materials such as films, tapes, computer printouts, etc. not otherwise
identified in the schedule developed under this subsection. In such cases, the Department Head
who is the records custodian, in consultation with the City Attorney, must determine the costs for
reproduction of such records. The determination of these costs shall be made by utilizing a
practice or factors that are as uniform as practicable across City Departments.
e. Location Fee. If the cost of locating a requested record is Fifty Dollars ($50.00) or more, the
requester shall pay the full cost, as determined by the Department Head. Such cost shall not
exceed the actual, necessary and direct cost of locating such record. Whenever it is determined
that such location costs will exceed Fifty Dollars ($50.00) the requestor shall be required to post a
deposit with the custodian that is equal to the reasonable good faith estimate of such costs.
f. Mailing Fee. Custodians shall impose a fee upon a requester for the actual, necessary and direct
cost of mailing or shipping of any copy or record that is mailed or shipped to the requester.
g. Fee Waivers. A custodian may provide copies of a record without charge or at a reduced charge
where the Department Head determines in writing that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the
public interest.
h. Prepayment of Fees. Custodians may require prepayment by a requester of any fee or fees
imposed under this Chapter if the total amount exceeds Ten Dollars ($10.00) and a custodian
shall require prepayment by a requester of any fee or fees imposed under this subdivision if the
total amount exceeds Fifty Dollars ($50.00). If prepayment is required, the custodian shall not
process the request until such prepayment has been posted with the custodian.
3. Special Rules Regarding Reproduction of E-mail Records.
a. Reproducing Emails Dated Earlier than January 1, 2003. Emails dated earlier than January 1,
2003 were not stored on the mail server but may be in a local archive. The restoration and
location of these e-mails id difficult and labor intensive. Such requests for these records often
take more than fifteen (15) business days to comply with due to labor and technical issues.
Custodians who receive requests for these records should inform the requester of these issues.
Such requests should be immediately forwarded to the Information Technology Department who
may prepare an estimate of the actual, necessary and direct cost of locating such records and
whom shall provide technical assistance to the custodian.
b. Reproducing E-mails Dated After January 1, 2003. Emails dated after January 1, 2003 are
likely to have been preserved in a searchable format, many factors effect this and it is largely
dependent on the systems in place during the date range of the emails and the user. When
requests are made . Such requests for these records often take ten (10) or more business days to
comply with due to the labor and technical issues.
4. Time for Compliance and Procedures.
a. Time. The fulfillment of public records requests is a high priority for the City. Therefore, each
custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and without delay, either fill
the request or notify the requester of their determination to deny the request in whole or in part
and the reasons therefore. If a request may take more than ten (10) business days to process,
then the custodian must respond to the requestor within those ten (10) days with an estimate of
when such processing shall be completed and an explanation of the reasons supporting that
estimate.
b. City Attorney Consultation Required. Before any custodian may deny access to any records or
portion thereof, the custodian must consult with the City Attorney. Such consultation shall occur
as soon as practicable after the custodian has assembled and reviewed the requested record. In
any response to a requestor, the custodian shall include a statement that he or she consulted the
City Attorney regarding the denial of access to any records. Any denial of access made by a
custodian without such consultation and statement is not considered a response from the City of
Onalaska.
5. No Destruction of Records While a Request is Pending or While a Denial of a Request is Being
Appealed. No custodian may destroy any record at any time after the receipt of a request for
inspection or copying of the record until after the request is granted or until at least sixty (60) days
after the date that the request is denied. If any legal action is pending regarding or related to the
record, the record may not be destroyed without the express authorization of the City Attorney. No
record that is the object of or which has been produced pursuant to a discovery order or a subpoena
may be destroyed without the express consent of the City Attorney.
6. Retention Schedules. The City of Onalaska, in accordance with Secs. 19.21(4)(b) and 16.61(3)(e),
Wis. Stats., adopts the following record retention schedules:
a. Retention Schedule. The City of Onalaska adopts the State of Wisconsin Municipal Records
Retention Schedule. A copy of the complete schedule is attached to this Title as Appendix A.
b. Records that are Evidence. No record may be destroyed that has been identified as, or that
may have value as, evidence in any civil or criminal legal proceeding, labor arbitration or
disciplinary action. No record may be destroyed at any time within sixty (60) days of the denial of
a request to review the record or any part thereof.
c. Compliance with Federal or Other Record Retention Requirements. Notwithstanding the City
of Onalaska Records Retention Schedule set forth in Subparagraph a. above, custodians may not
destroy any record where any contract, grant, funding conditions, state or federal statute require
that such records be maintained for a longer period of time.
d. Offer of Records to State Historical Society Before Destruction. The City is required to offer
all obsolete records to the State Historical Society in accordance with Appendix A prior to
destruction of those records. The Information Technology Director or any Department Head, may
apply to the State Historical Society for a waiver of this requirement as to certain categories of
records under such person's authority that they reasonably believe have little or no significant
historical value.
D. Electronic Formatting or Other Reproduction of Records. Any City officer or Department Head may,
with the approval of the City Attorney’s office in consultation with the Information Technology Department,
may retain and preserve public records in their possession by means of microfilm, or another reproduction
method, optical imaging or electronic formatting. Such records shall meet the standards for photographic
reproduction set forth in Secs. 16.61(7)(a) and (b) Wis. Stats., and Chs. PR 1 and Wis. Admin. Code 12.
Such records shall be considered original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along
with other files of the department or division and shall be open to public inspection and copying according
to the provisions of state law and of Subsections (1) through (3) of this ordinance. This ordinance does
not require that past copies of a record be converted to the new format(s). However, when the decision is
made to convert old records to the new format, the original hardcopy of any document or record which
has been converted to the new format may be destroyed once the Records Disposition Authorization for
that records classification has been approved by the Wisconsin State Public Records Board and only
when such destruction is permissible under Subsection (7) of this ordinance. A requester shall be
charged a fee to defray the cost of copying records. The fee shall be set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee
Schedule. The actual cost of duplication shall be charged for oversized documents.
4.01.15 Limitations on Right to Access
A. As provided in Sec. 19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt from inspection under this
Chapter.
1. Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized to be exempted
from disclosure by state law;
2. Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement purposes if federal law
or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a condition to
receipt of aids by the state;
3. Computer programs and files, although the material used as input for a computer program/file or the
material produced as a product of the computer program is subject to inspection; and
4. Pursuant to Sec. 905.08, Wis. Stats., a record or any portion of a record containing information
qualifying as a common law trade secret. "Trade secrets" are defined as unpatented, secret,
commercially valuable plans„ appliances, formulas, or processes which are used for making,
preparing, compounding, treating or processing articles, materials or information which are obtained
from a person and which are generally recognized as confidential.
B. As provided by Sec. 43.30, Wis. Stats., public library circulation records are exempt from inspection under
this Section.
4.01.16 Preservation Through Microfilm or Other Imaging Technology
A. Any custodian, may, subject to the approval of the City Clerk, keep and preserve public records in their
possession by means of microfilm or other photographic or image reproduction methods. Such records
shall meet the standards for reproduction set forth in Sec. 16.61(7)(a) and (b), Wis. Stats., and shall be
considered original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with other files of the
department and shall be open to public inspection and copying pursuant to the provisions of state law and
this Chapter.
Title 5 Public Safety
Chapter 01 Law Enforcement
Division 1 Authority
5.01.11 Organization of Police Department
A. The Onalaska Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police (“Police Chief”) and such other officers,
assistants, and patrolmen as from time to time may be appointed, pursuant to the provisions of the
Wisconsin Statutes, the ordinances and resolutions of the Common Council, and the rules and
regulations of the Police and Fire Commission.
5.01.12 Records and Reports
A. Reports. The Police Chief shall provide reports to the Mayor of the activities of the Department.
B. Police Records. The Department shall keep appropriate records through their Record Management
System of the events of the Department as required by Wisconsin Statutes.
5.01.13 General Powers of Police Officers
A. Every member of the Police Department shall:
1. Familiarize themselves with the ordinances of the City and the Statutes and attend to the
enforcement of such ordinances by all lawful means.
2. Help prevent crimes, misdemeanors and violations of City ordinances, State laws, health orders and
protect the health, safety, public peace and order of the City and its inhabitants.
3. Report all street and sidewalk obstructions, unlighted street lamps, unlawful street signs or signals,
and defective or dangerous streets and sidewalks to the appropriate City department.
4. Maintain order at the scene of a fire or any other fire response within the City or any act of
disobedience/civil unrest.
5. See that the necessary permits and licenses issued by the State or City are in the possession of or
properly displayed by any person engaged in an activity or business within the City for which such
permit or license is required and that the terms of such permits or licenses are complied with.
6. Perform such other lawful duties as ordered by the Chief of Police or their authorized designee.
5.01.14 Responsibilities of Chief of Police
A. Duties. In addition to the duties imposed upon them elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances, the Police
Chief shall:
1. Have command of the Police Department on administrative matters, subject to the direction of the
Mayor.
2. Ensure maintenance of accurate records of complaints, crimes, traffic accidents, ordinance violations,
arrests, summons, incidents, and calls for police service and shall provide a system of periodic
summary and analysis to ensure the most efficient and effective deployment and use of the
Department's resources. The Police Chief shall submit or cause to be submitted to the various
agencies such reports and summaries as are required by Wisconsin Statutes or ordinances and shall
participate in voluntary programs designed to improve law enforcement and public safety.
3. Submit such reports and comply with such administrative procedures and policies as may be
prescribed by the Mayor and Common Council relative to fiscal and administrative matters.
4. Have exclusive control of the assignment, hours of duty, and transfer of all members of the
Department.
5. Plan, organize, staff, direct, and control all of the human and material resources of the Department for
the most effective and efficient discharge of its duty to protect persons and property, preserve the
peace, protect the rights of citizens and enforce the Wisconsin Statutes and the ordinances of the
City as are within its jurisdiction. The Police Chief shall supervise the preparation and presentation of
annual reports and budgets for the Police Department. They shall be required to certify to the
correctness of all bills incurred by the Department.
6. Strive to maintain suitable, productive relationships with other City departments and with other
governmental agencies and private organizations concerned with law enforcement, crime prevention,
administration of justice and public safety. They shall cooperate and exchange information with other
City departments in matters relating to their various functions.
7. Plan and execute programs designed to prevent and repress crime, apprehend and prosecute
offenders, recover property, and regulate non-criminal conduct, giving highest priority in the allocation
of resources to crime and other offenses most hazardous to life and property.
B. Custody of Department Equipment. The Police Chief shall be the custodian of all City property,
equipment and supplies under the control of, or used by, the Police Department and shall be responsible
for the care, maintenance, safeguarding and accurate records of such property, equipment, and supplies.
C. Custody of Department Property/Evidence. The Police Chief shall be the custodian of all
property/evidence and shall be responsible for the safekeeping, lawful disposition and accurate record of
the same. They shall see that all property is returned to its lawful owner or otherwise disposed of
according to the applicable statutes.
5.01.15 Rules and Policies for the Police Department
A. The Police Chief shall establish and promulgate Rules of Conduct, Directives and Policies and
Procedures and prescribe such duties for individual members as deemed necessary for the effective and
efficient command and operation of the Department; provided no such Rules of Conduct, Directive or
Policy Procedure duties or assignment shall be in conflict with the statutes, ordinances and approved City
personnel rules and regulations.
5.01.16 Personnel
A. The Police Chief shall comply with all provisions of the Law Enforcement Standards Board in regard to
background investigations. The Police Chief shall be adequately informed of the activities of the
Department and be assured that the duties of its subordinates are properly discharged. The Police Chief
shall formulate procedures for recognizing outstanding performance by Department members, for
investigating complaints of misconduct by any Department member and for taking appropriate disciplinary
action subject to the provisions of the applicable statutes, policies and procedures, and rules of the
Department.
5.01.17 Police Chief's Responsibility for Training
A. The Police Chief is responsible for the training of all members of the Department. The Police Chief shall
cause adequate and progressive programs of training to be organized and conducted to prepare
Department members in the knowledge, procedures, and techniques of their duties and responsibilities.
The Police Chief may delegate the administration of such training programs to the Assistant Chief or such
other Department personnel as may be appropriate. The Police Chief shall insure that, within budgetary
limitations, members of the Department attend training courses, seminars, and conferences necessary to
maintain and improve their job skills and professional knowledge. The Police Chief shall encourage
Department members to further their education in Law Enforcement through study, special courses,
college attendance, extension programs, and independent readings.
5.01.18 Onalaska Police Reserve
A. Establishment. There shall be established within the corporate limits of the City of Onalaska a volunteer
organization to be known as the Onalaska Police Reserve, the members thereof to be appointed by the
Chief of Police and to serve without pay for their services.
B. Purpose. The primary purpose of the Onalaska Police Reserve is to augment the regular police force in
case of emergency, and members shall serve whenever it is necessary to provide additional personnel for
special events and community functions within the City.
C. Authority. The authority of the Onalaska Police Reserve, as well as its objectives, organizational chart,
qualifications for membership, structure, membership, officers and pertinent information, rules and
requirements shall be controlled by a set of bylaws and procedures duly passed by the Onalaska Police
Reserve Executive Board. The Chief of Police or their designee shall have the authority to command,
train, control and supervise the police reserve.
D. Executive Board. The Executive Board shall consist of the Commander, Deputy Commander, Reserve
Sergeants, Professional Standards Sergeant and one (1) sworn Officer of the Onalaska Police
Department. The Commander, Deputy Commander and sworn Officer are appointed by the Chief of
Police with input from the Onalaska Police Reserve Executive Board. The Reserve Sergeants are
appointed by the Professional Standards Sergeant subject to approval by the Chief of their designee.
Chapter 02 Fire Protection
Division 1 Authority
5.02.11 Fire Department Organization
A. Organization. The Onalaska Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief and such other officers and
firefighters as from time to time may be appointed pursuant to the provisions of national standards,
Wisconsin Statutes and regulations, the ordinances and resolutions of the Common Council, and rules
and regulations of the Police and Fire Commission.
5.02.12 Impeding Fire Equipment Prohibited
A. No person shall impede the progress of a fire engine, fire truck or other fire apparatus of the Onalaska
Fire Department along the streets or alleys of the City at the time of an emergency or when the Fire
Department is using such streets or alleys in response to an emergency or for training.
5.02.13 Police Power of the Department; Investigation of Emergencies
A. Police Authority at Fires.
1. The Fire Chief, assistants and officers in command at any emergency are hereby vested with full and
complete police authority at emergencies. Any officer of the Department may cause the arrest of any
person failing to give the right-of-way to the Fire Department in responding to an emergency.
2. The Fire Chief may prescribe certain limits in the vicinity of any emergency within which no persons,
excepting firefighters and police officers and those admitted by order of any officer of the Department,
shall be permitted to come.
3. The Fire Chief shall have the power to cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become
necessary for the preservation of such property from an emergency or to prevent the spreading of fire
or to protect the adjoining property, and during the progress of any fire the Fire Chief shall have the
power to cause the removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all electricity or other
services where the same impedes the work of the Department during the progress of an emergency.
B. Fire Inspection Duties.
1. The Fire Chief shall be the Chief Fire Inspector of the City of Onalaska and shall have the power to
appoint one (1) or more Fire Inspectors each of whom shall perform all duties required of the Fire
Inspectors by the laws of the State and rules of the Department of Safety and Professional Services,
particularly Section 101.14, Wis. Stats.
2. While acting as Fire Inspector pursuant to Sec. 101.14(2), Wis. Stats., the Fire Chief, or any
designee, shall have the right and authority to enter any building or upon any premises in the City of
Onalaska at all reasonable hours for the purpose of making inspections or investigations which, under
the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, they may deem necessary. Should the Fire Inspector find
that any provisions of this Code relating to fire hazards and prevention of fires are being violated, or
that a fire hazard exists which should be eliminated, it shall be their duty to give such directions for
the abatement of such conditions as they shall deem necessary and, if such directions are not
complied with, to report such noncompliance to the Fire Chief for further action.
3. The Fire Chief or any designees are required, to inspect all buildings, premises and public
thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to
be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of any law or ordinance relating to
the fire hazard or to the prevention of fires. Such inspections shall be made at least once in six (6)
months in all of the territory served by the Fire Department. Each six (6) month period shall begin on
January 1 and July 1 of each year.
4. Written reports of inspections shall be made and kept on file in the office of the Fire Chief in the
manner and form required by the Department of Professional and Safety Services.
5.02.14 Damaging Fire Hose Prohibited; Parking by Hydrants; Blocking Fire Lanes
A. Driving Over Fire Hose. No person shall willfully injure in any manner any hose, hydrant or fire
apparatus belonging to the City, and no vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when laid down on any street, private driveway or other place, to be used at any emergency,
without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.
B. No Parking Near Fire. It shall be unlawful for any person, in case of fire, to drive or park any vehicle
within one block from the place of fire or bypass the police/fire apparatus without the consent and
authority of the Fire Chief or any police officer.
C. Utilities Near Hydrants. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, business or corporation to install any
above ground utilities or any portion of said utilities within eight (8) feet of any fire hydrant.
D. Plantings, Mailboxes and Other Items Near Hydrants. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
business, or corporation to place any planting, mailboxes or other items within eight (8) feet of any fire
hydrant at any time.
5.02.15 Firefighters May Enter Adjacent Property
A. Entering Adjacent Property. It shall be lawful for any firefighter while acting under the direction of the
Fire Chief or any other officer in command to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of a
building or other property then on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire and in case any person
shall hinder, resist or obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of their duty, the person so offending shall
be deemed guilty of resisting firefighters in the discharge of their duty.
B. Destruction of Property to Prevent the Spread of Fire. During the progress of any fire, the Fire Chief
or their assistant shall have the power to order the removal or destruction of any property necessary to
prevent the further spread of fire; provided that it is inevitable that, unless such property is removed, other
property is in danger of being destroyed by fire.
5.02.16 Duty of Bystanders to Assist
A. Every person who shall be present at an emergency shall be subject to the orders of the Fire Chief or
officer in command and may be required to render assistance in removing or guarding property. Such
officer shall have the power to cause the arrest of any person or persons refusing to obey said orders.
5.02.17 Interference with Use of Hydrants Prohibited
A. No person shall occupy any portion of such streets or alleys with a motorized or other vehicle between
such fire engine or fire truck or other fire apparatus or any hydrant to which a fire hose may be, or may be
about to be, attached.
5.02.18 Fire District Limit
A. Districts Designated.
1. City of Onalaska.
2. Those municipalities or areas thereof for which the City provides fire service under contract.
B. Code Requirements. All buildings erected within the fire district limits shall comply with the State Building
Codes/Standards.
Chapter 03 Fire Prevention Code; Hazardous Materials
Division 1 Standards
5.03.11 Adoption of International, National, and State Codes/Standards
A. The following provisions of International, National and State Codes/Standards, as from time to time
amended, are incorporated herein by reference:
1. International Building Code (IBC);
2. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Codes and Standards which include, but is not limited to,
NFPA 1 Uniform Fire Code; NFPA 101 Life Safety Code; and NFPA 5000 Building Code;
3. Chapter SPS 101 – Regulation of Industry, Buildings, and Safety;
4. Chapter SPS 307 – Explosives and Fireworks;
5. Chapter SPS 308 – Mines, Pits and Quarries;
6. Chapter SPS 309 – Anchoring and Securing of Movable Soccer Goals;
7. Chapter SPS 314 – Fire Prevention;
8. Chapter SPS 314 – Appendix;
9. Chapter SPS 316 – Electrical;
10. Chapter SPS 318 – Elevators, Escalators, and Lift Devices;
11. Chapter SPS 328 – Smoke Detectors and Carbon Monoxide Detectors;
12. Chapter SPS 330 – Fire Department Safety and Health Standards;
13. Chapter SPS 361 – Administration and Enforcement;
14. Chapter SPS 362 – Buildings and Structures;
15. Chapter SPS 363 – Energy Conservation;
16. Chapter SPS 364 – Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning;
17. Chapter SPS 365 – Fuel Gas Appliances;
18. Chapter SPS 366 – Existing Buildings;
19. Chapter SPS 366 – Appendix;
20. Chapters SPS 375-379 – Buildings Constructed Prior to 191;
21. Chapter SPS 375 – Definitions and General Requirements;
22. Chapter SPS 376 – Factories, Office and Mercantile Buildings;
23. Chapter SPS 377 – Theaters and Assembly Halls;
24. Chapter SPS 378 – Schools and Other Places of Instruction; and
25. Chapter SPS 379 – Apartment Houses, Hotels and Places of Detention.
5.03.12 Onalaska Fire Prevention Local Codes/Standards
A. Means of Egress.
1. Required exit signs shall be illuminated at all times.
2. At every required exit doorway, and whenever otherwise required to clearly indicate the direction of
egress, an approved exit sign shall be provided from all areas.
3. In the interior stairways, the floor level leading directly to the exterior shall be clearly indicated.
4. All exit aisles shall be maintained clear and unobstructed and be a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches
wide.
5. Exit hardware shall be maintained.
6. Every door which serves as a required exit door or an exit access door serving any area, room, public
passageway, stairway or building that can accommodate one hundred (100) persons, shall have such
fastenings or hardware that can be opened from the inside by pushing against a single bar or plate.
7. Every exit door, exit access door, and egress paths to those doors shall be free from obstructions.
Doors shall be unlocked when the building is occupied. No locking hardware requiring a key, padlock,
chains, or other non-approved locking devices shall be used.
8. Storage is not permitted on rescue platforms.
B. Fire Protection Systems.
1. Fire Extinguishers.
a. Where required. In all buildings and structures provided for under the Fire Codes of the State
and the City, a minimum size of 3-A: 40-B:C fire extinguisher shall be installed in a visible and
easily accessible location.
b. Fire extinguishers shall be serviced and tagged annually and have the appropriate six (6) year
maintenance and twelve (12) year hydro test if required.
c. Fire extinguishers shall not be obstructed or obscured from view.
d. Handheld fire extinguishers not housed in cabinets, shall be installed on supplied hangers or
brackets.
e. Fire extinguishers weighing less than forty (40) pounds shall be installed so that the top is no
more than five (5) feet above the floor.
f. Clearance between the bottom of the extinguisher and the floor shall never be less than four (4)
inches.
2. Fire Alarms and Smoke Detectors.
a. The building owner shall be responsible for ensuring that the fire alarm and smoke detection
systems are maintained in an operable condition at all times.
b. Operational tests are required monthly.
c. Fire alarm panels shall be kept locked at all times to prevent tampering.
d. Records of testing and maintenance are required to be maintained.
e. Landlords shall be responsible for all batteries and maintenance of smoke detectors in their
buildings.
f. A detailed plan of the facility and alarm system components shall be readily available near the
main entrance by the annunciator panel or other area approved by the Fire Department.
g. A detailed floor plan shall be submitted in an electronic format to the Fire Department for the
purpose of pre-planning in the event of an emergency at the occupancy.
3. Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems.
a. All fire sprinkler systems shall be inspected and maintained in accordance with (IAW) NFPA 25.
b. Noted deficiencies by contractors shall be corrected.
c. Complex systems with three (3) or more risers shall have a diagram in the sprinkler room
indicating area covered.
d. Fire Department Connection (FDC) shall have a five (5) inch storz connector for demands larger
than five hundred (500) Gallons Per Minute (GPM).
e. FDC shall not be located more than two hundred (200) feet from a fire hydrant.
f. Water supplies for occupancies requiring additional water as specified in NFPA 1142 Table G.4.2
(b), (c), (d), and (e), may require additional water sources on site.
g. All inlets to the FDC shall be installed so that they face the fire apparatus access road.
h. A weatherproof horn/strobe alarm shall be installed above the FDC connection to indicate a water
flow.
i. All fire sprinkler systems shall be monitored.
j. All fire sprinkler systems shall be serviced and tagged annually with a copy of the test record in a
plastic sleeve at the main riser.
k. The Fire Department shall be notified if the system is shut off or impaired.
l. There shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches of clearance below all sprinkler heads.
m. Sprinkler heads shall be kept free of accumulation of dust, dirt, paint or other substances that
may impair its operation.
n. Any defective, painted, or damaged sprinkler heads are required to be immediately replaced upon
finding.
o. Companies installing, servicing, or testing fire sprinkler systems shall submit records of such work
to the Onalaska Fire Department for review.
p. The Fire Chief may approve the removal of a non-required system based on their discretion. If
approved, all components of the system shall be removed.
4. Standpipe Systems.
a. Standpipe systems may be required in new commercial and residential structures that are three
(3) stories in height and shall be required in structures that are four (4) or more stories in height.
The Authority Having Jurisdiction (“AHJ”) or their designee shall approve all systems.
b. An automatic water supply for a wet standpipe system shall be designed to provide not less than
the flowing capacity from top outlets at not less than sixty-five (65) pounds per square inch (psi)
flowing pressure for a period of thirty (30) minutes; five hundred (500) GPM for a single
standpipe; seven hundred fifty (750) GPM for two (2) interconnected standpipes; and one
thousand (1,000) GPM for larger systems.
c. All standpipe and hose systems shall be inspected and maintained in accordance with the NFPA
25 Standard.
5. Inspection, Testing, Maintenance, Interferences, Tampering or Removal of All Fire Protection
Equipment.
a. Fire Protection System. All approved devices, equipment and systems or combinations of
systems used to detect a fire, activate an alarm, extinguish or control a fire, control or manage
smoke and products of a fire or any combination thereof.
b. Owner or operators shall be responsible for the condition of all their fire protection systems and
any other firefighting equipment.
c. Owners or operators of all fire protection systems and any other firefighting equipment shall
maintain the systems in good operating condition.
d. All fire protection systems and other firefighting equipment shall be inspected, tested, and
maintained in accordance with the adopted standards and good engineering practices.
e. The local Fire Department shall be notified whenever any fire protection system or any other
firefighting equipment is shut down or impaired and when it is placed back in service. The owner
shall arrange for immediate and continual servicing or repair of the impaired fire protection
system or firefighting equipment until it is placed back in operation.
f. No person shall interfere with, tamper with or remove any fire protection system, emergency
lighting system, fire hydrant, or any other firefighting equipment without first obtaining a written
approval from the Fire Chief.
C. Commercial Cooking Equipment.
1. The hood, exhaust, and fire protection systems shall meet the requirements set forth in NFPA 96
Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations and the Wis.
Adm. Code.
2. Cooking equipment involving vegetable oil or animal fats shall be protected by a Class K rated
portable fire extinguisher provided within thirty (30) feet travel distance.
3. Automatic fire extinguishing systems shall be serviced every six (6) months and after activation of the
system. All systems shall be tagged and records maintained.
4. The actuation of commercial cooking equipment fire suppression system shall automatically shut
down the fuel and/or electrical power supply to the cooking equipment and activate the buildings fire
alarm system. Reset shall be manual. A written record shall be maintained and available to the AHJ.
5. Hoods, grease-removal devices, fans, and ducts shall be cleaned to prevent the accumulation of
grease. Cleaning shall be recorded and such records shall be maintained on the premises.
6. Excess grease and dirt shall not be allowed to accumulate on the equipment or on or in any part of
the hood system.
7. Companies servicing or cleaning hood systems shall submit the service or maintenance records to
the Onalaska Fire Department at least quarterly for review.
8. Noted deficiencies by contractors shall be corrected.
D. Electrical.
1. Extension cords shall not be substituted for permanent wiring placed under doors or floor coverings
and may not be attached to any building or structure.
2. The front of electrical service equipment (panels) shall have a clear working space of not less than
thirty (30) inches in width, thirty-six (36) inches in depth, and seventy-eight (78) inches in height.
3. Extension cords shall be of a three (3) prong U/L approved grounding type when used in conjunction
with devices equipped with three (3) prong grounding type attachment plugs.
4. Multi-outlet assemblies, surge protectors and re-locatable power taps may not be attached to any
structure or permanently mounted to any surface unless listed for the purpose. Multi-outlet
assemblies, surge protectors and re-locatable power taps may not be daisy chained.
E. Knox Box.
1. A Knox box shall be installed on all new mercantile, commercial, & business occupied buildings.
Multi-unit residential structures that have restricted access through locked doors and have a common
corridor for access to living units shall be equipped with a Knox box approved by the Fire Department.
2. The Knox box shall be installed in a location that is approved by the Fire Department and shall be
installed prior to the issuance of any Occupancy Permit.
3. Location: The Knox box shall be at or near the recognized public entrance of a building, five (5) to
seven (7) feet from the ground. No steps, displays, signs, or other fixtures, structures, or protrusions
shall be located around or under the box as to limit its access.
4. All required Knox box(s) shall be installed and have the proper keys prior to the issuance of an
Occupancy Permit.
F. Fire Doors.
1. Listed closing devices and hardware shall be maintained on all fire doors.
2. All horizontal or vertical sliding and rolling fire doors shall be inspected and tested annually to check
for proper operation and full closure.
3. Resetting of the release mechanism shall be done IAW the manufacturer’s instructions.
4. A written record shall be maintained and shall be available to the AHJ.
G. Miscellaneous.
1. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner.
2. Grills. For other than one-and two family dwellings, no hibachi, gas-fired grill, charcoal grill, or other
similar devices used for cooking, heating, or any other purpose, shall be used or kindled on any
balcony or under any overhang portion or within ten (10) feet of any structure. Listed electrical
ranges, grills, or similar apparatus shall be permitted. (See NFPA 1; 2006; p.142)
3. Flammable liquids are not allowed to be stored in basements.
4. Exterior doors shall be labeled when hazardous materials or conditions are present to alert
emergency personnel.
5. The AHJ may require signs labeling interior doors, e.g. mechanical rooms (utilities).
6. Large Box Commercial.
a. For all large retail, wholesale, and warehouse commercial facilities that exceed twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet, a floor plan shall be approved by the Fire Department showing the locations
of wing stacks, end caps, or other islands of product that may be positioned in aisles.
7. Fire Wall Identification Sign Requirements.
a. General. The sign shall consist of three (3) circles arranged vertically on the exterior wall,
marking the location of the firewall and centered on the firewall. The circles shall either be affixed
directly to the surface of the building or may be placed on a background that is affixed to the
building.
b. Size of circle. Each circle shall be the same size. The diameter of the circle shall be at least one
and one-half (1 ½) inch (38 mm), but no greater than two (2) inches (51 mm).
c. Spacing. The circles shall be spaced an equal distance apart. The distance measured from the
top of the uppermost circle to the bottom of the lowermost circle shall be no more than twelve (12)
inches (305 mm).
d. Color. The color of the circle shall be red, amber (orange – yellow) or white. The color of the
circle shall contrast with the color of the background.
8. Pallets and Combustible Storage.
a. Pallets shall not be stored closer than thirty (30) feet from a building or in piles higher than twenty
(20) feet.
b. The owner or occupant of any commercial property shall have an approved plan by the Fire
Department for outside storage of combustible/salvage materials.
H. Application. All non-residential structures in the City of Onalaska are subject to Section 5.3.12.A-G and
5.3.12.J.
I. Application to Residential Rental Properties With Three (3) Or More Units.
1. All residential rental properties are subject to 5.3.12.A-G of this Section.
2. Residential rental properties shall also comply with the following:
a. Dryers shall be vented outside with rigid or semi-rigid pipe.
b. Dryer pipes shall be cleaned and inspected annually or as needed.
c. Self-closing fire doors shall be tested and maintained.
d. Required Knox boxes by the AHJ shall have keys to access the building and alarm panel. At no
time shall an alarm panel door be left unlocked.
J. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter for which a penalty is not otherwise
established by this Section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than Two Thousand Dollars
($2,000.00) each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
5.03.13 Disclosure of Hazardous Materials and Infectious Agents; Reimbursement for
Cleanup of Spills
A. Application.
1. All persons, firms or organizations using, researching or producing hazardous materials and/or
infectious agents shall notify the Fire Department as prescribed by this Section.
2. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all persons, firms or organizations using, researching,
producing or storing hazardous materials and/or infectious agents on and after the effective date of
this Section.
B. Definitions.
1. Infectious agent. A bacterial, mycoplasmal, fungal, parasitic or viral agent and arboviruses.
2. Hazardous materials. Those materials that can cause death or disabling injury from brief exposure;
those materials that could cause a lost-time injury from exposure; and those materials that could
cause temporary disability or injury without permanent effects which are used, researched, produced
or stored within or on premises except those household consumer products used at the point of
consumption and not used for commercial or experimental purposes. This definition of hazardous
materials shall include radioactive materials.
C. Information Required.
1. Any person, firm or organization using, researching, producing and/or storing any hazardous
materials shall provide in writing to the Fire Department the following information:
a. Address, location of where hazardous materials are used, researched, stored or produced;
b. The trade name of the hazardous material;
c. The chemical name and any commonly used synonym for the hazardous material and the
chemical name and any commonly used synonym for its major components;
d. The exact locations on the premises where materials are used, researched, stored and/or
produced;
e. Amounts of hazardous materials on premises per exact location;
f. The boiling point, vapor pressure, vapor density, solubility in water, specific gravity, percentage
volatile by volume, evaporation rate for liquids and appearance and odor of the hazardous
material;
g. The flash-point and flammable limits of the hazardous substance;
h. Any permissible exposure level, threshold limit value or other established limit value for exposure
to a hazardous material;
i. The stability of the hazardous substance;
j. Recommended fire extinguishing media, special firefighting procedures and fire and explosion
hazard information for the hazardous material;
k. Any effect of over-exposure to the hazardous material, emergency and first aid procedures and
telephone numbers to call in an emergency;
l. Any condition or material which is incompatible with the hazardous material and must be avoided;
m. Any personal protective equipment to be worn or used and special precautions to be taken when
handling or coming into contact with the hazardous materials; and
n. Procedures for handling or coming into contact with the hazardous materials.
2. Any person, firm or organization using, researching, producing and/or storing infectious agent and/or
carrier of an infectious agent shall provide in writing to the Fire Department the following:
a. The name and any commonly used synonym of the infectious agent;
b. Address/location where infectious agents are used, researched, stored and/or produced;
c. The exact locations where infectious agents are used, researched, stored and/or produced;
d. Amount of infectious agent on premises per exact locations;
e. Any methods of route of transmission of the infectious agents;
f. Any symptoms of effect of infection, emergency and first aid procedure and a telephone number
to be called in an emergency;
g. Any personal protective equipment to be worn or used and special precautions to be taken when
handling or coming in contact with the infectious agent; and
h. Procedures for handling, clean-up and disposal of infectious agents leaked or spilled.
D. Reimbursement for Cleanup of Spills. Any person who possesses or controls a hazardous material or
infectious agent which was discharged or caused the discharge of a hazardous material or infectious
agent shall reimburse the City for actual and necessary expenses incurred by the City or its agent to
contain, remove or dispose of the hazardous substance or infectious agent or take any other appropriate
action which is deemed appropriate under the circumstance.
5.03.14 Recovery of Costs
A. Every person, firm or corporation, storing, handling or transporting flammable or combustible liquid,
chemicals, gasses or other hazardous materials shall comply with the requirements of OSHA 29 Code of
Federal Regulations 1910, EPA 40 Code of Federal Regulations 311, and Chapter Comm. 10, WI Admin.
Code, as the same are now in force and may hereafter from time to time be amended.
B. Every person, firm or corporation using, storing, handling or transporting (whether by rail or on the
highways) flammable or combustible liquids, chemicals, gasses or other hazardous materials shall be
liable to the City for the actual cost of labor and materials associated with the use of any specialized
extinguishing agent, chemical, neutralizer or similar material or equipment employed to extinguish,
confine or clean up any such hazardous material which is involved in any accidental spill or in threat of
any fire or accidental spill.
5.03.15 Charges for Fire Department Services and Calls
A. In addition to the Fire Chief’s powers and duties, the Fire Chief shall charge for Fire Department services
and fire calls, including calls involving vehicles owned by nonresidents, as authorized by Sec. 62.13(8),
Wis. Stats. It shall be the responsibility of the Common Council to set the rates of the Fire Department
services and fire calls on the City’s Fee Schedule, after consideration of the fees as recommended by the
Police and Fire Commission. The purpose of such fees shall be to compensate the Onalaska Fire District
for fire inspection, plan review, field inspection work and other Fire Department Services. Such fees shall
not exceed the limits established by Sec. 66.0628, Wis. Stats. and other applicable laws. No fee shall be
charged for City of Onalaska work in relation to municipal property. Upon nonpayment of the fee, the
amount due may be placed on the tax roll as a special charge pursuant to Sec. 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 04 Regulation of Alarm Systems
Division 1 Introductory Provisions
5.04.11 Title
A. This Chapter shall be known as the City of Onalaska Alarm Systems Ordinance.
5.04.12 Declaration of Purpose
A. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to burglar, fire
and holdup alarm systems, alarm business and alarm users. Both society in general and public safety in
particular will be aided by providing a useful and usable system of private security which properly
balances quick response by law enforcement with minimization of law enforcement time spent on alarms
which are false or otherwise not the intended function of private security systems.
5.04.13 Definitions
A. Within this Chapter, the following terms, phrases and words and their derivations have the means given
herein.
1. Alarm Business. Any business in which the owners or employees engage in the activity of altering,
installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, or servicing alarm systems.
2. Alarm System. An assembly of equipment and devices or single device such as a solid state unit
which relays and signals the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the Police
or Fire Department is expected to respond. Excluded from this definition and from the coverage of
this Chapter are alarm systems used to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm
system is located of an attempted, unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt or fire.
3. Answering Service. A telephone answering service providing among its services the service of
receiving on a continuous basis through trained employees emergency signals from alarm systems,
and thereafter immediately relaying the message by live voice to the dispatch center of the Police or
Fire Department.
4. False Alarm. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper
installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of their employees or
agents or other undetermined cause. False alarm does not include alarms caused by tornadoes or
other violent climatic conditions.
5. Central Station. An office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected,
where operators supervise the circuits.
6. Subscriber. A person who buys or leases or otherwise obtains an alarm system and thereafter
contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor and/or service the alarm system.
5.04.14 Administrative Rules
A. The Chief of Police shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the implementation of this
Chapter. Such rules shall require the approval of the Common Council and shall be open to inspection by
the public.
Division 2 General Provisions
5.04.21 Automatic Dialing Devices
A. No person shall interconnect any automatic dialing device to a Police or Fire Department primary trunk
line. No person shall permit such devices, which were installed prior to the effective date of this Chapter,
to remain interconnected from any property owned or controlled by that person. Such devices may be
connected to a central station or an answering service. Relaying messages so received to the Police or
Fire Department shall only be done person to person on the telephone line.
5.04.22 Direct Connections to the Police Department
A. Direct connections to the Police or Fire Department are prohibited.
5.04.23 Testing
A. No alarm business or alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages to the Police Department
shall be tested or demonstrated without prior notification and approval of the Police Department
dispatcher. Alarm businesses or alarm system owners or lessors will be advised on proper test
procedure.
B. No alarm system relayed through intermediate services to the Police Department will be tested to
determine the Police Department's response without first notifying the appropriate authority. However, the
Police Department may inspect or test on-site alarm systems authorized under this Chapter.
C. Alarm systems shall be in compliance with all pertinent response policies of the Police Department.
5.04.24 Notification
A. When the service provided by an alarm business to its subscribers is disrupted for any reason by the
alarm business or the alarm business becomes aware of such disruption, it shall promptly notify its
subscribers by telephone that protection is no longer being provided. If, however, the alarm business has
written instructions from its subscriber not to make such notification by telephone during certain hours, the
alarm business may comply with such instructions.
5.04.25 Fee for Answering Alarms
A. Generally. Each false alarm requires response of public safety personnel, involves unnecessary expense
to the City, increases the risk of injury to persons or damage to property and dilutes the overall public
safety protection to the City. Such false alarms constitute a public nuisance and must be abated.
B. Intentional. No person shall intentionally cause the activation of a burglar/fire alarm device knowing that
no criminal activity, fire or other emergency exists.
C. False Alarms; Administrative Charges. Any person, business, corporation or other entity having
permissible alarm system with alarm device(s) at one or more locations in accordance with this Chapter
shall pay to the City a charge for false alarms responded to by the Police or Fire Department according to
the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. This Subsection is intended to impose a strict liability on the person,
business, corporation or other entity responsible for alarm connection to either the police alarm panel or
to alarm receiving firm to which the Police or Fire Department have responded and shall be applied
regardless of the cause of the false alarm excepting those alarms excluded from the definition of "False
Alarm."
D. Other Violations. Any person, corporation or other entity violating this Chapter in any manner, shall be
subject to General Penalty Forfeiture as provided in Title 1 of this Code. When any premises located in
the City is owned, leased or occupied by two (2) or more persons as joint tenants, tenants in common,
joint lessees, or in any other manner, each person shall see that the provisions of this Chapter are
complied with, and each person may be subjected to a penalty on violation of this Section.
E. Default of Payment for Forfeiture and/or Costs. On default of payment of forfeiture and/or costs under
the immediately preceding Subsections D., such person or responsible officer of the violating corporation
or other entity shall be confined in the county jail until the same be paid but not to exceed a length of time
specified by the court which length of time shall not exceed six (6) months. Upon nonpayment of the fee,
the amount due may be placed on the tax roll as a special charge pursuant to Sec. 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
5.04.26 City Liability
A. The City of Onalaska shall be under no duty or obligation to a subscriber or to any other person
concerning any provision of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, any defects in an alarm system or
any delays in transmission or response to any alarm; however, this in no way shall be construed that it is
not the proper function of law enforcement to respond to alarms.
5.04.27 Permits for Private Alarm Systems
A. Permit Required. A permit is required for each private alarm system on premises within the City. There
shall be a permit fee as set forth in the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. A permit must be applied for
within thirty (30) days of installation of the private alarm system.
B. Interior Alarms. A permit under this Chapter is not required for an alarm system which gives a signal,
visual or audible or both, solely within the interior of the building in which it is located.
C. Issuing Authority. The Chief of Police shall issue the permits.
D. Application. Application for permit required under this Chapter shall be filed with the Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to
evaluate and act upon the permit application. The Chief of Police shall deny a permit if the alarm system
for which it is sought does not comply with this Chapter.
E. Appeal. Any person required by this Chapter to have a permit who has been denied such a permit by the
Chief of Police shall have a right to appeal that decision to the Common Council. The procedure for this
appeal shall be as set forth in Section 5.04.28.C.
5.04.28 Revocation of Permits
A. Hearing. Before a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked, a hearing shall be held before
the Chief of Police. Notice setting forth the time, place and nature of the hearing shall be sent by mail or
delivered to the permittee at the address shown on the permit application not less than seven (7) days
prior to the hearing.
B. Grounds for Revocation. The Chief of Police may revoke a permit on the following grounds:
1. The application for a permit contains a false statement of a material fact.
2. A licensee has repeatedly failed to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
3. An alarm system repeatedly actuates false alarms.
C. Appeals. Any permittee may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police by filing a written notice of appeal
with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the Common
Council within thirty (30) days after filing the appeal. The Common Council may affirm, amend or reverse
the decision or take other action deemed appropriate. An appeal timely taken suspends the revocation
until the Council gives its decision. The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the
hearing to the appellant by certified mail or personal delivery not less than seven (7) days before the
hearing. In conducting the hearing, the Common Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of
evidence.
Chapter 05 Emergency Management
Division 1 Authority
5.05.11 Emergency Management Definitions
A. The term Emergency Management shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to mitigate, prepare
and respond for, and recover from disasters caused by a terrorism or other hostile action or by health
emergency, fire, flood or other natural causes.
B. The term National Incident Management System (NIMS) shall mean a comprehensive, national approach
to incident management that is applicable at all jurisdictional levels and across functional disciplines. The
intent of NIMS is to:
1. Be applicable across a full spectrum of potential incidents and hazard scenarios, regardless of size or
complexity.
2. Improve coordination and cooperation between public and private entities in a variety of domestic
incident management activities.
C. The term Incident Command System (ICS) shall mean a standardized, on-scene, all-hazard incident
management concept. ICS allows its users to adopt an integrated organizational structure to match the
complexities and demands of single or multiple incidents without being hindered by jurisdictional
boundaries.
5.05.12 Joint Action Ordinance
A. Joint Action Ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of La Crosse County providing for a County-Municipal
joint action emergency government plan of organization adopted by said County Board on the 16th day of
March, 1972. A copy of said County ordinance is on file with the City Clerk and made a part hereof, by
reference, and is hereby ratified and accepted by the City of Onalaska. This ratification and acceptance
of the Joint Action Ordinance shall constitute a mutual agreement between the City of Onalaska and the
County of La Crosse as provided by said Joint Action Ordinance.
B. The County Emergency Management Coordinator, appointed and employed by the La Crosse County
Board, is hereby designated and appointed Emergency Management Coordinator for the City of Onalaska
subject to the conditions and provisions as set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes and the La Crosse County
Joint Action Ordinance.
5.05.13 Utilization of Existing Services and Facilities
A. In preparing and executing the City’s Emergency Operation Plan (EOP), the City’s Emergency
Management Director(s) (EMDs) shall utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the
existing departments and agencies of the City to the maximum extent practicable. When the Common
Council has approved of the plan, it shall be the duty of all municipal agencies and departments of the
City to perform the duties and functions assigned by the approved plan.
5.05.14 Declaration of Emergency
A. The Emergency Management Team shall take action in accordance with the Emergency Operation Plan
(EOP) only after the declaration of an emergency and issuance of the official disaster warning.
Declaration of emergency shall be made by the Governor, the Mayor or, in their absence, by the City
Administrator or President of the Common Council. Such state of emergency shall continue until
terminated by the issuing authority, provided that any declaration not issued by the Governor may be
terminated by the Common Council.
5.05.15 Emergency Regulations
A. Whenever necessary to meet an Emergency Government emergency for which adequate regulations
have been adopted by the Common Council, the Mayor and, in their absence, the City Administrator or
Director of Emergency Government, may proclaim, promulgate and enforce orders, rules and regulations
relating to the conduct of persons and the use of property which are necessary to protect the public
peace, health and safety, and preserve lives and property, and to insure the cooperation in Emergency
Government activities. Such proclamation shall be posted in three (3) public places and may be rescinded
by resolution of the Common Council.
5.05.16 Obstruction of Emergency Management Organization
A. No person shall willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the Emergency Management
organization in the enforcement of any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to this Section or
violate any order, rule, regulation or plan issued pursuant to the authority contained in this Section. Any
person who shall violate any provision of this Section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
penalty as provided in Section 1.1.17 of this Code.
Title 6 Public Works
Chapter 01 Grades and Underground Utilities
Division 1 General Provisions for Grades and Underground Utilities
6.01.11 Establishment of Grades
A. Grades to be Established. The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be established by the
Common Council and the same recorded by the City Engineer in their office. No street, alley or
sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is established. In all cases where the grade of
sidewalks shall not have been specifically set by Section, the sidewalks shall be laid to the
established grade of the street. All such grades heretofore established are hereby confirmed.
B. Grades of Sidewalks. The grade or elevation of the top of the inner line of sidewalks, except when
otherwise specifically provided by the Common Council, shall be above the grade of the adjoining
street in an amount equal to a minimum of one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot of width and a maximum of
one (1) inch per foot of width from the inner edge of the sidewalk to the curb of the street. The grade
or elevation of the top of the inner line of the sidewalk between any two (2) fixed grade points shall be
upon straight lines, or on vertical curves, if necessary, to conform to the curb lines, from one (1) fixed
point to the nearest fixed point, excepting in cases otherwise specifically provided for by resolution or
approved plans.
C. Authority. Sec. 62.14(7) and 62.16, Wis. Stats.
6.01.12 Alteration of Grade Prohibited
A. No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground or any part thereof in
the City of Onalaska by any means whatsoever unless authorized or instructed to do so by the
Common Council upon the recommendation of the City Engineer. All such alterations of grade shall
be recorded in the office of the City Engineer.
6.01.13 Regulations and Grades of Underground Utilities
A. Elevation. The grade or elevation of all underground construction shall be a minimum of three (3)
feet below the established grade of the street, alley, park, public property or easement. The three (3)
feet shall be measured between the top of the established grade and the top of the underground
construction.
B. Approval of Location. The location of any and all such underground construction must have the
approval of the City Engineer. Contractor(s) or agents thereof shall obtain City Street Opening Permit
if within or crossing City right-of-way from the office of the City Engineer.
C. Filing Plans. Complete plans for any such construction must be filed with and be approved by the
City Engineer before construction can begin.
D. Inspection. On request of the City Engineer, the utility company must provide opportunity for City
officials to check any construction before it may be covered.
E. Conflict with Other Utilities. If the grade or elevation herein set for the underground construction of
utilities shall, in any instance, conflict with other existing utilities, the utility shall be required to lower
the elevation of its underground construction at the election of the Common Council, or its designee,
and in accordance with its directions and specifications.
F. Establishment of Grade. At the request of the utility company, the Common Council, or its designee,
shall, at the City's expense, give the utility company an established grade on any streets, alleys,
public parks or easements where it proposes to install underground utilities.
G. Emergency. In case of an emergency, when immediate action is necessary in order to protect life or
property, the utility company may proceed with underground construction subject to obtaining the
approval of such work by the Common Council, or its designee, as soon thereafter as is reasonably
possible.
H. Restoration of Surface. In the event of any such underground construction, the utility company shall
leave the surface of the ground, or road, in the same condition as before said work was commenced,
and in the event of its failure so to do, the City may proceed to place the surface of the ground or
street in such condition at the utility company's expense. Such work shall comply with the provisions
of Sections 6.02.42. and 6.02.43.
I. Non-Relief from Obligations. Compliance with this Section does not relieve the utility company from
any responsibility of any kind whatsoever by reason of the widening of the travel-way, or any other
improvements which may become necessary; nor does it relieve it from any liability of any kind or
nature whatsoever. Compliance with this Section shall not relieve the utility company from the
responsibility or obligation of removing, relocating or moving any of its mains, pipes or property due to
the opening, widening or improving of streets, or due to any other changes which may occur by
reason of which such moving, relocation or removing may be necessary.
Chapter 02 Street and Alley Design Standards
Division 1 Street Design Standards
6.02.11 Street Improvements
A. General Considerations. The streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographical conditions and natural terrain features such as streams and existing
tree growth, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses
of the land to be served by such streets.
B. Construction Standards. Construction of all streets shall conform to the current standards as
established by the City and shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer before acceptance.
6.02.12 General Design Standards
A. Compliance with Statutes. In laying out a subdivision, the owner shall conform to the provisions of
Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., and all applicable City regulations. In all cases where the requirements of this
Section are different from the requirements of Ch. 236, Wis. Stats, the more restrictive provision shall
apply.
B. Dedication. The subdivider shall dedicate land and improve streets as provided in this Section and
Chapter 3 of this Title. Streets shall be located with due regard for topographical conditions, natural
features, existing and proposed streets, utilities and land uses and public convenience and safety.
Streets shall conform to official maps adopted by the Common Council. The subdivision, certified
survey parcel or land division shall be so designed as to provide each lot with satisfactory access to a
public street or road.
C. Compliance with Comprehensive Plan and Official Map. The arrangement, character, extent,
width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to any City Comprehensive Plan and Official
Map and to this Section and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to run-off of storm water, to public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be
served by such streets. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the
appropriate continuation at the same width of the existing streets in adjoining areas.
D. Areas Not Covered by Official Map. In areas not covered by an official map, the layout of streets
shall conform to the plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining areas of the
neighborhood. Streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and officially planned
streets, topography and natural terrain, streams and lakes and existing tree growth, public
convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served
by such streets.
E. Traffic Impact Studies. If a Traffic Impact Study is required as outlined in Section 13.05.51, the
recommendations outlined shall be followed as part of street design standards. Costs for
improvements related to new traffic impacts shall be paid by the Developer.
F. Continuation. Streets shall be laid out to provide for possible continuation wherever topographic and
other physical conditions permit. Provision shall be made so that all proposed streets shall have a
direct connection with, or be continuous and in line with, existing, planned or platted streets with
which they are to connect. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be
subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of
the Common Council, upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission, such extension is not
necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with existing layout or the
most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. Dead end streets not over five hundred
(500) feet in length will be approved when necessitated by the topography.
G. Minor Streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out so as to discourage their use by through traffic.
H. Frontage Roads. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial highway, the
Plan Commission may require a frontage road, non-access reservation along the rear of the property
contiguous to such highway or such other treatment as may be necessary to ensure safe, efficient
traffic flow and adequate protection of residential properties.
I. Private Streets. Private streets shall not be approved nor shall public improvements be approved for
any private street; all streets shall be dedicated for public use and installed to City specifications.
J. Tangents. A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be required between reverse curves
on arterial and collector streets.
K. Half Streets. Where an existing dedicated or platted half-street is adjacent to the subdivision, the
other half-street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. The platting of half-streets is not permitted.
6.02.13 Street Classification
A. Street Classifications. Streets shall be classified as indicated below.
1. Arterial Streets. Arterial streets shall be arranged to provide through traffic for a heavy volume of
vehicles. Arterial streets shall be arranged so as to provide ready access to centers of
employment, centers of governmental activity, shopping areas, recreation areas and points
beyond the boundaries of the community. They shall also be properly integrated with and related
to the existing and proposed system of major streets and highways and shall be, insofar as
practicable, continuous and in alignment with existing or planned streets with which they are to
connect.
2. Collector Streets. Collector streets shall be arranged so as to provide ready collection of traffic
from commercial and residential areas and conveyance of this traffic to the major street and
highway system and shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as schools,
churches and shopping centers and other concentrations of population and to the major streets
into which they feed.
3. Minor/Local Streets. Minor streets shall be arranged to conform to the topography, to
discourage use by through traffic, to permit the design of efficient storm and sanitary sewerage
systems and to require the minimum street area necessary to provide safe and convenient
access to abutting property.
4. Proposed Streets. Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract being
subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion
of the Plan Commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the
layout of the subdivision or land division or for the advantageous development of the adjacent
tracts.
a. Reserve Strips. Reserve strips shall not be provided on any plat to control access to streets
or alleys, except where control of such strips is placed with the City under conditions
approved by the Plan Commission.
b. Alleys.
i. Commercial, Industrial, and Mixed Use. Alleys may be provided in all Commercial,
Industrial, and Mixed Use Districts as approved by the City Engineer.
ii. Residential. Alleys may be approved in residential areas due to topography, planned unit
developments or other exceptional circumstances.
iii. Dead End. Dead-end alleys are prohibited except under very unusual circumstances,
and crooked and "T" alleys shall be discouraged. Where dead-end alleys are
unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead end.
6.02.14 Street Grades and Radii of Curvature
A. Street Grades.
1. Unless necessitated by exceptional topography subject to the approval of the Plan Commission,
the maximum centerline grade of any street or public way shall not exceed the following:
a. Arterial streets: six percent (6%).
b. Collector streets: eight percent (8%).
c. Minor streets, alleys and frontage streets: ten percent (10%). Three hundred (300) feet
maximum length on a single street section.
d. Pedestrian ways: twelve percent (12%) unless steps of acceptable design are provided.
e. The grade of any street shall in no case exceed twelve percent (12%) or be less than
thirty-six hundredths percent (0.36%).
2. Street grades shall be established wherever practicable so as to avoid excessive grading, the
promiscuous removal of ground cover and tree growth, and general leveling of the topography.
3. All pavement shall have a minimum cross slope of fifteen thousandths (0.015) ft/ft and a minimum
longitudinal slope of thirty-six hundredths percent (0.36%).
B. Radii of Curvature.
1. When a continuous street centerline deflects at any one (1) point by more than ten degrees (10º),
a circular curve shall be introduced having a radius of curvature on said centerline of not less
than the following:
a. Arterial streets and highways: five hundred (500) feet.
b. Collector streets: three hundred (300) feet.
c. Minor streets: one hundred (100) feet.
2. Horizontal curves should be provided when centerline defections exceed one degree (1°) in rural
areas and in urban areas when defection exceeds three degrees (3°).
3. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent
in feet to fifteen (15) times the algebraic difference in the rates of grade for all major streets and
one-half (1/2) this minimum for all other streets.
6.02.15 Intersections
A. Visibility. Streets shall afford maximum visibility and safety and shall intersect at right angles where
practicable. As required by the City Engineer, sufficient vision clearance triangles shall be provided at
intersections.
B. Intersections.
1. Property Lines. Property lines at street intersections of major thoroughfares shall be rounded
with a radius of fifteen (15) feet or of a greater radius where the City Engineer considers it
necessary.
2. Angle of Intersect. Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles as topography and
other limiting factors of good design permit.
3. Number of Streets Converging. The number of streets converging at one (1) intersection shall
be reduced to a minimum, preferably not more than two (2). Diagonal intersections on local
streets shall be avoided whenever possible in favor of T-type intersections. Intersections of local
streets shall be at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from each other.
4. Number of Intersections. The number of intersections along arterial streets shall be held to a
minimum. Wherever practicable, the distance between such intersections shall be not less than
twelve hundred (1,200) feet.
5. Property Lines at Street Intersections. Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded
with a minimum radius of fifteen (15) feet or of a greater radius when required by the Plan
Commission or shall be terminated by a straight line through the points of tangency of an arc
having a radius of fifteen (15) feet.
6. Local Streets. Local streets shall not necessarily continue across arterial or collector streets, but
if the centerlines of such local streets approach the major streets from opposite sides within three
hundred (300) feet of each other, measured along the centerline of the arterial or collector streets,
then the location shall be so adjusted that the street adjoining t across the major or collector
street is continuous.
7. Additional Sight Easements. At any intersection determined by the City Engineer, restricted
development easements or additional street right-of-way shall be platted to provide for adequate
sight distances in every direction of travel. At a minimum, the subdivider shall grade, clear or
otherwise provide for an unobstructed sight triangle at all intersections incorporating the area
within a triangle formed by the intersection of the street right-of-way lines and a point on each
right-of-way line being not less than twenty (20) feet from the intersection point.
6.02.16 Street Names
A. Street Names.
1. New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets, but streets that are
continuations of others already in existence and named shall bear the names of the existing
streets. Street names shall be subject to approval by the Plan Commission and Common Council
at the time of plat or Certified Survey Map approval.
2. All streets shall be named subject to approval by the City Planning and Engineering Departments.
New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets, provided, however, that
streets that are obviously in alignment with others already existing and shall bear the names of
the existing streets. Repetition of common names (i.e. oak) should be avoided. Long or
continuous thoroughfares running north and south shall be named avenues; those running east
and west shall be named streets; diagonal thoroughfares shall be named roads; and curving
thoroughfares shall be named drives. Short or discontinuous thoroughfares running north and
south shall be named courts; those running east and west shall be named places; diagonal
thoroughfares shall be named ways; and curving thoroughfares shall be named lanes, or as
approved by the Plan Commission.
3. Obscure Names, Similar Spelling and Phonetically Confusing Spelling Not Permitted. To
eliminate confusion resulting from diction problems when individuals are reporting street names
under stress, similar (text or phonetic) or confusing spelling of street names shall not be
approved.
6.02.17 Miscellaneous Street Standards
A. Cul-de-sacs and Dead End Streets.
1. Cul-de-sac streets designed to have one (1) end permanently closed shall not exceed five
hundred (500) feet in length. Any cul-de-sac street over five hundred (500) feet in length will only
be considered if unusual conditions exist with the approval of the City Engineer. All cul-de-sac
streets designed to have one (1) end permanently closed shall terminate with a turnaround of not
less than one hundred (100) feet in diameter of right-of-way and a roadway of not less than eighty
(80) feet in diameter, unless approved by Plan Commission. The use of cul-de-sacs should be
avoided where possible. Cul-de-sacs shall have a ten (10) foot snow easement beyond the rightof-
way.
2. Temporary Dead-ends or Cul-de-sacs. All temporary dead-ends shall have a maximum length of
eight hundred (800) feet and a temporary cul-de-sac shall have a minimum right-of-way radius of
sixty-six (66) feet and a minimum inside curb radius of forty (40) feet.
B. Limited Access Highway and Railroad Right-of-Way Treatment. Whenever the proposed
subdivision contains or is adjacent to a limited access highway, arterial street or railroad right-of-way,
the design shall provide the following treatment:
C. Commercial and Industrial Districts. Commercial and industrial districts shall have provided, on
each side of the limited access highway, arterial street or railroad, streets approximately parallel to
and at a suitable distance from such highway or railroad for the appropriate use of the land between
such streets and highway or railroad, but not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
D. Streets Parallel to a Limited Access Highway. Streets parallel to a limited access highway or
railroad right-of-way, when intersecting a major street and highway or collector street which crosses
said railroad or highway, shall be located at a minimum distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet from
said highway or railroad right-of-way. Such distance, where desirable and practicable, shall be
determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for the future separation of
grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
E. Minor Streets. Minor streets immediately adjacent and parallel to railroad rights-of-way shall be
avoided, and location of minor streets immediately adjacent to arterial streets and highways and to
railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided in residential areas.
F. Highway Access.
1. No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of
expressways, nor to any controlled access arterial street without permission of the highway
agency that has access control jurisdiction. No direct public or private access shall be permitted
to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of freeways, interstate highways and their interchanges
or turning lanes nor to intersecting or interchanging streets within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of
the most remote end of the taper of the turning lanes (such as exit and entrance ramps).
2. Access barriers, such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping or other topographic barriers
shall be erected to prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the above specified
streets or highways.
3. Temporary access to the above rights-of-way may be granted by the City Engineer after review
and recommendation by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be
temporary, revocable and subject to any conditions required and shall be issued for a period not
to exceed twelve (12) months.
Division 2 Street Construction Specifications
6.02.21 General Requirements
A. General Requirements.
1. Construction Standards. All roadway construction and materials used shall be performed in
accordance with the construction methods as listed in the appropriate sections of the latest
edition of the "State of Wisconsin Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction" and its supplements, City specifications, and this Section, whichever is
more restrictive. The design requirements of this Section shall be applicable to all streets and
roads that are to be dedicated to the City, regardless of whether such streets or roads are part of
a new subdivision or land division. Design requirements for the pavement shall be adequate for
the zoning and street classification of the area served by the subject street. A street which divides
areas with different zoning classifications shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the area requiring the higher quality pavement. Any variation of this must have
prior approval of the City Engineer. Combination concrete curb and gutter is required on all
streets (refer to the Section describing requirements for curbs and gutters). A copy of all design
assumptions and computations on which the proposed design is based shall be submitted to and
approved by the City Engineer.
2. Project Costs. All roadway surveys, dedications, plans and specifications and construction will
be at the expense of the applicant or applicants. This includes any expense incurred by the City
in the preparation of plans and review and inspection of plans and construction. The developer
shall pay such project costs for streets thirty-seven (37) feet or less in width, back-of-curb to
back-of-curb; the City shall be responsible for additional costs of construction over thirty-seven
(37) feet back-of-curb to back-of-curb for larger streets and bituminous asphalt pavement over
three (3) compacted inches.
3. Preliminary Consultation. Prior to the design, preparation and construction of any roadway to
be dedicated to the City of Onalaska, the applicant shall notify the City Engineer. An on-site
meeting will then be arranged to be attended by the City Engineer and the applicant. Plans must
be provided in order for the City Engineer to check the design and the drainage.
4. Material Slips. Copies of material slips for all materials furnished for the road construction
projects shall be delivered to the City before the City approves the final construction.
5. Required Inspections. Prior to the commencement of any street construction, the subdivider
shall notify the City Engineer at least one (1) workday in advance, as to the nature of the work
being done. The City Engineer shall be contacted for required inspections after the following
phases of construction:
a. Sub-base grading;
b. Crushed aggregate base course;
c. Bituminous surface course; and
d. Shouldering.
e. Any deficiencies found by the City Engineer shall be corrected before proceeding to the next
phase of construction.
6. Tests of Materials. The City reserves the right to obtain a sample of the roadway base material
prior to placement on the roadway for purposes of determining whether the material meets
gradation and soundness requirements.
7. Pavement Samples. Samples of bituminous concrete will be taken by the City during pavement
construction operations for purposes of determining that the material meets specifications.
B. Street Signs. Developer shall coordinate with the City Engineering Department a plan for street
signage. Following review and approval by the City, the Developer shall pay a sum as listed in the
City Fee Schedule.
C. Street Trees. Developer shall provide the City with a Master Street Tree Plan for review and
approval by the City Planning Department.
D. Survey Monumentation. Before final approval of any plat or certified survey within the corporate
limits of the City, the subdivider shall install monuments placed in accordance with the requirements
of Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., or as may be required by the City Engineer. All survey monumentation
located adjacent to street or public rights-of-way, but not located within street pavement, shall be
protected with steel fence posts erected near the survey monumentation. The City Engineer may
waive the placing of monuments for a reasonable time during public improvement construction on
condition that the subdivider executes a survey to insure the placing of such monuments within the
time required. On behalf of the City, the City Engineer is authorized to accept such surety bonds and
contracts for monumentation in an amount approved by the City Engineer. Building permits shall not
be issued until all survey monumentation for the block(s) of lots in which the lot(s) for which building
permits are being applied for within the phase of the land division under development has been
installed. When the land division includes an established one-half (1/2), one-quarter (1/4), one-quarter
one-quarter (1/4-1/4), or such other section monument, the established monument shall be preserved
and/or fully restored by the subdivider at their cost.
E. Curb and Gutter. After the installation of all utility storm water drainage improvements, the
subdivider shall construct thirty (30) inch wide curbs and gutters in accordance with plans and
standard specifications approved by the City Engineer. The City shall assume the cost of difference of
materials only over thirty (30) inches.
6.02.22 Construction Standards
A. Construction Standards. All streets and highways constructed in the City or to be dedicated to the
City shall fully comply with the following construction standards:
1. Right-of-Way and Pavement Width. The minimum right-of-way and roadway width of all
proposed streets and alleys shall be as specified by the comprehensive plan, comprehensive
plan component or official map or, if no width is specified therein, the minimum widths shall be as
specified below. Cross sections for freeways and parkways should be based upon detailed
engineering studies. The Plan Commission may approve reduced width for right-of-way and
pavement where needed for special zoning districts, such as Planned Unit Developments.
URBAN CROSS SECTION
Type of Street Pavement Width
R.O.W. Width to be
Reserved
R.O.W. Width
To be
Dedicated
Face of Curb to
Face of Curb
Width
Expressway, Primary or Standard
Arterial (Limited Access) Primary
Arterial State Standard 80 Feet State Standard
High Collector 66 Feet 66 Feet State Standard
Low Collector 66 Feet 66 Feet State Standard
Local 66 Feet 66 Feet 36 Feet
Cul-de-sac 60 Feet 60 Feet 36 Feet
Frontage Streets 66 Feet 66 Feet 30 Feet
Alleys N/A 25 Feet 25 Feet
Pedestrian Ways 10 Feet 10 Feet 5 Feet
RURAL CROSS SECTION (Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Area)
Type of Street Pavement Width
R.O.W. Width to be
Reserved
R.O.W. Width
To be
Dedicated
Face of Curb to
Face of Curb
Width
Expressway, Primary Arterial (Limited
Access) Primary Arterial or Standard
Arterial State Standard 80 Feet State Standard
High Collector 80 Feet 80 Feet State Standard
Low Collector or Local 66 Feet 66 Feet State Standard
2. Ditches. Where curb and gutter is not required by the City for rural cross-section streets, the
minimum ditch slope shall be fifty one-hundredths percent (0.50%).
3. Roadway Base Thickness.
a. All streets shall have a minimum roadway base thickness of eight (8) inches of compacted
in-place crushed aggregate base course in areas of granular soils. In areas of heavy clay
soils/hydric or as determined by City Engineer, all streets shall have a minimum of eighteen
(18) inches of breaker rock and four (4) inches of crushed aggregate base course compacted
in place. Crushed rock shall comply with Wisconsin Department of Transportation's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", latest edition, as it relates to crushed
aggregate base course.
b. The developer/subdivider shall hire an independent soil testing/pavement design consultant
to recommend adequate pavement design or have such design approved by the City
Engineer. The subdivider/developer is responsible for all the costs of installing approved
pavement design, with a minimum of eight (8) inches of crushed rock base and two and onehalf
(2 ½) inches of compacted asphalt in granular soils and eighteen (18) inches of breaker
rock, four (4) inches in base, and three (3) inches in asphalt in heavy clay or silty
soils/hydrologic.
c. In the case of commercial, arterial or other heavy-use roads, the Common Council may, in
the alternative to the above standards, have the City Engineer provide specifications for such
roads after researching the site(s) and conducting a soil and pavement design analysis.
d. In any case, the Common Council shall have the sole discretion in determining the use and
construction classification to be adhered to.
e. In all cases, the base course shall be compacted to the extent necessary to produce a
condition so that there will be no appreciable displacement of material laterally and
longitudinally under traffic and shall conform to line, grades and shape shown on the
approved plans, profiles and cross sections.
4. Roadway Sub-Base. Stable and non-organic sub-base material is required. Unstable and
organic material must be sub-cut, removed and replaced with a suitable granular or breaker-run
material approved by the City Engineer.
5. Pavement Thickness. Residential streets shall have a minimum of two and one-half (2 ½ )
inches thick compacted bituminous concrete pavement. On commercial, arterial or other
heavy-use streets, there shall be a minimum of three and one-half (3 ½ ) inches of bituminous
concrete pavement, placed in two (2) layers -- a binder course two (2) inches thick and a surface
course of one and one-half (1 ½ ) inches thick. In the case of commercial, arterial or other
heavy-use roads, the Common Council may, in the alternative to the above standards, have the
City Engineer provide specifications for paving such roads after researching the site(s) and
conducting a pavement and soil analysis. In any case, the Common Council shall have the sole
discretion in determining the use and construction classification to be adhered to.
6. Roadway Culverts and Bridges. Roadway culverts and bridges shall be constructed as directed
by the City Engineer and sized utilizing the methods listed in Chapter 13, entitled "Drainage", of
the "Facilities Development Manual" of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. All roadway
culverts shall be reinforced concrete with concrete apron endwalls.
7. Driveway Culverts. Driveway culverts shall be sized by the City Engineer (if appropriate). The
culverts shall be placed in the ditch line at elevations that will assure proper drainage, and they
shall be provided with concrete, metal or landscape timber endwalls.
8. Topsoil, Grass, Seed, Fertilizer and Mulch. All disturbed areas (ditches, back slopes) within the
road right-of-way not provided with pavement and shouldering material shall be restored utilizing
six (6) inches of topsoil and good quality grass seed, fertilizer and mulch. Ditches along the
roadway with greater than a two and one-half percent (2 ½ %) slope shall be protected by erosion
control materials such as hay bales, sod, erosion control mats, etc. For additional standards, see
“City of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements”.
9. Drainage Improvements. In the case of all new roads and streets, the City Engineer may require
that storm water retention areas and storm sewers be constructed in order to provide for proper
drainage.
10. Continuity and Transitions.
a. All street pavement widths on streets continued from previously developed or platted streets
shall, wherever practical, provide for the greater of either the existing or required pavement
type, width, grade and cross slope.
b. Where it is necessary to provide for a transition of pavement width and/or type between new
and existing streets, the transition shall occur in a safe manner at an intersection. In the event
a transition in pavement width cannot safety occur at an intersection, it shall not occur closer
than two hundred fifty (250) feet to the intersection of right-of-way lines. In width transitions,
the ratio of the transition length to width shall not be less than fifteen to one (15:1) unless the
City Engineer determines that special circumstances prevent use of such ratio, in which case
the minimum transition ratio shall be ten to one (10:1).
6.02.23 Street Lights
A. The subdivider shall install street lights along all streets per City specifications and approval. In the
event the City determines that it is in the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the City to install street lights on undeveloped lands prior to their development, the City
shall do so and shall charge the costs of the same to the developer upon development.
1. Upon annexation of lands to the City of Onalaska, street lights shall be installed per City
specifications. Each owner of lands within the annexed area shall be assessed for the costs of
the street lights. The amount of the assessment shall be determined on a front footage basis. The
cost per front foot shall be calculated by dividing the total cost for the street lamps and the
installation thereof by the amount of front footage served by said lights. The assessment per
owner shall then be determined by multiplying the cost per front foot times the amount of front
footage owned.
2. In determining such assessment, lands on both sides of any street shall be included.
3. Provided, however, that in the event lands on only one (1) side of any street shall be annexed,
the assessment for lands within the City shall be fifty percent (50%) of the assessment as
calculated above. Upon subsequent annexation to the City of any lands for which no street light
assessment has previously been paid, the owners of said land shall be assessed for the cost of
street lights in accordance with this Section.
6.02.24 Roadway Grading and Finishing
A. Grading.
1. With the submittal of the Preliminary Plat, the subdivider shall furnish drawings, which indicate the
existing and proposed grades of roads, streets and alleys shown on the plat.
2. Proposed grades will be reviewed by the City Engineer for conformance with City standards and
good engineering practice. Street grades require the approval of the Common Council after
receipt of the City Engineers recommendations.
3. After the installation of temporary block corner monuments by the subdivider and establishment
of street grades according to standards approved by the governing body, the subdivider shall
grade the full width of the right-of-way of the streets and alleys proposed to be dedicated,
including the vision clearance triangle on corner lots.
4. In cases where an existing street right-of-way is made a part of the plat or abuts the plat, the
subdivider shall grade that portion of the right-of-way between the existing pavement and the
property line.
5. The bed for the roadways in the street rights-of-way shall be graded to subgrade elevation.
6. The City Engineer shall approve all grading within rights-of-way and said grading shall extend for
a sufficient distance beyond the right-of-way to insure that the established grade will be
preserved.
7. Where electric and other communications or utilities facilities are to be installed underground, the
utility easements shall be graded to within six (6) inches of the final grade by the subdivider, prior
to the installation of such facilities; earth fill piles or mounds of dirt or construction materials shall
not be stored on such easement areas.
B. Street Construction. After the installation of all utility and storm water drainage improvements, the
subdivider shall prepare for surfacing all roadways in streets proposed to be dedicated, to the widths
prescribed by these regulations, by placing crushed rock on said roadways and, in addition, shall
surface said street, in a manner and quality consistent with plans and specifications approved by the
City Engineer. The subdivider shall surface roadways to the widths prescribed by City specifications.
Construction shall be to City standard specifications for street improvements.
C. Street Cross Sections. When permanent street cross sections have been approved by the City, the
subdivider shall finish grade all shoulders and road ditches, install all necessary culverts at
intersections and, if required, surface ditch inverts to prevent erosion and sedimentation in
accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the City Engineer.
D. Completion of Street and Sidewalk Construction.
1. Prior to any occupancy permits being issued on lands adjacent to streets and/or sidewalks, all
street and sidewalk construction shall be completed by the subdivider/owner, approved by the
City Engineer and accepted by the Common Council.
2. The Common Council may issue a waiver of these requirements in unusual or special
circumstances such as excessively severe weather conditions, heavy construction temporarily in
area or construction material shortages (i.e., cement, asphalt). The issuance of a waiver shall be
at the discretion of the Common Council.
3. The owner requesting a waiver shall do so in writing, presenting such information and
documentation as required by the Common Council.
4. The waiver shall be in written form and shall detail which improvement requirements are
temporarily waived and for what period of time.
Division 3 Streets, Sidewalks and Alleys
6.02.31 Removal of Debris and Dirt from Sidewalks, Streets, and Public Grounds
A. No abutting property owner shall, upon any sidewalk, street, alley or public ground, so maintain their
land or any building situated thereon so that, by erosion or by travel, parts of the soil or other
substance shall be deposited upon the butting sidewalk, street, alley or any public ground, and if such
deposit by erosion or otherwise shall take place, the sidewalk, street, alley or public ground shall be
cleaned and made passable by such abutting owner within twenty-four (24) hours after receiving
notice thereof from the Inspection Department.
B. No abutting property owner shall maintain their adjacent land within three (3) feet of any sidewalk,
street, alley or public ground so that by erosion, debris, or other substances a public nuisance, as
defined in Section 16.0.12. of the City of Onalaska Code of Ordinances, shall be created or that the
maintenance of the adjoining lands shall be such that over time said conditions will cause destruction
and disrepair of the sidewalk, street, alley or public grounds. That within twenty-four (24) hours after
receiving notice thereof from the Inspection Department, said property owner shall remedy any public
nuisance or conditions which may cause destruction and disrepair of sidewalks, streets, alleys or
public grounds.
C. If such owner of occupant fails to remove any such debris or dirt or remedy a public nuisance or
condition as outlined above when notified to do so by the City Engineer, or its designee, the City
Engineer or its designee may cause the same to be done and report the cost thereof to the City Clerk
who shall place the cost on the tax roll as a special tax against the premises, pursuant to Sec.
66.0627, Wis. Stats. or such cost may be recovered in an action against the owner or occupant.
6.02.32 Boulevard Areas and Vaults
A. Definition. See Section 6.05.12.
B. Noxious Weeds; Paving. All that part of the boulevard not covered by a sidewalk shall be kept free
and clear of all noxious weeds and shall not be paved, surfaced or covered with any material which
shall prevent the growth of plants, the infiltration of stormwater runoff, and shall be maintained as a
lawn, except in areas specifically approved by the Common Council or its designee.
C. Responsibility to Maintain. Every owner of land in the City whose land abuts a boulevard is
required to maintain, or have maintained by their tenant, the boulevard directly abutting such land as
provided in this Section and elsewhere in this Code. Every owner shall keep mailboxes located on a
boulevard free and clear of snow. Excess right-of-way located between any sidewalk and a private
property line is also the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain.
D. Boulevard Area Restrictions. In addition to the definitions and restrictions contained herein, no
person shall place any accessory structure or use, including landscaping ornaments, stones and
basketball backboard/hoops, in the boulevard area. No lawn sprinkler system shall be installed in the
boulevard area without first obtaining a street privilege permit under Section 6.02.45.
E. Vaults. All vaults and cisterns under sidewalks shall be prohibited.
6.02.33 Requests for Improvements
A. Requests or petitions by City property owners for new streets, street resurfacing, curb and gutter,
storm sewers, utility work and sidewalks shall be presented to the Common Council on or before
August 1st to be considered for installation in the following year.
6.02.34 Raking Leaves into Streets
A. In the interest of public safety, health and general welfare, community appearance and efficiency of
operation, it shall be unlawful to rake or place fallen tree leaves or grass clippings onto the pavement
or into the gutter of any public street. No person shall permit grass clippings from mower swaths to
remain upon sidewalks or on abutting property owned or occupied by them.
6.02.35 Unlawful Dumping on Streets
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited, dump, sort, scatter or leave
any rubbish, stone, wire, earth, ashes, cinders, sawdust, hay, glass, manure, filth, paper, snow, ice,
dirt, grass, leaves, construction waste, garbage or other offensive or noxious material in any public
street, sidewalk, alley, or upon any public property or upon any property of another, without the
express permission of the owner of occupant thereof.
6.02.36 Street Numbers
A. Buildings to Have Street Numbers. Each principal building in the City shall be assigned an official
street number by the Public Works Department. All lots and parts of lots in the City shall be numbered
in accordance with a street numbering map on file in the office of the Public Works Department. Plats
shall be numbered to conform as nearly as possible to the general scheme of numbering as outlined
on the map.
B. Street Number System.
1. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, all streets whose course is northerly or southerly
shall be considered North and South streets, and all streets having a easterly or westerly course
shall be considered East and West streets and the general word "street" shall be deemed and
held to include all streets, boulevards, courts or avenues.
2. Numbering North and South Streets. All streets running north and south shall have as their
dividing line, Main Street, and all numbers running northerly from Main Street shall be designated
as North, and all numbers running south from Main Street shall be designated as South and shall
have as their point of beginning the said Main Street.
3. Numbering East and West Streets. All streets running east and west shall have as their dividing
line, First Street, and all numbers running easterly from First Street shall be designated as East,
and all numbers running westerly from First Street shall be designated as West and shall have
their point of beginning said First Street.
4. Allocation of Numbers.
a. All numbering shall commence at the dividing street, and there shall be assigned as a unit of
one hundred (100) for each block with even numbers on the right side and odd numbers on
the left side of each street or avenue commencing at said dividing streets.
b. In all cases where an intersecting street or avenue shall not continue entirely across the City,
the lots and buildings shall be numbered so that all lots and buildings the same distance from
the base line shall have approximately the same numbers.
C. Street Numbers to Be Displayed. The owner, occupant, or agent in charge of the premises shall
cause to be affixed and to be maintained when so affixed to each principal building controlled by them
the official street number assigned to that building as provided in Section 6.02.36.A. The physical
numbers provided herein shall be not less than two and one-half (2-1/2) inches high on a background
of not less than three (3) inches. Each required number shall be affixed on the particular building in
such a location that it may be easily and readily seen by a person of ordinary eyesight on the public
street or highway upon which the building abuts. For buildings abutting also on a public alley, the
street number shall also be affixed in such location that it may be seen in like manner from such alley.
D. Noncompliance. If the owner or occupant of any building neglects to duly attach and maintain the
proper numbers on the building, the City shall serve them a notice requiring them to properly number
the same, and if they neglects to do so for ten (10) days after service, they shall be subject to a
forfeiture as provided in the City Schedule of Deposits.
6.02.37 Obstruction of Public Ditches
A. No person shall in any manner obstruct or cause to be obstructed the free passage of water in any
public gutter, ditch, culvert, swale or drain or place or cause to be placed any rubbish, dirt, sand,
gravel or any other matter or thing so that the same is likely to be carried by the elements into any
public gutter, ditch, culvert, swale or drain.
6.02.38 Alley Paving
A. Property owners desiring paved alleys shall present a signed petition for alley paving to the City
Clerk. Said petition must contain the signatures of the owners of at least sixty percent (60%) of the
front footage of the alley. After presentation, the City Clerk shall check the petition to determine
compliance and, when approved, it shall be forwarded to the Common Council. The Council shall
refer said petition to the Board of Public Works for plans and costs and a recommendation to the
Council.
B. Due to the varying degrees of run-off, each alley will be reviewed individually. If the particular
circumstances justify paving and the Common Council agrees, it shall direct the Board of Public
Works to set up a public hearing on alley paving.
C. After a public hearing, the project shall be placed in the capital improvement budget for the following
year.
D. Assessments.
1. Assessments for alley paving are determined by the actual cost of paving within the alley limits
(from street line to street line). Any addition work such as alley aprons, sidewalks, retaining walls,
etc., shall be the sole obligation of the property owner.
2. The cost of the project will be assessed on the basis of one-third (1/3) of the cost to each property
owner abutting on the alley and the remaining one-third (1/3) shall be borne by the City.
3. The formula to determine the per-foot assessment for alley paving is as follows:
Total Construction Costs = Assessment/Foot
Assessable Frontage
E. Corner lots and double frontage shall be assessed in full.
F. Most alleys are twenty (20) feet in width (right-of-way). Residential alleys are paved seventeen (17)
feet in width, while alleys in commercial or industrial areas are paved full width. Alleys having less
than twenty (20) feet in right-of-way are judged individually as to what width they shall be paved.
Division 4 Street Openings, Permits and Encroachments
6.02.41 Regulations Regarding Construction of Mailboxes
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish standards for providing safe mailbox installation
to lessen the likelihood of injuries, deaths, and substantial property damage resulting from mailboxes
which do not have breakaway supports and/or sufficient attachment of mailbox to support so as to
prevent the separation of the box from the support post when struck.
B. Support Systems. The support should be a wood post or steel channel installed no more than
twenty-four (24) inches in the ground and extending to a vertical height such that the bottom of the
mailbox is a minimum of forty-one (41) inches, but not to exceed a maximum of forty-five (45) inches
above the ground surface. The support should be the following dimensions:
1. Square post: four (4) by four (4).
2. Round wood post: four and one-half (4-1/2) inches diameter.
3. Steel channel: two (2) pounds per foot.
C. Location. In compliance with the requirements set by the United States Post Office for the location of
a mailbox, the front edge of the mailbox itself shall be six (6) to eight (8) inches behind the back edge
of the curb and gutter system, in the event that there is no curb and gutter system in place contact the
postmaster for guidance.
Fig. from USPS.com/mailboxes
D. Anchoring of Support. Anchor plates shall not be used with metal posts. No support shall be set in
concrete. Anti-twist flanges may be installed on a steel channel support but shall not be imbedded
more than ten (10) inches into the ground.
E. Attachment. The box-to-post attachment shall be sufficient to prevent the separation of the box from
the support post when struck.
F. Permit. Any support system not meeting the requirements of this section shall need a street privilege
permit approved by the Director of Public Works.
G. Damage. Mailboxes damaged during the process of snow removal, street sweeping or other street
department activities will only be replaced or repaired if that mailbox complies with the support
system and location requirements, as set forth above, and only if physically hit by the snow removal
or street equipment. If City replacement or repair is warranted, the mailbox will be returned to
working condition until such time as permanent replacement or repair can be made. Repair or
replacement shall be limited to a basic metal mailbox and a four (4) inch by four (4) inch square wood
post, with material cost not to exceed Fifty Dollars ($50.00).
H. Non-Compliance. Persons constructing mailboxes in non-compliance with these provisions shall be
required to sign a waiver of liability for replacement of the structure if it is damaged by street
maintenance.
6.02.42 Excavations of Streets, Alleys, Public Ways and Grounds
A. Permit Required. No person, partnership or corporation, or their agents or employees or contractors,
shall make or cause to be made any opening or excavation in any public street, right-of-way, public
alley, public way, public ditch, public ground, public sidewalk or City-owned easement within the City
of Onalaska without a permit therefor from the City Engineer.
B. Application for Permit. The application for a permit shall be in writing and signed by the applicant or
their agent. The applicant shall submit to the City Engineer at the time the permit is applied for,
sufficient information relating to the work to be done including the general location and nature of the
work and the method applicant proposes to use in doing the work. The City Engineer shall determine
if sufficient information is submitted.
C. City Work Excluded. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to excavation work by City
employees or to contractors performing work under contract with the City necessitating openings or
excavations in City streets.
D. Validity of Permit. Permits shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of approval,
except as provided for under Section 6.02.43. for pavement replacement.
E. Renewal of Permit. If operations have begun under an approved permit and will continue beyond the
thirty (30) day validation period, the permittee shall apply for a thirty (30) day permit renewal by
written request to the City Engineer and payment outlined in the City Fee Schedule. Permit renewals
shall be issued at the discretion of the City Engineer.
F. City Standards; Fees.
1. City Standards. All street work shall be performed in accordance with the current standard
specifications for street openings found in this Section and Section 6.02.41. Any damaged curb
and gutter, sidewalk or grass-covered area shall be restored to the condition prior to damage.
2. Fee. The fee for a street opening permit shall be as outlined in the City Fee Schedule. Permit
fees shall be paid to the City Treasurer who shall issue the receipt therefore.
G. Insurance Required. A permit shall be issued only upon condition that the applicant submit to the
City Engineer satisfactory written evidence that applicant has in force and will maintain during the
time the permit is in effect public liability insurance of not less than One Million Dollars
($1,000,000.00) per one (1) person, One Million Dollars($1,000,000.00) for one (1) accident and
property damage coverage of not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00). The policy shall
name the City of Onalaska as the additional insured.
H. Bond Requirements.
1. Before a permit for excavating or opening any public street, sidewalk, ditch, alley or public
right-of-way may be issued, the applicant must execute and deposit with the City Clerk an
indemnity bond of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) conditioned that he will indemnify and
save harmless the City of Onalaska and its officers from all liability for accidents and damage
caused by any of the work covered by their permit, and that he will fill up and place in good and
safe condition all excavations and openings made in the street, and will replace and restore the
pavement over any opening he may make as near as can be to the state and condition in which
he found it, and keep and maintain the same in such condition, normal wear and tear excepted, to
the satisfaction of the Board of Public Works for a period of three (3) years, and that they will pay
all fines or forfeitures imposed upon them for any violation of any rule, regulation or ordinance
governing street openings or drain-laying adopted by the Board of Public Works and will repair
any damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation in accordance
with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City. Such bond shall also guarantee that, if the
City shall elect to make the street repair, the person opening the street will pay all costs of making
such repair and of maintaining the same for three (3) years. Recovery on such bond for any
accident, injury, violation of law, ordinance, rule or regulation shall not exhaust the bond but it
shall cover any and all accidents, injuries or violation of law during the period of excavation for
which it is given. An annual bond may be given.
2. Faulty work or materials shall be immediately replaced by the permittee upon notice by the City.
Failure to correct deficiencies shall result in a one (1) year revocation of the right to obtain a
street opening permit. The Board of Public Works shall repair the deficiencies and bill the
permittee for all labor, materials and equipment used plus twenty percent (20%) for
administration.
3. The person who does such restoration shall be responsible therefore for three (3) years from the
date of the completion of the work and shall file a written guarantee or surety bond to that effect
with the City in an amount of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00).
4. Whenever the Board of Public Works shall find that any such work has become defective within
three (3) years of the date of completion, he shall give written notice thereof to the contractor or to
their surety stating the defect, the work to be done, the cost thereof and the period of time
deemed by the Board of Public Works to be reasonably necessary to complete said work. After
receipt of such notice, the contractor or the surety must, within the time specified, repair the
defect or indemnify the City for the cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice.
5. An annual bond may be given under this Section covering all excavation work done by the
principal for one (1) year beginning January 1, which shall be conditioned as specified above and
in the amount determined by the City Engineer as necessary to adequately protect the public and
the City.
I. Public Utilities. All public utilities as defined in Sec. 196.01, Wis. Stats., are hereby required to be
bound by the terms and conditions of this Section and Section 6.02.43. any and all subparagraphs
thereunder, except that a public utility as defined within this Section shall not be required to post the
per-project indemnity bond nor annual bond.
6.02.43 Regulations Governing Excavations and Openings
A. Frozen Ground. No openings in the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public ways shall be permitted
between November 15th and May 1st except where it is determined by the City Engineer to be an
emergency excavation.
B. Protection of Public.
1. Every opening and excavation shall be enclosed with sufficient barriers, signing, and such other
traffic control devices as may be required by the City Engineer or Police Department, and in
accordance with Section VI of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Sufficient warning
lights shall be kept on from sunset to sunrise. No open flame warning devices shall be used.
Except by special permission from the Common Council, Board of Public Works, or its designee,
no trench shall be excavated more than two hundred fifty (250) feet in advance of pipe or conduit
laying nor left unfilled more than five hundred (500) feet from where pipe or conduit has been laid.
2. All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public effectively from accidents or damage
to persons or property through the period of the work. Each person making such opening shall be
held liable for all damages, including costs incurred by the City in defending any action brought
against it for damages, as well as cost of any appeal, that may result from the neglect by such
person or their employees of any necessary precaution against injury or damage to persons,
vehicles or property of any kind.
3. Unless otherwise approved, a minimum of one (1) lane of traffic in each direction shall be
provided. Every effort shall be made on the part of the permittee to provide reasonable access to
all properties adjacent to their project. In the event traffic is limited to less than one (1) lane in
each direction, a flagman or temporary traffic control signal shall be provided so as to safely cycle
traffic in each direction past the work area.
4. The permittee shall perform the work in such a manner so as not to disrupt the flow of traffic in
the area or endanger the safety of workmen or passersby. It shall be the responsibility of the
permittee to prevent traffic backup during construction operation. The permittee shall notify the
Police Department twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencement of excavation of the location
and extent of the excavation, unless the excavation is an emergency excavation as identified in
Section 6.02.43.H.
5. When the operations will result in the loss of any utility service to private properties, the private
properties shall be notified in writing or by personal contact at least twelve (12) hours prior to the
loss of service, unless the operations are part of an emergency excavation as defined in Section
6.02.43.H.
C. Pavement Removal.
1. Removal of existing pavement shall be to neat, straight lines. The permittee shall make a final
saw cut in the existing pavement after backfilling. Excavations shall be kept to the minimum
possible and acceptable for the convenience and safe performance of their work and in
accordance with all applicable codes and regulations. Concrete pavement shall be removed to
the nearest joints.
2. If the pavement is damaged during excavation beyond the original saw cut lines, it shall be saw
cut again along neat, straight lines. The finished saw cut shall leave a regular rectangular section
for pavement replacement. Should the street opening occur within adjacent or close to an existing
patch or require more than one (1) opening within a short distance, the permittee shall identify
and locate the existing patches or additional openings on the permit application form. The City
Engineer shall, on the basis of an on-site inspection, approximate the boundaries of the
pavement replacement area.
3. Pavement replacement areas with the long dimension in the direction of travel shall have the long
dimension parallel with the curb line or the direction of travel. Pavement replacement areas in
concrete pavements shall be parallel with or at right angles to the direction of travel.
4. The City Engineer may order the permittee to remove and replace up to one (1) full lane width of
pavement along the patched or excavated area. Special care shall be taken with concrete
pavement to produce a vertical face on the existing concrete at the point of the saw cut to insure
a full depth of concrete at the joint.
D. Excavation.
1. All excavated material shall be piled in a manner such that pedestrian and motor traffic is not
unnecessarily disrupted. Gutters shall be kept clear or other satisfactory provisions made for
street drainage, and natural watercourses shall not be obstructed.
2. Excavated material to be used for backfilling of the trench must be so handled and placed as to
be of as little inconvenience as practical to public travel and adjoining tenants.
E. Backfilling.
1. All backfill material shall be free from cinders, ashes, refuse, vegetable or organic matter,
boulders, rocks or stones greater than eight (8) inches in their greatest dimension, frozen lumps
or other material which in, in the opinion of the City Engineer, is unsuitable.
2. In refilling the excavation, if there is not sufficient material excavated suitable for refilling, the
deficiency shall be made up with material, approved prior to use by the City Engineer, hauled in.
3. Wherever an excavation crosses an existing utility, pipe or other structure, backfill shall be
carefully compacted in stages from the bottom of the excavation. Any sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, water, telephone, natural gas or other service shall not be interrupted by the permittee. It
shall be the permittee's responsibility to have the various utilities locate and mark their facilities
prior to excavation.
4. Mechanical compaction shall be used on all materials used for trench backfill. Each layer twelve
(12) inches maximum shall be uniformly compacted to a dry density of at least ninety-five percent
(95%) of the maximum dry density as determined by the Modified Proctor Test (ASTM-1557).
Compaction or consolidation by flooding shall not be permitted.
5. All excavations shall be subject to testing by the City. Backfilled material not achieving the above
compaction requirements shall be removed and recompacted by the permittee. The cost of any
retesting shall be paid by the permittee.
6. When the sides of the trench will not stand perpendicular, sheathing and braces shall be used to
prevent caving. No timber, bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench.
At no time shall any street pavements be permitted to overhang the excavation.
F. Notice. It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the City Engineer and all public and private
individuals, firms and corporations affected by the work to be done at least one (1) business day
before such work is to commence. The City Engineer shall also be notified at least four (4) hours prior
to backfilling and/or restoring the surface.
G. Pavement Replacement and Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter and Driveway Restoration.
1. Backfill material shall be left below the original surface to allow for five (5) inches of three (3) inch
crushed stone and four (4) inches of three-quarter (3/4) inch crushed stone, plus the thickness of
the required pavement structure. If paving will not occur as part of the initial street restoration
operation, the balance of the opening to the original surface elevation shall be backfilled with
compacted three-quarter (3/4) inch crushed stone.
2. Bituminous pavement shall be placed the full depth of the existing pavement or three (3) inches,
whichever is greater. Bituminous pavement shall be placed in a maximum of one and one-half
(1-1/2) inch layers with each layer compacted to maximum density and shall consist of Wisconsin
Department of Transportation Gradation No. 1 for the binder course and Wisconsin Department
of Transportation No. 3 for the surface course. The finished surface shall be smooth and free of
surface irregularities and shall match the existing pavement and any castings or street
appurtenances. Allowable deviations shall be no more than one-quarter (1/4) inch as measured
with a ten (10) foot straight edge.
3. Concrete pavement shall be placed to the full depth of the existing pavement or seven (7) inches,
whichever is greater. Concrete used shall not contain calcium chloride. The surface shall be given
a light broom finish. The edges shall be tooled to prevent spalling at the saw cut edge. The
surface shall be evenly and completely sealed with a white pigmented curing compound. The
surface shall be protected from traffic for a minimum of three (3) days. Tie bars shall be installed
as directed by the City Engineer.
4. All permanent restoration of street, curb and gutter shall be of the same type and thickness as the
curb and gutter which abuts. The grade of the restored curb and gutter shall conform with the
grade of the existing adjacent curb and gutter.
5. All permanent restoration of driveways and sidewalks shall conform to the manner of construction
as originally placed and to the lines and grades as given by the City Engineer. No patching of
concrete driveway areas will be allowed between joints or dummy joints.
6. Sidewalks shall be replaced the full width of the walk and minimum length shall be sixty (60)
inches. All replaced walk shall be four (4) inches thick, except at driveways where it shall be six
(6) inches thick. The new walk shall slope to conform to existing construction across the width of
the walk toward the street.
7. In emergency excavations during winter months when it is not possible to replace the removed
pavement with a like material, the excavation shall be temporarily resurfaced with a minimum of
three and one-half (3-1/2) inches of cold mix bituminous material. This temporary wearing surface
shall be compacted and rolled smooth. These temporary wearing surfaces shall be removed and
replaced with material as specified above by not later than the following June 1st, except as
provided above. Permanent pavements shall be replaced within sixty (60) days of the date of the
permit.
H. Emergency Excavation. In the event of an emergency, any person, firm or corporation owning or
controlling any sewer, gas main, water main, conduit or other utility in or under any public street, alley
easement, way or ground and their agents and employees make take immediate proper emergency
measures to remedy dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health or safety without
obtaining an excavation permit, provided that such person, firm or corporation shall apply for an
excavation permit not later than the next business day and shall notify the Police Department
immediately.
I. Excavation in New Streets Limited. Whenever the City determines to provide for the permanent
improvement or repaving of any street, such determination shall be made not less than thirty (30)
days before the work of improvement or repaving shall begin. Immediately after such determination
by the Common Council, the Board of Public Works shall notify in writing each person, utility or other
agency owning or controlling any sewer, water main, conduit or other utility in or under said street or
any real property abutting said street, that all such excavation work in such street must be completed
within thirty (30) days. After such permanent improvement or repaving, no permit shall be issued to
open or excavate said street for a period of five (5) years after the date of improvement or repaving
unless, in the opinion of the Board of Public Works, conditions exist which make it absolutely
essential that the permit be issued. Every effort shall be made to place gas, electric, telephone and
television cable lines in street terraces.
J. Repair by City. The City may elect to have the City or a contractor working for the City make the
pavement repair for any street or sidewalk opening, in which case the cost of making such repair and
of maintaining such repair for three (3) years shall be charged to the person making the street
opening.
6.02.44 Obstructions and Encroachments
A. Obstructions and Encroachments Prohibited. No person shall encroach upon or in any way
obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated to public use, or
any part thereof, or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public
way adjoining the premises of which they are the owner or occupant, except as allowed in Sections
6.02.45. and 6.02.46.
B. Exceptions. The prohibition noted above shall not apply to the following:
1. Temporary encroachments or obstructions authorized by permit under Sections 6.02.45. and
6.02.46. pursuant to Sec. 66.0425, Wis. Stats.
2. Building materials for the period authorized by the Building Inspector and City Engineer which
shall not obstruct more than one-half (1/2) of the sidewalk or more than one-third (1/3) of the
traveled portion of the street and which do not interfere with the flow in the gutters.
3. Excavations and openings permitted under Sections 6.02.42. and 6.02.43. of this Title.
4. Signs or clocks attached to buildings which project not more than six (6) feet from the face of
such building and which do not extend below any point ten (10) feet above the sidewalk, street or
alley.
5. Awnings which do not extend below any point seven (7) feet above the sidewalk, street or alley.
C. Issuance of Permit.
1. The Common Council may issue a permit which allows property owners to place certain fixtures
on sidewalks which immediately adjoin their property. In determining if a permit shall be
authorized, all of the following requirements must be met:
a. The property must be located in an area zoned for commercial uses.
b. The fixture(s) shall not be physically attached to the sidewalk, any street fixture or any
adjacent building, and shall be of a temporary design.
c. The placement of the fixture shall not impede the flow of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk. In
no event shall the fixture reduce the unobstructed sidewalk width to less than five (5) feet at
any point.
d. The property owner shall provide the City with proof of liability insurance coverage. The
insurance coverage shall be an amount of not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00)
per occurrence and the policy shall specifically state that it includes coverage for the fixtures
located on the City sidewalks. In addition, the City shall be identified as a third-party insured.
e. The fixture(s) shall not be for sale nor shall the fixture(s) be used for the sale of merchandise,
specifically excluded are all forms of vending machines, vendors carts or tables, etc.
f. The property owner whose property adjoins the City sidewalk shall file the permit application
or authorize the occupant of the subject property to file the permit application.
g. The property owner or the occupant of the subject property shall display the approved permit
in the window of the building so that it can be seen from the sidewalk.
2. Upon reviewing the permit application if it is determined by the Common Council that all of the
above requirements have been met, it shall issue the permit. Said permit may be revoked by the
Common Council, Board of Public Works, Director of Public Works, Building Inspector or any City
law enforcement officer ("City enforcement officials") at any time when one (1) or more of the
above requirements are not complied with or if he determines that the placement of the fixture(s)
endangers the safety of the pedestrians who utilize the sidewalks.
D. Removal by City for Sidewalk Obstructions and Encroachments. In addition to any other penalty
imposed, if any City enforcement official determines that a sidewalk is unlawfully obstructed in
violation of this Section, he shall issue a written notice to the owner or occupant of the premises
which adjoins the obstructed sidewalk directing that the obstruction be removed within twenty-four
(24) hours.
E. Removal by City for Obstruction and Encroachments Located In the City Streets, Alleys,
Public Grounds or Lands Dedicated for Public Use. In addition to any other penalty imposed, if
any City enforcement official determines that a City street, alley, public grounds or land dedicated for
public use is obstructed or encumbered, he shall issue a written notice to the property owner of the
premises which adjoin the obstructed public area directing that the obstruction be removed within
twenty-four (24) hours.
F. Failure to Remove Obstruction.
1. If the owner or occupant fails to remove the obstruction within the time period established in
Subsection D. or E. above respectively, any City enforcement official shall cause the removal of
the obstruction, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expenses shall
be charged to and paid by such property owner. Notice of the bill for abatement of the obstruction
shall be mailed to the owner of the premises and shall be payable within ten (10) calendar days
from receipt thereof. Within sixty (60) days after such costs and expenses are incurred and
remain unpaid, the City Treasurer shall enter those charges onto the tax roll as a special tax as
provided by the State Statutes.
2. The failure of the City Treasurer to record such claim or to mail such notice or the failure of the
owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to place the City expense on the tax rolls for
unpaid bills for abating the obstruction as provided for in this Section.
6.02.45 Street Privilege Permit
A. When Required. Permits for the use of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways or places of
the City may be granted to applicants by the City as per Sec. 66.0425, Wis. Stats. for the purpose of
moving any building, structure, or other large items which encroaches on more than one (1) lane of
traffic, or of encumbering the street, alley, sidewalk or way with materials necessary in and about the
construction or demolition of any building or structure, provided such applicant has complied with the
other requirements of this Section and has obtained a building permit if required by this Code of
Ordinances. The City Clerk or his/her authorized deputy shall issue the permit. The City Clerk or their
deputy shall request advisory recommendations from the Chief of Police, Director of Public Works,
City Engineer and Building Inspector prior to issuance of the permit. City officials may attach
conditions to the permit, including proof of liability insurance.
B. Bond. No street privilege permit shall be issued until the applicant shall execute and file with the City
Clerk a bond of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned that the applicant will indemnify and
save harmless the City from all liability for accidents or damage caused by reason of operations
under said permit and will remove such encumbrance upon termination of the operations and will
leave the vacated premises in a clean and sanitary condition and repair any and all damage to the
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public property of the City resulting from such building or moving
operations.
C. Fee. The fee for a street privilege permit shall be as outlined in the City Fee Schedule.
D. Conditions of Occupancy. The permission to occupy or obstruct the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds is intended only for use in connection with the actual erection, alteration, repair,
removal or moving of buildings, structures or other items as defined above, and shall be given upon
the following terms and conditions and subject to revocation without notice by the Board of Public
Works, Chief of Police, Common Council or Building Inspector for violation thereof:
1. Such temporary obstruction shall cover not more than one-third (1/3) of any street or alley.
2. Obstructions shall be sufficiently lighted at night so as to be in full view of the public from all
directions.
3. Sidewalk traffic shall not be interrupted, but temporary sidewalks of not less than four (4) feet in
width guarded by a closed fence at least four (4) feet high on both sides may be maintained
during the period of occupancy.
4. The process of moving any building, structure or other large item as defined above shall be as
continuous as practicable until completed and, if ordered by the Chief of Police, Common Council
or Board of Public Works, shall continue during all hours of the day and night.
5. No building, structure or other large item as defined above shall be allowed to remain overnight
on any street crossing or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire
hydrant.
6. Buildings, structures or other large items as defined above shall be moved only in accordance
with the route prescribed by the Common Council, upon the recommendation of the Chief of
Police.
7. Upon termination of the work necessitating such obstruction, all parts of the streets, alleys,
sidewalks or public grounds occupied under the permit shall be vacated, cleaned of all rubbish
and obstructions and placed in a safe condition for public travel at the expense of the permittee.
E. Termination. All street privilege permits shall automatically terminate at the end of three (3) months
from the date of issuance unless an earlier termination date is specified thereon at the discretion of
the Common Council.
F. Removal by City. In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the owner or occupant of the premises
adjoining any lawfully obstructed sidewalk shall remove or neglect to remove such obstruction within
twenty-four (24) hours after such notice from the Common Council, Board of Public Works, City
Engineer, Chief of Police or Building Inspector to do so, it shall be the duty of the Common Council,
Board of Public Works, City Engineer, Chief of Police or Building Inspector to remove such
obstruction and make return of the costs and expenses thereof to the City Treasurer who shall enter
such cost on the next annual tax roll as a special charge against the property abutting such
obstructed sidewalk, and such sum shall be levied and collected as other special taxes against real
estate.
6.02.46 Use of Streets, Alleys and Other Public Ways by Persons and Businesses
Renting Dumpsters and Roll-off Containers
A. Permit Required. No person or business engaged in the business of leasing dumpsters or refuse
containers for the storage of materials discarded or used in the process of construction or alteration of
buildings are to place or allow for placement such dumpsters or refuse containers in any street, alley,
highway, sidewalk or other public way within the City without first obtaining a permit from the Public
Works Department.
B. Application. Applications for the dumpster or refuse container business permit shall be on forms
provided by the City Public Works Department. Each person engaged in the business of leasing to
others dumpsters or refuse containers which are placed in any street, alley, highway, sidewalk or
other public way within the City for the storage of materials discarded or used in the process of
construction or alteration of structures or buildings shall make a separate application and said permit
shall be valid for the period of time specified thereon, not to exceed fourteen (14) days.
C. Fees. The permit fee for each person engaged in the business of renting or leasing to others the use
of dumpsters or refuse containers which are placed in the street or other public ways within the City
shall be as outlined in the City Fee Schedule.
D. Insurance. Prior to the issuance of a permit provided for in this Section, the permittee must furnish
the Department of Inspection satisfactory written evidence that it has in force and will maintain during
the term of the permit public liability insurance of not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for
one (1) person, One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for one (1) accident and property damage
insurance of not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00). Each permittee shall also furnish to
the City a certificate of insurance naming the City of Onalaska as additional insured, and evidence of
the same shall be on file with the Public Works Department at all times during the term of the permit.
E. Regulations.
1. Each dumpster or refuse container shall have posted thereon the name, address and phone
number of the lessor or owner of said dumpster or refuse container.
2. Each dumpster or refuse container shall be equipped with reflectorized tape or other reflector
devices adequate to warn others of its presence during night hours.
3. No dumpster or refuse container shall be placed in a moving lane of traffic.
4. Each permittee shall notify the Public Works Department of the location of all dumpsters or refuse
containers placed in the streets, alleys, highways, sidewalks or other public ways within the City.
5. Each permittee shall comply with any order of the Public Works Department to remove any
dumpster or refuse container should the placement or location of the dumpster or refuse
container constitute a safety hazard.
6. No dumpster or refuse container shall be placed so as to interfere with public works construction
being performed by the City.
7. Each permittee shall place flashing lights on at least two (2) sides of each dumpster or refuse
container so as to alert all persons of the placement of the dumpster or container during hours of
darkness.
8. No dumpster or refuse container shall be placed within twenty-five (25) feet of any intersection.
F. Security. Each permittee shall provide in the sum of not less than One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) a bond by an approved insurance or security company or letter of credit meeting the
approval of the City Attorney in order to insure removal of any dumpster or refuse container ordered
removed by the Public Works Department and to cover any damages to any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk or other public way that may be damaged by the permittee's placement of a dumpster or
refuse container.
Chapter 03 Subdivision Required Public Works Improvements
Division 1 General Provisions for Subdivisions
6.03.11 Required Construction Plans; City Review; Inspections
A. Engineering Reports, Construction Plans and Specifications. As required by Section 13.04.11.
and Section 13.04.12., engineering reports, plans and proposed specifications shall be submitted
simultaneously with the filing of the Preliminary Plat. At the Final Plat stage, construction plans for the
required improvements conforming in all respects with the standards of the City Engineer and the
Ordinances of the City shall be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a professional engineer who
is registered in the State of Wisconsin, and said plans shall contain their seal. Such plans, together
with the quantities of construction items, shall be submitted to the City Engineer for their approval and
for their estimate of the total cost of the required improvements; upon approval they shall become a
part of the contract required. Simultaneously with the filing of the Preliminary Plat with the City Clerk,
or as soon thereafter as practicable, copies of the construction plans and specifications shall be
furnished for the following public improvements, with a copy sent to the appropriate sanitary district:
1. Street Plans and Profiles. Showing existing and proposed grades, elevations and cross sections
of required improvements.
2. Sanitary Sewer Plans and Profiles. Showing the locations, grades, sizes, elevations and
materials of required facilities.
3. Storm Sewer and Open Channel Plans and Profiles. Showing the locations, grades, sizes,
cross sections, elevations and materials of required facilities complying with best management
practices as set forth in the latest version of the City of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater
Management Requirements.
4. Water Main Plans and Profiles. Showing the locations, sizes, elevations and materials of
required facilities.
5. Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plans. Showing those structures required to retard the rate
of runoff water and those grading and excavating practices that will prevent erosion and
sedimentation. Such plans shall comply with the Title 15, Chapter 2, Construction Site/Excavation
Erosion Control and the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources Best Management
Practices.
6. Planting Plans. Showing the locations, age, caliper, species and time of planting of any required
grasses, vines, shrubs and trees.
7. Stormwater Management Plan. Showing calculations, drawings, maps, etc. as outlined in the
City of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements.
8. Additional Special Plans or Information. As required by City officials.
B. Action by the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall review or cause to be reviewed the plans and
specifications for conformance with the requirements of this Section and other pertinent City
Ordinances and design standards recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the Common
Council. If the City Engineer rejects the plans and specifications, he shall notify the owner, who shall
modify the plans or specifications or both accordingly. When the plans and specifications are
corrected, the City Engineer shall approve the plans and specifications for transmittal to the Board of
Public Works and Common Council. The Common Council shall approve the plans and specifications
before the improvements are installed and construction commenced.
C. Construction and Inspection.
1. Prior to starting any of the work covered by the plans approved above, written authorization to
start the work shall be obtained from the City Engineer upon receipt of all necessary permits and
in accordance with the construction methods of this Section. Building permits shall not be issued
until all improvements required by this Section are satisfactorily completed, unless the developer
provides the City with a bond or irrevocable letter of credit. The City requires that at a minimum all
utilities and curb and gutter are installed, inspected and approved before the issuance of building
permits.
2. During the course of construction, the City Engineer shall make such inspections as the Common
Council deems necessary to insure compliance with the plans and specifications as approved.
The owner shall pay the actual cost incurred by the City for such inspections. This fee shall be the
actual cost to the City of inspectors, engineers and other parties necessary to insure satisfactory
work, billed monthly.
3. The City shall pay for the initial compaction test; if the test results are unsatisfactory, the
owner/developer shall pay for any necessary retesting.
D. Subdivider to Reimburse the City for Costs Sustained. The subdivider of land divisions within the
City shall reimburse the City for its actual cost of design, inspection, testing, construction and
associated legal and real estate fees for the required public improvements for the land division. The
City's costs shall be determined as follows:
1. The cost of City employees time engaged in any way with the required public improvements
based on the hourly rate paid to the employee multiplied by a factor determined by the City
Financial Services Director/Treasurer to represent the City's cost for expenses, benefits,
insurance, sick leave, holidays, vacation and similar benefits.
2. The cost of City equipment employed.
3. The cost of mileage reimbursed to City employees which is attributed to the land division.
4. The actual costs of City materials incorporated into the work, including transportation costs plus a
restocking and/or handling fee not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the cost of the materials.
5. All consultant fees associated with the public improvements at the invoiced amount plus
administrative costs. Unless the amount totals less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00), the City shall bill
the subdivider monthly for expenses incurred by the City. Bills outstanding for more than thirty
(30) days shall accrue interest at the rate of one and one-half percent (1-1/2%) per month. Bills
outstanding for more than ninety (90) days shall be forwarded to the subdivider's surety agency
for payment. Amounts less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) shall be held for billing by the City until
amounts total more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) or until the conclusion of project activities.
E. Record Plans. After completion of all public improvements and prior to final acceptance of said
improvements, the subdivider shall make or cause to be made three (3) copies of record plans
showing the actual location of all valves, manholes, stubs, sewers and water mains and such other
facilities as the City Engineer shall require. These plans shall be prepared on the original Mylar's of
the construction plans and shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer registered in
Wisconsin. The presentation of the record plans shall be a condition of final acceptance of the
improvements and release of the surety bond assuring their completion. Two (2) copies shall be
retained by the City and one (1) copy of such record plans shall be forwarded to the appropriate
sanitary district.
6.03.12 Improvements on Boundaries of Subdivisions and on Undeveloped Land
A. Any public improvements occurring on the boundaries of a subdivision shall be paid for by using the
normal assessing methods for establishing payments. Similarly, undeveloped land shall have the
same assessing policies as this Section provides. The intention is that the owners of said land shall
pay for all improvements using the same procedures as in this Section.
6.03.13 Non-Residential Subdivisions
A. General Requirements.
1. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the
layout of the subdivision with respect to such land shall make such provisions as the City may
require.
2. A non-residential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set
forth in Title 13 Unified Development Code. A non-residential subdivision shall be subject to all
the requirements of this Section, as well as such additional standards required by the City and
shall conform to the proposed land use standards established by any City Comprehensive Plan or
Official Map and the Unified Development Code.
B. Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in this Section, which are appropriate to the
planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Common
Council that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is taken into account with other uses in the
vicinity and adapted to the uses anticipated in the area. The following principles and standards shall
be observed:
1. Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial
development anticipated.
2. Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of
traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon.
3. Special requirements may be imposed by the Common Council, upon the recommendation of the
City Engineer, with respect to street, curb, gutter and sidewalk design and construction.
4. Special requirements may be imposed by the Common Council, upon the recommendation of the
City Engineer, with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and storm
water drainage.
5. Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a
proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels
backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for permanently
landscaped buffer strips when necessary.
6. Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to
the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas.
6.03.14 Grading and Erosion Control
A. Grading. The subdivider shall grade each land division in order to establish street, block and lot
grades in proper relation to each other and to topography as follows:
1. The subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of all proposed streets in accordance
with the approved plans, including the grading of site triangles at each intersection.
2. Block grading shall be completed by one (1) or more of the following methods:
a. Regrading along the side or rear lot lines, which provides for drainage to the public drainage
facilities.
b. Parts of all lots may be graded to provide for drainage to a ditch or to a swale, provided any
ditches or swales are in public drainage easements.
c. Draining across rear or side lot lines may be permitted provided that the course of drainage is
within a public drainage easement and is toward public drainage facilities.
3. Lot grading shall be completed so that water drains away from each building site toward public
drainage facilities at a minimum grade of one percent (1%) and provisions shall be made to
prevent drainage onto properties adjacent to the land division unless to a public drainage facility.
4. Grading activities shall not result in slopes greater than three to one (3:1) on public lands or lands
subject to public access.
5. The topsoil stripped for grading shall not be removed from the site unless identified in the Erosion
Control Plan approved by the City Engineer as not being necessary for erosion control or site
landscaping purposes. Topsoil shall be uniformly returned to the lots when rough grading is
finished. Topsoil piles shall be leveled and seeded for erosion control prior to the City releasing
the one (1) year guarantee provision on public improvements in the streets adjacent to the lots on
which the topsoil is stockpiled.
6. Such grading shall not result in detriment to any existing developed lands, either within or outside
of the corporate limits.
B. Erosion Control. Pursuant to Title 15 Chapter 2 Construction Site/Excavation Erosion Control, the
subdivider shall cause all grading, excavations, open cuts, side slopes, and other land surface
disturbances to be mulched, seeded, sodded or otherwise protected so that erosion, siltation,
sedimentation and washing are prevented. The subdivider shall submit an erosion control plan that
specifies measures that will be taken to assure the minimization of erosion problems.
6.03.15 Required Agreement Providing for Proper Installation of Improvements; Surety
A. Development Agreement. Prior to installation of any required improvements and prior to approval of
the Final Plat, the subdivider shall enter into a written development agreement with the City requiring
the subdivider to furnish and construct said improvements at their sole cost and in accordance with
plans and specifications and usual contract conditions, which shall include provision for inspection of
construction details by the City Engineer. The development agreement form shall be provided by the
City and may provide for a phasing of public improvements construction, providing such phasing is
approved by the City Council. The City reserves the right to control the phasing through limits,
sequence and/or additional surety so as to provide for continuity of streets, sewers, water mains and
other necessary public improvements within and between the phases.
B. Security Required. The City may require surety as allowed under Sec. 236.13(2)(am) Wis. Stats. for
a period of time up to fourteen (14) months after the substantial completion of the public
improvements. .
C. Waiver of Special Assessment Notice and Hearing. The subdivider shall file with said
Development Agreement , subject to the approval of the City Attorney, a waiver of special
assessment notices and hearings such that the subdivider, their heirs and assigns (including
purchasers of property from the subdivider), waive notice and hearing for and authorize the
assessment for any and all of the required public improvements in phases of the land division
intended for future development in accordance with Sec. 66.0701 and 66.0703), Wis. Stats.
6.03.16 Acceptance of Improvements and Dedications
A. Acceptance of Improvements. The dedication of any improvements, utilities, streets, parks,
easements, rights-of-way or other lands or rights to the City or the public shall not be considered
accepted by the City for public ownership until such time as the required public improvements within
the intended dedication or necessary because of the intended dedication have been completed and
accepted by the Common Council. The subdivider shall be responsible for and liable for the
maintenance, safety and operation of all required public improvements until such time as the
improvements are accepted by the Director of Public Works. In the event the City must take
measures to maintain, operate or make safe a public improvement existing or required as a result of
the land division but which has not yet been accepted by the City, the costs of such measures shall
hereby be determined to be City-incurred costs to be reimbursed to the City by the subdivider in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.
1. Inspection and Certification of Improvements. After any of the following increments of the
required improvements have been installed and completed, the subdivider shall notify the City
Engineer, in writing, that the work is complete and ready for final inspection, shall file reproducible
record drawings of the completed improvements. Acceptance of the improvements may be
requested in the following increments:
a. Sewer mains and services (either storm or sanitary).
b. Water mains and services.
c. Streets comprised of all grading, gravel, curb and gutter, culverts and paving.
d. Other miscellaneous appurtenances to the above increments such as sidewalks, bikeways,
street lighting, street signing, etc.
2. The appropriate department heads shall certify that there are no unpaid taxes or unpaid special
assessments on any of the lands included in the area of acceptance and shall prepare a final
billing for engineer, inspection and legal fees and submit it to the subdivider for payment. The City
Engineer shall conduct any necessary final inspections of the improvements and forward a report
to the Common Council recommending either approval or disapproval. When the engineering,
inspection, taxes, special assessments and legal fees have been paid, the report of the City
Engineer shall be forwarded to the Common Council for approval and acceptance of the
improvements and dedications.
Division 2 Utility Requirements for Subdivisions
6.03.21 Sanitary Sewer and Water Systems and Facilities
A. Central Sanitary Sewerage and Private Sewage Disposal Systems.
1. The subdivider shall construct sanitary sewers in such a manner as to make adequate sanitary
sewerage service available to each lot within the subdivision. If central sewer facilities are not
available, the subdivider shall make provision for adequate private sewage disposal systems as
specified by the community Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources; however, any lot
containing less than one (1) acre of land and being less than one hundred fifty (150) feet wide
must be served by public sanitary sewer facilities, unless in the considered opinion of the Plan
Commission such service will be made available to the subdivision within five (5) years of the
date of the submission of the Preliminary Plat. The City Plan Commission may require the
installation of sewer laterals to the street lot line. If, at the time of final platting, sanitary sewer
facilities are not available to the plat, but will become available within a period of five (5) years
from the submission of the Preliminary Plat, the subdivider shall install or cause to be installed
sanitary sewers and sewer laterals to the street lot line in accordance with this Section and shall
cap all laterals as may be specified by the City Engineer. The size, type and installation of all
sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and standard
specifications approved by the City Engineer. All sanitary sewer facilities shall be flood proofed.
2. The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all sanitary sewers ten (10) inches in diameter
or less in size. If greater than ten (10) inch diameter sewers are required to handle the
contemplated sewage flows, the cost of the materials only of such larger sewers shall be
reimbursed by the City to the subdivider. The subdivider shall pay all costs associated with
installation of sewer.
B. Water Supply Facilities.
1. The subdivider shall construct water mains in such a manner as to make adequate water service
available to each lot within the subdivision. If municipal water service is not available, the
subdivider shall make provision for adequate private water systems as specified by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources; however, any lot containing less than one (1) acre of land and
being less than one hundred fifty (150) feet wide must be served by public water facilities, unless
in the considered opinion of the Plan Commission such services will be made available to the
subdivision within five (5) years of the date of the submission of the Preliminary Plat. The Plan
Commission may require the installation of water laterals to the street lot line. The size, type and
installation of all public water mains proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans
and standard specifications approved by the City Engineer.
2. The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all water mains ten (10) inches in diameter or
less in size. If greater than ten (10) inch water mains are required, the City shall reimburse the
developer for the difference in cost of materials only between the ten (10) inch water main and
the larger size water main. The subdivider shall pay all costs associated with the installation of
mains no matter what size. All water systems shall be flood proofed.
3. If oversized materials and equipment are required to obtain adequate flows when developing at
higher elevations such as the bluffs, the subdivider/developer shall be required to pay for all
oversized materials and equipment, including but not limited to booster stations and oversized
water mains.
6.03.22 Stormwater Drainage Facilities and System
A. Pursuant to Section 13.04.31. the subdivider shall provide storm water drainage facilities which may
include curb and gutter, catch basins and inlets, storm sewers, road ditches and open channels, as
may be required. All such facilities are to be of adequate size and grade to hydraulically
accommodate maximum potential volumes of flow, the type of facility required, the design criteria and
the sizes and grades to be determined by the City Engineer. Storm drainage facilities shall be so
designed as to present no hazard to life or property, minimize shoreland erosion and siltation of
surface waters, shall prevent excess run-off on adjacent property and shall provide positive drainage
away from on-site sewage disposal facilities. The size, type and installation of all storm water drain
and sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with this Section and plans and
standard specifications approved by the City Engineer. Storm drainage facilities shall be so designed
as to minimize hazards to life or property, and the size, type and installation of all storm water drains
and sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications
approved by the City Engineer. . The subdivder, at their cost, shall comply with Federal Storm Water
Regulations and the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources NR 216 using NR151
performance standards. The subdivider shall submit a storm water management plan as outlined in
the City of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements. The size, type,
quantity of all storm water controls and best management practices shall be reviewed for approval by
the City Engineer.
B. Drainage System.
1. Required. As required by the City of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management
Requirements, a drainage system shall be designed and constructed by the subdivider to provide
for the proper drainage of the surface water of the subdivision and the drainage area of which it is
a part. The drainage system shall adhere to the requirements as outlined in the City of Onalaska
Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements. A Final Plat shall not be approved
until the subdivider shall submit plans, profiles and specifications as specified in this Section,
which have been prepared by a registered professional engineer and approved by the Common
Council, upon the recommendations of the Plan Commission and City Engineer.
2. Associated Permits. Applicants must also apply for and receive stormwater and erosion control
permits when applicable. Applicants shall conform to standards set forth in the City of Onalaska
Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements.
3. Drainage System Plans.
a. The subdivider shall submit to the City at the time of filing a Preliminary Plat a preliminary
drainage plan, and engineering report on the ability of existing watercourse channels, storm
sewers, culverts and other improvements pertaining to drainage or flood control within the
subdivision to handle the additional runoff which would be generated by the development of
the land within the subdivision. The drainage plan and engineering report shall adhere to the
requirements as outlined in the City of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater
Management Requirements. Additional information shall be submitted to adequately indicate
that provision has been made for disposal of surface water without any damage to the
developed or undeveloped land downstream or below the proposed subdivision. The report
shall also include:
i. Estimates of the quantity of storm water entering the subdivision naturally from areas
outside the subdivision.
ii. Quantities of flow at each inlet or culvert.
iii. Location, sizes and grades of required culverts, storm drainage sewers and other
required appurtenances.
b. A grading plan for the streets, blocks and lots shall be submitted by the subdivider for the
area within the subdivision.
c. The design criteria for storm drainage systems shall be based upon information provided by
the City Engineer.
d. Material and construction specifications for all drainage projects (i.e., pipe, culverts, seed,
sod, etc.) shall be in compliance with specifications provided by the City Engineer.
4. Storm Drainage and Stormwater Management Facilities.
a. The subdivider, at their cost, shall install all drainage and stormwater management facilities
identified in the drainage plan, engineering report and Erosion Control Plan or determined by
the City Engineer as being necessary for the management of all lands and roadways within
the development. In addition, drainage capacity through the development from other areas
shall be provided in accordance with a Comprehensive Surface Water Management Study, if
applicable. All required storm drainage facilities shall be constructed and operational prior to
acceptance of any dedications and/or public improvements served by the storm drainage
facilities.
b. The subdivider shall submit to the City Engineer for review and approval a final copy of the
drainage plan and engineering report, including as built data, as outlined in the City of
Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements prior to any final plat
approval.
6.03.23 Easements
A. Utility Easements. The Common Council, on the recommendation of appropriate departments and
agencies serving the City, shall require utility easements for poles, wire, conduits, storm and sanitary
sewers, gas, water and head mains or other utility lines. It is the intent of this Section to protect all
established easements so as to assure proper grade, assure maintenance of the established grade,
prohibit construction of permanent fences or retaining walls over underground installation and prevent
the planting of trees in the easement area.
B. Drainage Easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or
stream:
1. There shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially to the lines of such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as
will be adequate for the purpose and as may be necessary to comply with this Section; or
2. The watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream may be relocated in such a manner that the
maintenance of adequate drainage will be assured and the same provided with a storm water
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming to the lines of the relocated watercourse, and such
further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose and may be necessary
to comply with this Section.
3. Wherever possible, it is desirable that drainage be maintained by an open channel with
landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume flow. In all cases, such
water course shall be of a minimum width established at the high-water mark or, in the absence
of such specification, not less than thirty (30) feet. If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the
easement will be for a major drainage swale, the easement shall be of sufficient width to contain
a one hundred (100) year frequency storm. If the drainage easement is located in an established
floodway or flood fringe district, the entire floodplain area shall be included within the drainage
easement.
C. Easement Locations. Such easements shall be at least ten (10) feet wide, or wider where
recommended by the City Engineer, and may run across lots or alongside of front lot lines. Such
easements should preferably be located along front lot lines. Evidence shall be furnished the Plan
Commission and Common Council that easements and any easement provisions to be incorporated
in the plat or in deeds have been reviewed by the individual utility companies or the organization
responsible for furnishing the services involved.
6.03.24 Extra-Sized and Off-Site Facilities
A. When any public improvements of adequate capacity are not available at the boundary of a proposed
land division, the City, or its duly authorized representative, shall require, as a prerequisite to
approval of a Final Plat or Certified Survey Map, assurances that such improvement extensions shall
be provided as follows in accordance with the following standards:
1. Design Capacity. All improvements within or entering or leaving the proposed development shall
be installed to satisfy the service requirements for the entire service or drainage area in which the
development is located and the improvements shall be of sufficient capacity to handle the
expected development of the overall service area involved.
2. Extra-sized and Off-size Improvements. Where improvements of adequate size needed to
serve the development are not available at the boundary of the development, the subdivider shall
proceed under one (1) of the alternatives as identified in Section 06.03.21.B.
3. Lift Stations. Where sanitary or storm sewer lift stations and force mains are required to lift
sewage to the gravity system, the subdivider shall have plans, profiles, specifications and
estimated operation and maintenance costs prepared for the installation of such facilities to the
City Engineer's requirements. Equipment similar to existing City equipment shall be utilized
whenever possible. The installation, inspection, supervision and engineering fees for lift stations
and/or force mains shall be paid for by the subdivider unless otherwise determined and agreed
upon by the Common Council. Gravity sanitary sewer service shall be employed whenever
determined by the City Engineer to be feasibly accessible.
Chapter 04 Sidewalks, Curb and Gutter, and Driveways
Division 1 General Provisions
6.04.11 Construction and Repair of Sidewalks
A. Provision of State Law. All provisions of Sec. 66.0907 of the Wisconsin Statutes describing and
defining regulations with respect to sidewalks are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of
this Section as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by Sec.
66.0907, Wis. Stats. is required or prohibited by this Section.
B. Sidewalk Repair or Construction.
1. Adjacent property owners building, repairing, constructing and perpetually maintaining sidewalks
along or upon any street, alley or highway in the City of Onalaska shall pay the cost thereof
pursuant to this Section. A sidewalk map as recommended by the Plan Commission and adopted
by the Common Council shall be the basis of selecting proposed sidewalk locations throughout
the City.
2. All sidewalks within the City of Onalaska hereafter shall be repaired, rebuilt and constructed in
accordance with the specifications of this Section.
C. Special Assessments for Sidewalks. Special assessments levied to defray the costs of laying,
removing and repairing sidewalks may, when they exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), be paid in
equal installments, over a twenty (20) year period when new sidewalks are installed and over ten (10)
years when sidewalks are replaced or repaired. The special assessment shall bear interest at the
rate determined by the Common Council, uniform with other City special assessments, at a rate equal
to one percent (1 %) over the interest rate for the bond issuance that is issued to pay for the
improvement. Engineering and administrative fees of seven and one-half percent (7.5%) shall be
added to the special assessment cost.
1. Special assessments levied to defray the costs of repairing sidewalks damaged by City owned
trees placed on the boulevard shall be split equally between the City of Onalaska and the
property owner for all City administered repairs. Where the property owner’s portion of the fee
exceeds One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), the property owner shall be allowed to pay the fee in
equal installments as set forth in Subsection C. above.
D. Sidewalk Permit Required.
1. No person shall hereafter lay, remove, replace or repair any public sidewalk within the City unless
they are under contract with the City to do such work or has obtained a permit therefore from the
Inspection Department at least three (3) days before the work is proposed to be undertaken. A
fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule shall be charged for such permit. The
permit shall be issued upon application forms provided by the City and shall contain such
information as the Inspection Department shall deem necessary.
2. Such permit shall be for a continuous sidewalk within or between intersecting streets, in front of
the property owned by one (1) person, firm or corporation. No permit shall be necessary for
repairs which do not exceed sixty (60) square feet, unless the Public Works Inspector deems it
necessary to establish a new grade for such repair.
3. After the permit has been issued, the applicant shall obtain a survey and grade stakes from the
City Engineer. After the sidewalk has been constructed, repaired or reconstructed, the Inspector
will again check, after which a grade certificate will be issued upon request.
E. Grade Certificate. A grade certificate may be issued by the Public Works Department upon request
providing all sidewalk construction, repair or reconstruction is in accordance with City specifications.
F. Standard Specifications for Sidewalk.
1. General. Concrete sidewalk construction shall meet the specifications and provisions set forth in
this Section and shall be constructed in locations and to line and grade as established by the City.
2. Sub-grade. Sub-grade shall be two (2) inches of sand fill, thoroughly and uniformly compacted
and brought to correct grade placing of concrete and thoroughly wet down immediately before
concrete is placed. Soft, porous and unsuitable sub-grade material shall be removed and
replaced with sand or other satisfactory material, and the sub-grade shall be thoroughly and
uniformly compacted and moistened immediately before the concrete is placed.
3. Concrete. The minimum quantity of cement per cubic yard shall be six (6) sacks of ninety-four
(94) pounds each. Concrete shall be mixed for at least one (1) minute. Gravel shall be of good
quality and washed. Concrete shall test three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds compression
in twenty-eight (28) days.
4. Forming. Concrete shall be placed in straight forms of wood or metal of sufficient strength to
resist springing, tipping or other displacement during the process of depositing and consolidating
the concrete. Forms shall be securely fastened, staked, braced and held firmly to required line
and shall be sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of mortar, and all forms shall remain in place for
twenty-four (24) hours after pour.
5. Jointing, Floating and Finishing. Soon after screening and while the concrete is still plastic, the
surface shall be floated with wood, cork or metal floats or by a finishing machine. At all places
where the sidewalk intersects another sidewalk or curb-line, a one-half (1/2) inch expansion joint
shall be placed. Transverse expansion joints of one-half (1/2) inch thick and four (4) inches wide
and five (5) feet long or premolded material shall be located every seventy-five (75) feet.
Sidewalks must be marked off to make blocks five (5) foot square and be at right angles to the
parallel lines. Any new sidewalk adjoining an old sidewalk or a sidewalk which abuts curb and
gutter shall have one-half (1/2) by four (4) inch expansion joints of premolded material.
6. Slope. All forms must be approved by the City Engineer, or their designee, before concrete is
poured. To provide adequate drainage, the sidewalk shall slope toward the curb at a minimum
rate of one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot of width of sidewalk. All joints and edges shall be finished
with a one-fourth (1/4) inch radius edging tool. Sidewalks shall be constructed within the limits of
the street, and unless otherwise specifically indicated, the back of the sidewalk shall be on the
property line.
7. Width and Thickness. All sidewalks shall be five (5) feet in width unless otherwise specified by
the Board of Public Works. Residential sidewalks shall be not less than four (4) inches thick and
commercial sidewalks not less than five (5) inches thick, except within driveway approaches the
minimum thickness shall be six (6) inches.
8. Carriage Walks and Driveway Areas.
a. Concrete carriage walks and concrete driveways that are not placed at grade shall be
removed at City expense. The concrete replacement cost to grade shall be charged to the
property owner.
b. Bituminous asphalt driveways shall be saw cut and removed at the City's expense. Their
replacement shall be six (6) inch thick concrete, and shall be charged to the property owner.
c. The City shall pay up to four (4) feet of driveway length to match the back of the sidewalk to
the existing driveway. Length in excess of four (4) feet shall be charged to the property
owner. Unusual cases shall be reviewed by the Board of Public Works.
d. The area between the curb and gutter and sidewalk, through the driveway commonly referred
to as the driveway approach, shall be six (6) inches thick poured concrete, the cost to be
assessed to the property owner.
9. Finishing. The concrete shall be struck off true to grade, finished smooth and given a broom
finish in transverse direction. Edges and joints shall be given a finish with a one-quarter (1/4) inch
radius edging tool. Dry cement shall not be spread on a wet surface to take up excess water.
Finishing operations shall be delayed until water has disappeared. No tool marks shall be left on
exposed surfaces. In case of rain, the walk shall be covered to protect the surface from being
damaged. Walks shall be kept free from all traffic at normal temperatures for forty-eight (48)
hours and in cold weather [below fifty (50) degrees F.] for ninety-six (96) hours.
10. Curing. Concrete shall be kept moist by sprinkling, covering or a combination of both for a
minimum of five (5) days.
11. Cold Weather Requirements. When the temperature is less than forty (40) degrees F., all
concrete placed in the forms shall have a temperature between fifty (50) degrees F. and seventy
(70) degrees F. and shall meet the requirements as per Wisconsin Department of Transportation
specifications for cold weather concrete.
12. Lawn Replacement. When contractors perform sidewalk work for the City, the City shall replace
and/or return lawns back to original condition at the City's expense. (Example: If a property owner
has black dirt and sod, that is what the City shall replace; if a property owner has sand and
weeds, the City will simply seed the area, with no black dirt.) After the sod has been placed, it
shall be the responsibility of the property owner to water and to care for it. There shall be no
replacement because of abuse or neglect. Property owners doing their own sidewalk and
driveway construction shall take out sidewalk and driveway permits and shall not be entitled to
any services from the City, such as excavation, black dirt, sod, seed, etc.
G. Objects in Right-of-Way.
1. All trees, shrubs, planters, landscaped flower gardens, flagpoles, fences, light posts, etc., and, in
general, other objects placed on a City right-of-way (boulevard) without permission from the City
that are in the way of the sidewalk, or pose a problem by being too close to the sidewalk, shall be
the removal responsibility of the property owner. Any relocation of said objects shall be done by
the property owner before sidewalk contractors start work. A property owner shall have thirty (30)
days to remove said objects after the City has ordered the sidewalk in. Objects not removed
within the thirty (30) day period shall be removed by the City or the sidewalk contractor at the time
of construction. Objects shall be hauled away and disposed of.
2. Trees that exist very close to the back of sidewalks [within three (3) feet] may be removed by the
City or sidewalk contractor at the City's expense. No replacement costs will be absorbed by the
City. Property owners are advised to remove or relocate trees, because in time the roots may
heave the walk, resulting in replacement at the cost of the property owner.
3. Any objects breaking the vertical plane at the property line, sitting on or over-hanging a sidewalk
that may constitute a public danger or safety hazard (be it on City boulevards or private property),
shall be cause to be removed by the City with no replacement provided.
H. Repair or Replacement of Defective Sidewalks. Pursuant to Sec. 66.0907, Wis. Stats., the
Common Council may order at any time property owners to repair or remove and replace any
sidewalk which is unsafe, defective or insufficient. If the property owner shall fail to so repair or
remove and replace such sidewalk within sixty (60) days after service of the notice provided in Sec.
66.0907, Wis. Stats., the Common Council shall repair or construct such sidewalk and the Finance
Director shall enter the total cost thereof upon the tax roll as a special tax against said lot or parcel of
land. If a life-threatening situation exists which is caused by a sidewalk in need of repair, the Board of
Public Works or City Engineer shall direct the property owner to make repairs within seven (7) days. If
the property owner shall fail to repair such sidewalk within the required period, the Board of Public
Works shall make the necessary repairs and the Finance Director shall enter the total cost thereof on
the tax roll as a special tax against said parcel.
I. Illegal Sidewalks. No sidewalk which shall be constructed contrary to the provisions of this Section
shall be considered a legal sidewalk and the same may be ordered to be replaced with a legal
sidewalk and with one that is in conformity with this Section, the same as if no sidewalk whatever had
been built or constructed in the place where any such sidewalk is located.
J. Retaining Walls. The cost of the initial flagstone or retaining wall, as determined by the Board of
Public Works, shall be paid for by the City. After completion of the construction, the wall shall become
property of the property owner. The property owner shall pay for any and all maintenance and
upkeep.
6.04.12 Downspouts and Eaves of Buildings Not to Drain on Sidewalks
A. No downspouts from any building shall terminate on or upon, or in such position that the contents of
such spout be cast upon or flow back or over any public sidewalk in the City. When the eaves of a
building extend over or are so constructed that water may fall therefrom or run back upon any public
sidewalk, such eaves shall be so protected by proper spouts or otherwise that no water shall fall or
drain therefrom or run back upon or over any public sidewalk. The owner or owners of any building
and the officers of any association or corporation owning any building on which any spouts or the
eaves thereof shall be maintained contrary to this Section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
the City’s Schedule of Deposits pursuant to Title 1 of this Code of Ordinances.
6.04.13 Sales, Café Seating or Display of Merchandise within Public Right-of-Way
A. Right-of-Way Sales Prohibited Except by Permit. No person shall display, sell or offer to sell on any
street, sidewalk, alley or other public place within the City any goods, wares, foodstuffs or anything of
value or service of any kind by putting up a booth or stopping a vehicle or person on foot or in any
other manner attempting to publicly sell or offer for sale any such articles, unless such person shall
have first applied for and obtained a special event permit as set forth in Title 7 of this Code of
Ordinances from the City Clerk.Where a special event permit is open, sidewalks must remain open
and accessible with a minimum of a four (4) foot wide unencumbered path at all times.
B. Outdoor Dining Areas on Public Property (Sidewalk Cafes).
1. Purpose. To encourage revitalization and growth of downtown and other areas of the City of
Onalaska, including the development of social and economic activities and to encourage enhanced
use of available public rights-of-way to complement restaurants while still encouraging the free and
safe flow of pedestrians. To establish safety standards for sidewalk cafés is necessary to protect
and promote public health, safety and welfare.
2. Sidewalk Café Defined. Sidewalk Café shall mean an expansion of a restaurant or coffee shop
creating an outdoor dining facility on part of the public property that immediately adjoins the
licensed premises for the purpose of consuming food or non-alcoholic beverages to the patrons of
the business.
3. Permit Required. An establishment may apply for a permit from the City’s Clerk’s office to allow
for a sidewalk café. The Clerk’s office may approve or deny a permit where necessary to maintain
the public health, safety or welfare, to prevent a nuisance from developing or continuing or due to
violation of this section, the City Code of Ordinances or applicable State or Federal Law. A
Sidewalk Café permit shall be issued where the application is filled out in its entirety, the fee as
set forth in the City Fee Schedule is paid and the application meets the standards set forth in
Section 4. below.
4. Permit Standards.
a. No portion of any sidewalk café may encroach on the sidewalk adjacent to any other property
other than the property that is licensed in this Chapter.
b. The Applicant shall maintain a four (4) foot wide unencumbered, open and accessible portion
of the sidewalk for pedestrian traffic safety and accessibility at all times.
c. Sidewalk cafes may operate; serve food or non-alcoholic beverages, until 11:00 p.m. Sunday
through Thursday and until midnight Friday and Saturday, meaning all patrons must vacate
the sidewalk café by those times.
d. The Applicant shall provide for removal of garbage and is responsible for the cleanliness of
the sidewalk café area.
e. The use of the portion of public property as a sidewalk café shall not be an exclusive use. All
public improvements, including but not limited to, trees, light poles, traffic signals, manholes or
any public initiated maintenance procedures shall take precedence over said use at all times.
The City Administrator, Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator, PublicWorks Director or their
designees may temporarily order the termination of sidewalk cafes for the following reasons,
but not limited to, special events, including but not limited to, construction, parades,
sponsored runs or walks, or for any reason to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the
public.
f. Semi-permanent markings will delineate the corners of the sidewalk café area, as illustrated in
the approved site plan required for permit.
g. Outdoor furniture will not be easily wind borne i.e. plastic tables/chairs, lawn chairs,
lightweight wicker.
h. Applicant shall secure tables and chairs nightly.
5. Liability and Insurance. By obtaining a Sidewalk Café Permit, the applicant agrees to indemnify,
defend, save and hold harmless the City, its officers and employees, from any and all claims,
liability, lawsuits, damages, and causes of action, which may arise out of the permit or the
permittee’s activity at the sidewalk café. Permittee shall provide commercial liability insurance in
the amount of at least One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and name the City of
Onalaska as additional insured and show how the coverage extends to the area used for the
sidewalk café. Applicant shall execute an indemnification agreement approved by the City
Attorney and submit an original certificate of insurance as required in the application prior to
operation of the sidewalk café.
6. Revocation of Suspension. The approval of a Sidewalk Café Permit is conditional at all times.
The City Administrator, Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator, PublicWorks Director or their
designees may temporarily order the termination of sidewalk cafes’ at any time. Issuance of this
permit under this ordinance is a privilege, not a right, to use the public right of way.
7. Appeal. A revocation, suspension, or denial of a permit may be appealed by the applicant or
permit holder to the Common Council or designated Committee of the Council, which shall hold a
hearing and either grant, grant with conditions, or deny the permit. The permit holder or applicant
shall be notified and shall have the right to be heard prior to a decision.
8. Penalty. The penalty for violation of this section shall be a forfeiture of not less than Fifty Dollars
($50.00) or more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) per day for each violation, together with the
costs of prosecution.
6.04.14 Curb and Gutter
A. Special Assessments and Charges. The City may, at any time, construct or have constructed curb
and gutter in the City. As a complete alternative to any other methods provided by law, the City may
collect for said curb and gutter in the manner and by the procedure provided by Sec. 66.0701 and/or
66.0703, Wis. Stats.
B. Alternative Methods.
1. Petition. Any taxpayer and property owner in the City may petition the City for the installation of
curb and gutter abutting property owned by said petitioner in said City.
a. Requirements of Petition. The petition for the installation of curb and gutter shall state that
the petitioner(s) request curb and gutter abutting property owned by said petitioner,
describing said property, stating what type is requested, and further said petition shall state
that each petitioner individually shall be responsible and liable for, and thereby obligates
themselves to pay the total costs of installation of said curb and gutter to include surveying
and other contingent expenses.
b. Effect of Petition. In the event a petition for the installation of curb and gutter is presented to
the Common Council, the Council shall have the exclusive discretion to accept or reject the
same. The Council may refer said petition, may table it, but in any event they shall act upon
the same in some manner within six (6) months of receipt of said petition.
2. Resolution of Intent. In the event the City should desire to construct curb and gutter in any area
of the City, the Common Council may adopt a resolution of intent to install said curb and gutter
and assess the costs thereof to the abutting property owners as provided in Sec. 66.0701, Wis.
Stats.
C. Types of Curb and Gutter. All curbs and gutters shall conform to the construction standards adopted
by the Common Council, on file with the City Engineer.
D. Liability for Repair Thereof. Whenever curb and gutter is installed, all property owners receiving the
benefits thereof shall be responsible and liable for all replacements, repairs, damage and
maintenance and during any period of construction on the property against which it abuts. Any
expense for additional width of road made necessary by blacktop curb and gutter shall be the
responsibility of and shall be paid for by the abutting property owner.
E. Entered on Tax Rolls. Any and all costs of replacement, repair and maintenance of curb and gutter
incurred within two (2) years after installation thereof or damage thereto during construction as
provided above, shall be charged to the lot or parcel of land affected thereby pursuant to Sec.
66.0703, Wis. Stats.
6.04.15 Driveway Permit Required
A. Purpose. For the safety of the general public, the City shall determine the location, size, construction
and number of access points to public roadways within the City limits. It is the City's intent to provide
safe access to properties abutting public roadways suitable for the property to be developed to its
highest and best use, provided that access is not deficient or dangerous to the general public.
B. Permit Required to Construct, Reconstruct, Alter or Enlarge. No person, firm or corporation shall
construct, reconstruct, alter or enlarge any private driveway within the limits of the dedicated portion
of any public street under the control and jurisdiction of the City of Onalaska without first obtaining a
permit therefor as provided by this Section.
C. Application.
1. Application for such permit shall be made to the Inspection Department on a form provided by the
City and shall be accompanied by a drawing accurately depicting the portion of the proposed
private driveway to be constructed, reconstructed, altered or enlarged lying within the dedicated
portion of the public street, the dimensions thereof and a statement of the materials proposed to
be used. The applicant shall pay a fee as prescribed in the City Fee Schedule.
2. Applications for permits must be accompanied by a scale drawing indicating the location of the
driveway or driveways to be installed and the requested widths for all installations classified as
special above and for any installation involving a utility relocation.
3. The permit application shall be made at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of intended
installation for all classes, except special or unclassified uses, wherein five (5) days shall apply to
permit time for study and consideration before granting the permit.
4. In no case shall any driveway be installed prior to securing a building permit if the driveway is to
service such building or buildings.
5. The determination of the class of driveway shall be by present land use where nonconforming to
the Unified Development Cod and, in all other cases, by the class of driveway for the particular
zone involved.
6. Application for "blind" driveways, wherein the only purpose is to restrict street parking, shall be
denied.
D. Application Provisions. All driveway permit applications shall contain the applicant's statement that:
1. The applicant represents all parties in interest, and that such proposed driveway is for the bona
fide purpose of securing access to their property and not for the purpose of parking or servicing
vehicles, advertising, storage or merchandising of goods within the dedicated portion of the City
street, or for any other purpose.
2. The City, notwithstanding the construction of such driveway, reserves the right to make any
changes, additions, repairs or relocations within the dedicated portion of the City street at any
time, including relocation, reconstruction, widening and maintaining the street without
compensating the owner of such private driveway for the damage or destruction of such private
roadway.
3. The permittee, their successors or assigns, agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of
Onalaska, its officials, officers, agents or employees, against any claim or any cause of action for
personal injury or property damage sustained by reason of the exercise of such permit.
4. The City does not assume any responsibility for the removal or clearance of snow, ice or sleet or
the opening of any windrows of such material upon such portion of such driveway within the
dedicated portion of the City street.
E. Widths and Permit Fees. Unless otherwise especially permitted by resolution of the Common
Council, upon written application giving the reason therefore, the standard and maximum widths of
driveways at the sidewalk and curb, other requirements for such installations, and fee for permits
shall be as outlined in the City Fee Schedule:
Type and
Classification
Minimum
Widths at
Sidewalk
Curb Maximum
Widths at
Sidewalk
Curb
Residential:
Single Garage 10 ft 17 ft 12 ft 17 ft
Double Garage 18 ft 25 ft 22 ft 26 ft
Three-Car Garage 18 ft 25 ft 30 ft 34 ft
Commercial:
Single 15 ft 22 ft 20 ft 25 ft
Double 20 ft 27 ft 30 ft 34 ft
Industrial:
Special 20 ft 27 ft 30 ft 34 ft
Parking Lots: 20 ft 27 ft 26 ft 30 ft
6.04.16 Driveway Location, Design and Construction Requirements
A. General Requirements. The location, design and construction of driveways shall be in accordance
with the following:
1. General Design.
a. Private driveways shall be of such width and so located that all of such driveways and their
appurtenances are within the limits of the frontage abutting the street of the property served.
Driveways must be a minimum of three (3) feet from adjoining parcel line at right-of-way and
into the parcel.
b. Driveways shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from any street intersection area
and shall not encroach upon or occupy areas of the street right-of-way required for effective
traffic control or for street signs or signals. A driveway shall be so located and constructed
that vehicles approaching or using it shall have adequate sight distance along the street.
c. Where more than one (1) driveway shall be on the same street, they shall be at least six (6)
feet apart on frontage of less than ninety (90) feet or twenty-five (25) feet apart on frontage
exceeding ninety (90) feet.
d. Driveways shall, in all cases, be placed wherever possible as not to interfere with utilities in
place. All costs of relocating utilities shall be the responsibility of the property owner with
approval of the Board of Public Works necessary before any utilities may be relocated and
the driveway installed.
e. All driveways must be located within the extended property lines unless accompanied by a
special agreement from the abutting property owner, with extension of said property lines to
be on a ninety (90) degree angle from the street line.
f. Where removal of the curb head is required for driveway installation, it shall be fully removed
and replaced.
g. In all instances, for driveways a drophead curb shall be installed in a two (2) foot distance.
h. The slope across the sidewalk portion of each driveway shall be governed by this Section or
as permitted by specific resolution. A sidewalk permit is also required for the sidewalk portion
of the driveway.
2. Number. The number of driveways to serve an individual property fronting on a street shall be
one (1), except where deemed necessary and feasible by the City Engineer for reasonable and
adequate service to the property, considering the safety, convenience and utility of the street.
3. Island Area. The island area in the street right-of-way between successive driveways or
adjoining a driveway and between the highway shoulder and right-of-way shall constitute a
restricted area and may be filled in and graded only as provided below in Section 6.04.16.A.7.
4. Drainage. The surface of the driveway connecting with street cross sections shall slope
downward and away from the highway shoulder a sufficient distance to preclude ordinary surface
water drainage flowing onto the street roadbed.
5. Culverts. Driveways shall not obstruct or impair drainage in street ditches or roadside areas.
Driveway culverts, where required, shall be adequate for surface water drainage along the street
and shall not be less than the equivalent of a twelve (12) inch diameter pipe. The distance
between culverts under successive driveways shall not be less than ten (10) feet except as such
restricted area is permitted to be filled in pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.04.16.A.7.
6. Reconstruction of Sidewalks and Curb and Gutter. When the construction of a driveway
requires the removal of a curb or gutter the new connections shall be of equivalent acceptable
material and curb returns shall be provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner. The
driveway surface shall be connected with the highway pavement and the sidewalk, if any, in a
neat, workmanlike manner. The driveway construction shall include the replacement of such
sidewalk areas which are inadequate or which are or may be damaged by means of vehicle travel
across the sidewalk. All driveway entrances and approaches which are constructed across
sidewalks shall be paved in accordance with the requirements for sidewalk construction in
Section 6.04.11. of this Title insofar as such requirements are applicable, including thickness
requirements. Standard thickness of driveway approaches will be six (6) inches thick.
7. Restricted Areas. The restricted area between successive driveways may be filled in and graded
only when the following requirements are complied with:
a. The filling or draining shall be to grades approved by the City Engineer and, except where
highway drainage is by means of curb and gutter, water drainage of the area shall be directed
away from the street roadbed in a suitable manner.
b. Culvert extensions under the restricted area shall be of the same size and of equivalent
acceptable material as the culvert under the driveway. Intermediate manholes adequate for
clean-out purposes may be required where the total culvert length is excessive.
c. Where no street side ditch separates the restricted area from the street roadbed, permanent
provision may be required to separate the area from the street roadbed to prevent its use for
driveway or parking purposes by construction of a border, curb, rail or posts as may be
required by the City Engineer.
8. Construction Across Sidewalks. All driveway entrances and approaches which are constructed
across sidewalks shall be paved in accordance with the requirements for sidewalk construction in
Section 6.04.11. of this Title insofar as such requirements are applicable, including thickness
requirements.
9. Variances. Any of the above requirements may be varied by the Board of Public Works, upon the
recommendation of the City Engineer, in such instances where the peculiar nature of the property
or the design of the street may make the rigid adherence to the above requirements impossible or
impractical.
B. Prohibited Driveways.
1. No person, firm or corporation shall place, construct, locate in, or cause to be placed, constructed
or located in, any obstruction or structure within the limits of any public road, highway or street in
the City of Onalaska except as permitted by this Section. As used herein the word "structure"
includes private driveways, a portion of which extends into any public road, highway or street, and
which is in non-conformance with this Section.
2. No driveway shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the extended street line at an intersection. At
street intersections a driveway shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from the street
intersection area and shall not occupy areas of the roadway deemed necessary by the City for
effective traffic control or for highway signs or signals.
3. The grade of that portion of any private driveway or pedestrian path located within the limits of
any public road, highway or street shall be such as shall meet the grade of the existing public
roadway at its edge and not cause an obstruction to the maintenance or clearing of such public
roadway.
4. No driveway apron shall extend out into the street further than the facing of the curb and under no
circumstances shall such driveway apron extend into any gutter area. All driveway entrances and
approaches shall be constructed as not to interfere with the drainage of streets, side ditches or
roadside areas, or with any existing structure on the right-of-way.
5. No portion of any curb, parapet or retaining wall, rising above the grade of the driveway, erected
by the owner of the premises involved shall extend beyond the culvert spanning the water course
located in such public way.
Chapter 05 Trees and Shrubs
Division 1 General Provisions
6.05.11 Application of Chapter
A. Intent and Purpose. It is the policy of the City to regulate and establish policy for planting, removal,
maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in or upon all public areas and terrace areas of the
City to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons using
the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public areas; to promote and enhance the beauty and general
welfare of the City; to prohibit the undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and
maintenance of trees and shrubs located in public areas; and to guard all trees and shrubs both
public and private within the City against the spread of disease, insects or pests.
B. Application. The provisions of this Section shall apply to trees and shrubs growing or hereafter
planted in or upon public areas and terrace areas and also to all trees and shrubs growing or to be
planted in or upon any private premises which shall threaten the life, health, safety or welfare of the
public or of any public areas.
C. Violations. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall
upon conviction thereof be subject to a forfeiture between Fifty Dollars ($50.00) and Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00). Each day that such violation is not remedied, shall be considered a separate
offense.
D. Severability. Should any section, subsection, clause, or provision of this Ordinance be declared
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
Ordinance in whole or in any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid.
6.05.12 Definitions
A. Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Section, they shall be construed to have the
following meanings:
1. Boulevard or Terrace Areas. The land between the typical location of the street edge or curbing
and the street right-of-way. Where there is no curb and gutter, the edge of the road way
(pavement or gravel) to the right-of-way line shall be deemed to be a boulevard for the purpose of
this Section. “Boulevard” shall have the same meaning as “terrace”. Where there are no
sidewalks, the area from the curbing or edge of street to the right-of-way line shall be deemed
boulevard areas under this Section.
2. Critical Root Radius (CRR). 1.5 feet for every diameter inch at diameter at breast height (DBH),
as relating to excavations near trees.
3. Evergreen Tree. Any woody plant normally having one stem or trunk and bearing foliage in the
form of needles and crowns which extend from ground level throughout its entire height.
4. Frames. A device used to stabilize or provide protection to a tree. May include staking materials,
blocks, or other landscaping materials around the base of a tree.
5. Major Alteration. Trimming a tree beyond one-third (1/3) of the crown.
6. Person. Person, firm, business, association, corporation or other legal entity.
7. Public Nuisance. Any deleterious or fatal tree disease. Any tree or shrub or part thereof which,
by reason of its condition and location, is hazardous and/or interferes with the use of any public
property/area or public ways; infected with a plant disease; infested with injurious insects or
pests; injurious to public improvements or endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of persons
or property.
8. Public Properties/Areas. Land owned or controlled by the City, including without limitation
because of enumeration, public sites, parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, park ways, common
open spaces, greenways, forests, conservancies and other lands owned or leased by the City
under the authority of the Parks, Recreation and Library Board.
9. Public Trees and Shrubs. All trees and shrubs located or to be planted in or upon public areas.
10. Public Ways. All public streets, roads, right-of-ways, boulevards, terraces strips between public
lot lines and curbs, alleys, sidewalks, cemeteries, and other lands owned or leased by the City
and under the authority of the Board of Public Works.
11. Shrubs. Any woody vegetation or a woody plant having multiple stems and bearing foliage from
the ground up.
12. Staff Forester. Person(s) designated by the Parks, Recreation and Library Board or the Board of
Public Works as authorized to carry out provisions of this Section.
13. Top, Topping. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs within the tree crown to such a degree
so as to remove normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
14. Tree. Any woody plant, normally having one stem or trunk bearing its foliage or crown well above
ground level to heights of sixteen feet or more.
15. Urban Forest. The collection of trees in and around the City, including park and street trees on
public property and on private property.
6.05.13 General Standards
A. Adoption of State Statutes. Sections 27.09 and 86.03, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference.
B. Arboricultural Standards. All work performed must be performed in compliance of accepted
arboricultural standards.
C. Interference with Staff Forester Prohibited. No person shall interfere with the Staff Forester or
authorized representative while Staff Forester is engaged in carrying out any work or activities
authorized by this Section.
D. Emergencies. The Staff Forester, in the case of emergencies, such as windstorms, ice storms,
insect/disease outbreaks or other disasters, may waive the requirements of this Ordinance so that
private or public work to restore order in the City is in no way hindered.
E. Appeal from Determinations and Orders. Any person who receives a determination or order under
this Section from the Staff Forester or the Parks, Recreation and Library Board or Board of Public
Works or their designee and objects to all or any part thereof shall have the right to appeal such
determination or order, subject to the provisions of Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., to the Parks, Recreation and
Library Board or Board of Public Works or their designee within seven (7) days of receipt of the order.
The Parks, Recreation and Library Board or Board of Public Works or their designee shall hear such
appeal within forty-five (45) days of receipt of written notice of the appeal. After such hearing, the
Common Council may reverse, affirm or modify the order or determination appealed from and the
grounds for its decision shall be stated in writing. The Common Council shall, by letter, notify the
party appealing the order or determination of its decision within ten (10) days after the hearing has
been concluded. The Council shall file its written decision with the City Clerk.
6.05.14 Staff Forester
A. Parks, Recreation and Library Board or Board of Public Works Appointment. The Parks,
Recreation and Library Board or Board of Public Works may designate a municipal employee(s) to
perform the duties of Staff Forester under Ch. 27.09, Wis. Stats., and may authorize such Staff
Forester to perform the duties and exercise the powers imposed by this Section. The Staff Forester
shall have the following general powers and duties:
1. To direct, manage, supervise, and control the planting, removal, maintenance, protection of all
trees and shrubs on all public properties, areas and ways; to supervise Park and Public Works
Department personnel in the planting, removal, maintenance, and protection of said trees and
shrubs.
2. To guard all trees and shrubs within the City located on public areas so as to prevent the spread
of disease or pests and to eliminate dangerous conditions which may affect the life, health or
safety of persons or property.
3. To enforce this ordinance as it pertains to trees and shrubs on private premises.
4. Such other powers and duties as are provided by the laws of Wisconsin, particularly Sections
27.08 and 27.09, Wis. Stats., by ordinance of the City, by the Parks, Recreation and Library
Board, or Board of Public Works.
B. Right-of-Entry. The Staff Forester or other authorized City representatives may make a request to
enter upon private premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of examining any tree or shrub
located upon or over such premises and carrying out any of the provisions of this Section. If a request
to inspect such trees or shrubs is denied by the person responsible for the property, an inspection
warrant may be obtained pursuant to Sec. 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
C. Inspection. The Staff Forester may inspect or cause to be inspected all premises and places within
the City to determine whether any public nuisance exists thereon. The Staff Forester may also inspect
or cause the inspection of any tree reported to be public nuisance or suspected to be infested with a
deleterious or fatal tree disease or any part of a tree bearing materials reported or suspected to be
infested.
D. Maintenance/Removal. Staff Forester or other authorized agent may trim, prune, or remove a tree or
shrub located on or hanging into public properties/areas and public ways as necessary as determined
by the Staff Forester, due to disease, damage, hazardous condition and/or location, public nuisance,
or if it’s location is such that substantial detriment is done to the property upon which the tree or shrub
stands, or property abutting the same. Staff Forester shall cause maintenance and/or removal of a
tree or shrub on private premise as allowed per Section 6.05.15.
6.05.15 Abatement of Public Nuisances, Dangerous Trees and Costs
A. Tree Diseases as a Public Nuisance. Due to the many trees growing on public and private premises
within the City, the loss of which would substantially depreciate the value of public and private
property, impair the use and enjoyment of public and private premises and erode the tax base of the
City, and that the health and life of such trees is threatened by fatal diseases, the City intends to
control and prevent the spread of tree diseases, therefore infectious, epidemic and fatal tree diseases
(“Nuisance Diseases”) and the insect pests and vectors which carry such diseases are declared to be
public nuisances.
B. Inspection. The Staff Forester may inspect or cause to be inspected all premises and places within
the City to determine whether any public nuisance exists thereon. The Staff Forester may also inspect
or cause the inspection of any tree reported or suspected to be infested with Nuisance Diseases, or
any part of a tree bearing materials reported or suspected to be infested.
C. Abatement of Nuisances; Duty of Staff Forester.
1. The Parks, Recreation and Library Board or Board of Public Works their designee, upon the
recommendation of the Staff Forester, shall order, direct, supervise and control the abatement of
public nuisances on public properties/areas or public ways as defined in this Section by removal,
burning or by other means which it determines to be necessary to prevent as fully as possible the
spread of Nuisance Diseases, other deleterious tree diseases or the insect pests or vectors
known to carry such diseases.
2. Any tree or part thereof, whether alive or dead, which the Staff Forester finds to be infected,
hazardous or a nuisance so as to be a public nuisance, endanger the public or other structures,
trees, plants or shrubs, shall be removed, trimmed or treated by the owner of the property. The
Staff Forester shall give written notice to said owner to remedy the situation. Such notice shall
describe the public nuisance and recommend procedures for its removal or abatement and shall
specifically state the period of time within which the action must be taken, which shall be within
not less than twenty-four (24) hours nor more than fourteen (14) days as determined by the Staff
Forester on the basis of the seriousness of the condition of the tree and/or danger to the public.
The notice shall state that unless the owner abates the public nuisance in the manner specified in
the notice, or appeals to the Parks, Recreation and Library Board or Board of Public Works or
their designee to show that such nuisance does not exist or does not endanger the health of trees
in the City, the Parks, Recreation and Library Board or Board of Public Works or their designee
shall cause the abatement thereof and the property shall be assessed a special charge for the
work completed plus an administrative fee.
3. If the owner shall fail to remove, treat or trim said tree within the specified timeframe, the Staff
Forester may cause the tree to be removed, treated or trimmed by order of the Parks, Recreation
and Library Board or Board of Public Works or their designee and the property shall be assessed
as a special charge for the work completed in addition to an administrative fee as set forth on the
City’s fee schedule.
4. Prior to the Staff Forester causing the work to be completed, the Parks, Recreation and Library
Board or Board of Public Works or their designee shall determine if a public nuisance exists on
private property in the City and determine the method to abate or cause the abatement of such
nuisance in a manner as to remove the tree or bush or to destroy or prevent as fully as possible
the spread of public nuisances, other deleterious tree diseases, or the insect pests or vectors
known to carry such disease.
5. If the property owner appeals to the Parks, Recreation and Library Board or Board of Public
Works or their designee and the appeal to halt the abatement fails, the Parks, Recreation and
Library Board or Board of Public Works or their designee shall order the immediate abatement
thereof. Unless the property owner abates the nuisance as directed within five (5) days after such
appeal, the Parks, Recreation and Library Board or Board of Public Works or their designee shall
proceed to abate the nuisance and cause the cost thereof to be assessed against the property,
including an administrative fee, in accordance with the procedures provided in this Section. The
Parks, Recreation and Library Board or Board of Public Works or their designee may extend the
time allowed the property owner for abatement work, but not to exceed ten (10) additional days.
D. Assessment of Costs of Abatement. The entire cost of abating any public nuisance as defined
herein may be charged to and assessed against the parcel or lot abutting on the street, alley, terrace,
boulevard or parkway upon or in which such tree is located or the parcel or lot upon which such tree
stands, at the direction of the Parks, Recreation and Library Board or Board of Public Works or their
designee and Common Council in accordance with Sec. 66.0627 or Sec. 27.09, Wis. Stats.
1. The cost of abating a public nuisance located on private premises shall be assessed as a
special charge to the property on which such public nuisance is located, as follows:
a. The Staff Forester shall keep a strict account of the cost of such work and the amount
chargeable to each lot or parcel and shall report such work, charges, description of lands
to which charged and names and addresses of the owners of such lands to the and
subsequently the Common Council on or before October 15 of each year.
b. Upon receiving the Parks, Recreation and Library Board or Board of Public Works or their
designee’s report, the Council shall hold a public hearing on such proposed charges,
giving at least fourteen (14) days' advance notice of the time, place and purpose of such
hearing to interested persons by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality and by mail to the owner of each property proposed to be charged. Each
property owner shall be notified of the amount proposed to be assessed against their
premises and the work for which such charge is being made.
c. After such hearing, the Common Council shall affirm, modify and affirm or disapprove
such assessments by resolution and shall cause a copy thereof to be published. Upon
adoption and publication of such resolution, assessments made thereby shall be deemed
final.
d. The City Clerk shall mail notice of the amount of such final assessment to each owner of
property assessed at their last-known address, stating that, unless paid within thirty (30)
days of the date of the notice, such assessment will be entered on the tax roll as a tax
against the property, and all proceedings in relation to the collection, return and sale of
property for delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such assessment.
e. The City hereby declares that, in making assessments under this Section, it is acting
under its police power, and no damages shall be awarded to any owner for the
destruction of any diseased or infested tree or wood or part thereof.
6.05.16 Maintenance and Removal of Trees and Shrubs in Public Ways or Public
Properties/Areas
A. No person, firm, organization or corporation shall remove, damage, perform major alterations on or
destroy a tree or shrub in public ways or public properties/areas or cause such act to be done by
others unless authorized in writing by the Staff Forester.
B. In cutting down trees located in public and terrace areas, the tree must be removed with the root
stump grubbed out, or ground out to a depth of at least eight (8) inches below grade measured in a
straight line with the normal grade of sidewalk to top of eight (8) inches below grade measured as a
straight line, normal grade of sidewalk to top of curb. All wood and debris must be removed from the
street prior to the end of each working day and all holes shall be filled to normal grade level with
topsoil and seeded as soon as practicable.
C. Public Utilities shall notify the Staff Forester prior to removal, trimming, pruning, etc., of any public
tree or shrub in public ways or on public properties/areas in the City.
D. Any landscaping installed at the base of a public tree or shrub may be removed at the discretion of
the City.
6.05.17 Planting of Trees and Shrubs
A. Purpose. The planting, care and protection of the trees within the City is desirable for the purposes of
beauty, shade, comfort, stormwater runoff, noise abatement and economic betterment, and hereby
encourages all persons to assist in a program of tree planting, care and protection.
B. Tree Planting Program. The Staff Forester shall establish a program for tree planting, care and
protection for public properties/area and public ways. The Common Council shall also encourage the
planting, care and protection of trees and shrubs on private premises within the City. Planting of trees
in the terrace areas shall be according to the City approved tree planting list, as kept on file with the
Staff Forester.
C. Planting.
1. The size and genus, species and variety of trees and shrubs to be planted in public ways shall be
consistent with the City’s recommended tree species list on file with the Staff Forester, and
following planting requirements listed herein. The City at its discretion may remove any trees
planted in public ways.
2. Prior to any tree or shrub planting in public properties/areas, the Staff Forester shall first be
consulted regarding the size and genus, species and variety of trees and shrubs to be planted as
well as the manner of planting. The City at its discretion may remove any trees planted in public
properties/areas.
3. There shall be a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet and a recommended distance of
twenty-five (25) to thirty (30) feet between terrace area trees depending upon the size of tree and
other factors. Terrace trees shall be planted equal distance between the sidewalk or proposed
sidewalk and back of the curb or proposed back of curb. In terrace areas less than five (5) feet
wide, planting will not be permitted. Terrace area trees shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet
from an intersection.
4. Evergreen trees shall not be planted in a terrace area.
5. It shall be unlawful to plant or maintain shrubbery, ground cover or other plants not considered to
be a deciduous leaf tree within terrace areas whose growth is in excess of thirty (30) inches in
height above the top of the nearest curb.
6. Tree grates, where required, shall be provided for terrace trees surrounded by concrete by the
adjacent property owner and shall be level with adjacent concrete.
7. Trees or shrubs shall not be planted closer than two and a half (2 ½) feet to any sidewalk or curb.
Where sidewalks are not installed, trees or shrubs shall be planted in a manner to allow for future
sidewalk improvements.
8. All new required shade trees must be a minimum of one and one-half (1 1/2) inch diameter
caliper at the time of planting. All new required evergreen trees must be a minimum of six feet (6)
high when planted, except for low creeping shrubs.
9. For all new subdivisions and commercial developments, developers shall install one (1) tree per
twenty-five (25) feet of street frontage on boulevard of street frontage prior to issuance of
occupancy permits.
10. Placement of Trees. Trees may not be planted in the boulevard closer than:
a. Twenty (20) feet to a utility or street light pole;
b. Fifteen (15) feet to a driveway or alley;
c. Ten (10) feet to a water stop box, or gas shut off;
d. Ten (10) feet to a fire hydrant.
e. Fifteen to thirty (15-30) feet to another tree; or
f. Twenty (20) feet to the intersection of two (2) streets from either corner on the property line.
D. Unlawfully Planted Trees. Trees or shrubs planted within any terrace or planting easement without
the authorization and approval of the Staff Forester may be removed. The Staff Forester shall notify
the abutting owner in writing, listing the unlawfully planted trees or shrubs, ordering their removal, and
establishing a reasonable time within which such removal shall be accomplished. In the event that
removal is not to be accomplished within the time specified, the City may remove such trees, plants
or shrubs and assess the costs thereof to the owner.
E. Frames. Any person, adjacent to whose land any public tree or shrub is growing in public ways or
public property/areas, may, for the propose of protecting such tree or shrub, surround the same with a
suitable box or frame or staking for protection, but all such work should be performed under the
supervision and direction of the Staff Forester. The City may at its discretion remove frames or
landscaping located in public ways or on public properties/areas.
6.05.18 Trimming of Trees and Shrubbery and Those Obstructing Views at
Intersections/Traffic Signs
A. Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any boulevard, public way, public property/area or upon any
private premises adjacent to any public way or public property/areas shall be kept trimmed so that the
lowest branches projecting over the public way provide a clearance of not less than fourteen (14) feet.
The Staff Forester may waive the provisions of this Section for newly planted trees if the Staff
Forester determines that the trees(s) do not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any street
light or endanger public safety.
B. The necessity of pruning shall be determined by and may be ordered by the Staff Forester to be
completed.
C. Clearance from sidewalk to lower branches shall not be less than ten (10) feet. All trees standing
upon private property in the City, the branches of which extend over the line of the street, shall be
trimmed so that no branch shall grow or hang over the line of the sidewalk lower than ten (10) feet
above the level of the sidewalk. No tree shall be permitted to grow in such a manner as to obstruct
the proper diffusion of light from any public lamp.
D. No person may remove, trim or fertilize trees in the public right-of-way or on public property unless
the work is completed by a licensed arborist or designated agent of the City unless the City gives
written permission for another individual to complete such work. No person shall remove or make
Major Alterations to trees in the public right-of-way or on public property unless such work is
approved in writing by the City Forester, or the City Forester’s designee, prior to the completion of
work. For the purposes of this subsection the term “Major Alteration” shall mean “trimming or pruning
of more than one third (1/3) of the crown of a tree or bush.”
E. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, no person shall maintain, plant or permit to
remain on any private or public premises situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or
alleys in the City any tree, shrub or other growth which may obstruct the view or life safety of the
operator of any motor vehicle or pedestrian approaching such intersection.
F. It is unlawful for any person to plant, cause to grow, allow to grow or maintain any trees, bushes,
shrubbery or vegetation of any kind which is an obstruction to the clear and complete vision of any
traffic sign or driveway approach to a street in the City. It shall be the duty of every owner of such
tree, bush, shrubbery or vegetation to remove such obstruction.
G. Any shrub, tree or other plant which obstructs the view at an intersection or the view of a traffic sign
shall be deemed to be dangerous to public travel or life safety. The Staff Forester shall notify the
abutting owner in writing, listing the planted trees, plants or shrubs, ordering their trimming/removal,
and establishing a reasonable time within which such trimming/removal shall be accomplished. In the
event that trimming/removal is not accomplished within the time specified, the Board of Public Works
may order the trimming/removal such trees, plants or shrubs and property shall be special assessed
for the work completed in addition to an administrative fee.
6.05.19 Prohibited Acts
A. Damage to Public Trees. No person shall perform or cause to be performed by others any of the
following acts:
1. Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire sign, unprotected electrical installation or other device or
material to, around or through a tree or shrub.
2. Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or permit any fire to burn where it
will injure any tree or shrub.
3. Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious substance to seep, drain or be
emptied upon or about any tree or shrub or place concrete/asphalt or other solid substance
around the base of the same.
4. Remove any guard, stake, tree gator bag or other device or material intended for the protection of
a public tree or shrub, or close or obstruct any open space about the base of a public tree or
shrub designed to permit access of air, water and fertilizer.
5. Attach any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree, or fasten any guy wire, cable, rope,
nails, screws or other device to any tree; except that the City may tie official regulatory temporary
signs to trees when necessary in conjunction with street improvement work, tree maintenance
work or parades.
6. Cause or encourage any fire or burning near or around any tree.
7. It is prohibited to plant trees that reach a maximum, mature height of greater than twenty-five (25)
feet underneath any overhead utility line.
B. Excavations.
1. All trees on any parkway or other publicly owned property near any excavation or construction of
any building structure or street work shall be sufficiently guarded and protected by those
responsible for such work as to prevent any injury to said trees. No person shall excavate any
ditches, tunnels or trenches, or install pavement within a radius of ten (10) feet from any public
tree without a Street Opening / Work in Right-of-Way Permit from the Public Works Department.
Any person seeking a permit to excavate near a tree in a public street, alley, highway, or
boulevard shall submit a written proposed plan to the Public Works Department as part of the
permit application with clear and specific identification of the trees in a public street, alley,
highway or boulevard which the person is targeting for excavation. The identification shall include
the name and block number(s), address(s) of the street(s) on which the trees are located.
2. The Staff Forester has the authority to approve or deny the permit and assess violations as
outlined in this Section if the work is not performed in accordance with accepted arboricultural
standards. Any public tree that is removed or damaged to the extent of not gaining full recovery
in the opinion of the Staff Forester will be replaced through payment from the person causing the
removal or damage. Cost will be the value as determined in the City Tree Inventory, if the tree is
not part of an inventory the cost will equal Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) per inch measured at
diameter breast height or four and one-half (4 ½) feet from ground level.
Chapter 06 Stormwater Management
Division 1 General Provisions
6.06.11 Authority, Statement of Findings, and Purpose
A. Authority. This Section is adopted by the City Common Council under the authority granted by
Sec.62.234, Wis. Stats. This Section supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted
under Sec. 62.23, Wis. Stats., that relate to storm water management regulations. Except as
otherwise specified in Sec. 62.234 or 62.23, Wis. Stats., applies to this Section and to any
amendments thereof. The provisions of this Section are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the same governing body. The City Common Council hereby designates the City
Engineer to administer and enforce the provisions of this Section. The requirements of this Section do
not pre-empt more stringent storm water management requirements that may be imposed by any of
the following:
1. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or approvals including
those authorized under Sec. 281.16 and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
2. Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Statement of Findings. The City Common Council finds that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff
has a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety and general welfare of the
community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically,
uncontrolled post-construction runoff can:
1. Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing streambed scour,
diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream
temperature.
2. Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational and water
supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy
metals, bacteria, pathogens and other urban pollutants.
3. Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads.
4. Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading.
5. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by overtaxing storm sewers,
drainage ways, and other minor drainage facilities.
6. Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by increasing major flood peaks and
volumes.
7. Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and levels of flooding.
C. Purpose. The general purpose of this Section is to establish long-term, post-construction runoff
management requirements that will diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the
aquatic environment. Specific purposes are to:
1. Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
2. Prevent and control the adverse effects of storm water; prevent and control soil erosion; prevent
and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites,
placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote
sound economic growth.
3. Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and receiving water bodies;
prevent undue channel erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of particulate
matter; and prevent conditions that endanger downstream property.
D. Intent. It is the intent of the City Common Council that this Section regulates post-construction storm
water discharges to waters of the state. This Section may be applied on a site-by-site basis. The
City Common Council recognizes, however, that the preferred method of achieving the storm water
performance standards set forth in this ordinance is through the preparation and implementation of
comprehensive, systems-level storm water management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as
watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may prescribe regional storm water
devices, practices or systems, any of which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site
prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in conformance with the performance
standards developed under Sec. 281.16, Wis. Stats., for regional storm water management measures
and have been approved by the City Common Council, it is the intent of this ordinance that the
approved plan be used to identify post-construction management measures acceptable for the
community.
E. Applicability.
1. Where not otherwise limited by law, this ordinance applies after final stabilization to a site of land
disturbing construction activity that results in one or more acres of land disturbing construction
activities.
2. A site that meets any of the criteria in this paragraph is exempt from the requirements of this
ordinance.
a. A redevelopment post-construction site with no increase in exposed parking lots or roads.
b. A post-construction site with less than 10% connected imperviousness based on complete
development of the post-construction site, provided the cumulative area of all parking lots and
rooftops is less than one acre.
c. Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
d. Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
e. Routine maintenance for project sites under five (5) acres of land disturbance if performed to
maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the facility.
f. Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and fiber optic lines. This exemption
does not apply to the construction of any above ground structures associated with utility
construction.
3. Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in paragraph (a), this Section applies to postconstruction
sites of any size that, in the opinion of the City Engineer, is likely to result in runoff
that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that
causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of
particulate matter or that endangers property or public safety.
F. Jurisdiction. This Section applies to post construction sites within the boundaries and jurisdiction of
the City of Onalaska.
G. Exclusions. This Section is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined
under Sec. 227.01 (1), Wis. Stats., but also including the office of district attorney, which is subject to
the state plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under Sec. 281.33 (2),
Wis. Stats.
6.06.12 Technical and Performance Standards and Design Methods
A. Design Criteria, Standards and Specifications. All drainage facilities and practices required to
comply with this ordinance shall incorporate technical standards and design methods specified in the
document City of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements, maintained
and periodically updated by the City Engineer. Where not superseded by stricter requirements in City
of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements, the following standards are
also incorporated for reference:
1. Applicable design criteria, standards and specifications identified in the Wisconsin Department of
Naturals Resources Stormwater Technical Standards.
2. Other design guidance and technical standards identified or developed by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under subchapter V of Ch. NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Other Standards. Other technical standards not identified or developed above, may be used
provided that the methods have been approved by the City Engineer
C. Responsible Party. The entity holding fee title to the property shall be responsible for either
developing and implementing a stormwater management plan, or causing such plan to be developed
and implemented through contract or other agreement. This plan shall be developed in accordance
with Section 6.06.15., which incorporates the requirements of this Section.
D. Plan. A written storm water management plan in accordance with Section 6.06.14 shall be
developed and implemented for each post-construction site.
E. Stormwater Management Performance Standards. All drainage facilities and practices required to
comply with this ordinance shall meet performance standards specified in the document City of
Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements, maintained and periodically
updated by the City Engineer.
F. Location and Regional Treatment Option.
1. Stormwater Management Facilities required to meet this ordinance may be located on-site or offsite
as part of a regional stormwater device, practice or system.
2. The City Engineer may approve off-site management measures provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
a. The City Engineer determines that the post-construction runoff is covered by a stormwater
management system plan that is approved by the City of Onalaska and that contains
management requirements consistent with the purpose and intent of this ordinance.
b. The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
i. The facility will be in place before the need for the facility arises as a result of on-site
construction activities.
ii. The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control
equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the
performance standards of this ordinance.
iii. The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term operation and
maintenance.
iv. Where a regional treatment option exists such that the City Engineer may exempt the
applicant from all or part of the minimum on-site stormwater management requirements,
the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount determined in negotiation with
the City Engineer and approved by the Board of Public Works. In determining the fee for
post-construction runoff, the City Engineer shall consider an equitable distribution of the
cost for land, engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the regional
treatment option.
G. Alternate Requirements. The City Engineer may establish stormwater management requirements
more stringent than those set forth in City of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management
Requirements, if the City Engineer determines that an added level of protection is needed to address
downstream stormwater management issues.
6.06.13 Permitting Requirements, Procedures and Fees
A. Permit Required. No responsible party may undertake a land disturbing construction activity without
receiving a Storm Water Management permit, approved by the City Engineer, as outlined in City of
Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements prior to commencing the
proposed activity.
B. Permit Application and Fees. Unless specifically excluded by this ordinance, any responsible party
desiring a permit shall submit to the City Engineer a permit application made on a form provided by
the City Engineer for that purpose.
1. Unless otherwise excepted by this ordinance, a permit application must be accompanied by a
storm water management plan, a maintenance agreement (where required) and, where not
otherwise covered by a developer’s agreement, a non-refundable permit administration fee. The
permit administration fee, where applicable, shall be consistent with a fee schedule maintained by
the City of Onalaska and available at City Hall.
2. The storm water management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of Sections
6.06.12. and 6.06.14., the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of
Section 6.06.15., the financial guarantee shall meet the requirements of Section 6.06.15., and
fees shall be those established by the City Fee Schedule.
C. Review and Approval of Permit Application. The City Engineer or designee shall review any
permit application that is submitted with a storm water management plan, maintenance agreement,
and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used:
1. The City Engineer may request additional information if required for a complete application within
fifteen (15) business days of receipt of any permit application. Within thirty (30) business days of
the receipt of a complete permit application, including all items as required by Subsection B.
above, the City Engineer shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and
maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this
ordinance.
2. If the storm water permit application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved, or if an
agreed upon payment of fees in lieu of storm water management practices is made, the City
Engineer shall issue the permit.
3. If the storm water permit application, plan or maintenance agreement is disapproved, the City
Engineer shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval.
4. The City Engineer may request additional information from the applicant. If additional information
is submitted, the City Engineer shall have thirty (30) business days from the date the additional
information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are
either approved or disapproved.
5. Prior to commencing the land development activity, the project may be subject to additional
approvals as required by the City’s municipal code.
D. Permit Requirements. All permits issued under this ordinance shall be subject to the following
conditions, and holders of permits issued under this ordinance shall be deemed to have accepted
these conditions. The City Engineer may suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a permit
condition, following written notification of the responsible party. An action by the City Engineer to
suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in accordance with Section 6.06.16.C.
1. Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party of the responsibility to comply
with other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
2. The responsible party shall design and install all structural and non-structural storm water
management measures in accordance with the approved storm water management plan and this
permit.
3. The responsible party shall notify the City Engineer or designee at least two (2) business days
before commencing any work in conjunction with the storm water management plan, and within
three (3) business days upon completion of the storm water management practices. If required
as a special condition under Section 6.06.13.E. below, the responsible party shall make
additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the City Engineer so that installations
or BMP’s can be inspected during construction.
4. Installations or BMP’s required as part of this Section shall be certified "as built" by a licensed
professional engineer. Completed storm water management practices must pass a final
inspection by the City Engineer or its designee to determine if they are in accordance with the
approved storm water management plan and Section. The City Engineer or its designee shall
notify the responsible party in writing of any changes required in such practices to bring them into
compliance with the conditions of this permit.
5. The responsible party shall notify the City Engineer of any significant modifications it intends to
make to an approved storm water management plan. The City Engineer may require that the
proposed modifications be submitted to it for approval prior to incorporation into the storm water
management plan and execution by the responsible party.
6. The responsible party shall maintain all storm water management practices in accordance with
the storm water management plan until the practices either become the responsibility of the City
of Onalaska, or are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified in the approved
maintenance agreement.
7. The responsible party authorizes the City Engineer or designee to perform any work or operations
necessary to bring storm water management measures into conformance with the approved
storm water management plan, and consents to a special assessment or charge against the
property as authorized under Sub Chapter VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats., or to charging such costs
against the financial guarantee posted under Section 6.06.15.
8. If so directed by the City Engineer or designee, the responsible party shall repair at the
responsible party's own expense all damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainage ways
caused by runoff, where such damage is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the
approved storm water management plan.
9. The responsible party shall permit property access to the City Engineer or its designee for the
purpose of inspecting the property for compliance with the approved storm water management
plan and this permit.
10. Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in direction, increases in peak rate
and/or total volume of runoff from a site, the City Engineer may require the responsible party to
make appropriate legal arrangements with affected property owners concerning the prevention of
endangerment to property or public safety.
11. The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and penalties detailed in Section
6.06.16.A. and B., if the responsible party fails to comply with the terms of this permit.
E. Permit Conditions. Permits issued under this subsection may include conditions established by City
Engineer or designee in addition to the requirements needed to meet the performance standards in
Section 6.06.12. or a financial guarantee as provided for in Section 6.06.12.
F. Permit Duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through
the date the City Engineer notifies the responsible party that all storm water management practices
have passed the final inspection required under Subsection D.4. above. The permit shall be invalid if
work is not commenced within one (1) year of permit issuance and shall expire two years after permit
issuance. City Engineer may extend the period one (1) or more times for up to an additional one
hundred eighty (180) days each.
6.06.14 Stormwater Management Plan
A. Plan Requirements. A Stormwater Management Plan shall be prepared and submitted to the City
Engineer. The Stormwater Management Plan shall include, at a minimum, information required in the
City of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements, maintained and
periodically updated by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may waive certain submittal
requirements if determined by the City Engineer to be unnecessary to demonstrate compliance with
Section standards.
B. Alternate Requirements. The City Engineer may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for
applicants seeking an exemption to on-site storm water management performance standards.
6.06.15 Maintenance Agreement and Financial Guarantee
A. Maintenance Agreement Required. The maintenance agreement required under Section
6.06.13.B. for storm water management practices shall be an agreement between the City Engineer
and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of storm water practices beyond the duration
period of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the office of the La Crosse
County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding upon all subsequent
owners of the land served by the storm water management practices.
B. Agreement Provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following information and
provisions and be consistent with the maintenance plan required Section 6.06.13.B.
1. Identification of the storm water facilities and designation of the drainage area served by the
facilities.
2. A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the storm water management system
consistent with the storm water management plan required under Section 6.06.12.D.
3. Identification of the responsible party(s), organization or city, county, town or village responsible
for long term maintenance of the storm water management practices identified in the storm water
management plan required under Section 6.06.12.D.
4. Requirement that the responsible party(s), organization, or city, county, town or village shall
maintain storm water management practices in accordance with the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources standards.
5. Authorization for the City Engineer to access the property to conduct inspections of storm water
management practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and
operated in accordance with the agreement.
6. A requirement on the City Engineer or designee to maintain public records of the results of the
site inspections, to inform the party responsible for maintenance of the inspection results, and to
specifically indicate any corrective actions required to bring the storm water management practice
into proper working condition.
7. Agreement that the party designated under par. (3), as responsible for long term maintenance of
the storm water management practices, shall be notified by the City Engineer or designee of
maintenance problems which require correction. The specified corrective actions shall be
undertaken within a reasonable time frame as set by the City Engineer.
8. Authorization of the City Engineer to perform the corrected actions identified in the inspection
report if the responsible party designated under par. (3) does not make the required corrections in
the specified time period. The City Engineer shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and
collect the money as a special charge against the property pursuant to Subchapter VII of Ch. 66,
Wis. Stats.
C. Establishment of the Financial Guarantee. The City Engineer may require the submittal of a
financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be acceptable to the City Engineer pursuant to
Wisconsin Statutes. The financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the City Engineer
to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance of the storm water
management practices during the period which the designated party in the maintenance agreement
has maintenance responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give the City Engineer the
authorization to use the funds to complete the storm water management practices if the responsible
party defaults or does not properly implement the approved storm water management plan, upon
written notice to the responsible party by the City Engineer that the requirements of this Section have
not been met.
D. Conditions For Release of Financial Guarantee. Conditions for the release of the financial
guarantee are as follows:
1. The City Engineer shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this
section, less any costs incurred by the City Engineer to complete installation of practices, upon
submission of "as built plans" by a licensed professional engineer. The City Engineer may make
provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of
various development stages.
2. The City Engineer shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established under this
section to assure maintenance of storm water practices, less any costs incurred by the City
Engineer, at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another
entity via an approved maintenance agreement.
6.06.16 Administration
A. Enforcement.
1. Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff initiated after the effective
date of this Section by any person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the Section
provisions shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the requirements of
this Section.
2. The City Engineer or designee shall notify the responsible party by certified mail of any noncomplying
land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff. The notice shall
describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action, and
additional enforcement action which may be taken.
3. Upon receipt of written notification from the City Engineer or designee under Subsection B.
below, the responsible party shall correct work that does not comply with the storm water
management plan or other provisions of this permit. The responsible party shall make corrections
as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the City Engineer in the notice.
4. If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this Section are likely to result in damage to
properties, public facilities, or waters of the state, the City Engineer may enter the land and take
emergency actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the City Engineer
plus interest and legal costs shall be billed to the responsible party.
5. The City Engineer is authorized to post a stop work order on all land disturbing construction
activity that is in violation of this Section, or to request the City Attorney to obtain a cease and
desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
6. The City Engineer or designee may revoke a permit issued under this Section for non-compliance
with Section provisions.
7. Any permit revocation, stop work order, or cease and desist order shall remain in effect unless
retracted by the City Engineer or by a court with jurisdiction.
8. The City Engineer is authorized to refer any violation of this Section, or of a stop work order or
cease and desist order issued pursuant to this Section, to the City Attorney for the
commencement of further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction.
9. Compliance with the provisions of this Section may also be enforced by injunction in any court
with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order
before resorting to injunctional proceedings.
10. When the City Engineer determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this Section
has failed to follow practices set forth in the storm water management plan, or has failed to
comply with schedules set forth in said storm water management plan, the City Engineer or a
party designated by the City Engineer may enter upon the land and perform the work or other
operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into conformance with requirements of
the approved plan. The City Engineer shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and
expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any
financial security posted pursuant to Section 6.06.15. Where such a security has not been
established, or where such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses
shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and collected with any
other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is completed.
11. Compliance with the provisions of this Section may also be enforced by injunction in any court
with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order
before resorting to injunctional proceedings.
12. When the City Engineer determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this Section
has failed to follow practices set forth in the storm water management plan, or has failed to
comply with schedules set forth in said storm water management plan, the City Engineer or a
party designated by the City Engineer may enter upon the land and perform the work or other
operations necessary to bring the condition of said lands into conformance with requirements of
the approved plan. The City Engineer shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and
expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any
financial security posted pursuant to Section 6.06.15. Where such a security has not been
established, or where such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses
shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and collected with any
other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is completed.
B. Penalties.
1. Any person, firm, or corporation violating this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not
less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) and
the cost of prosecution and, in default of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county
Jail until payment of such forfeiture and the costs for a periods not to exceed thirty (30) days for
each violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
2. In addition to the aforementioned penalties, no plat submitted to the City and no site plan or
certified survey required by the City shall be approved unless it shows all improvements
reasonably required to prevent erosion after completion of development as required in this Title
and Title 13 of the City of Onalaska.
C. Appeals.
1. Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals, created pursuant to Sec. 62.23(7)(e)
Wis. Stats., shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order,
decision or determination made by the City Engineer in administering this Section. The board
shall also use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and
deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the board may authorize variances from the provisions of this
Section that are not contrary to the public interest, and where owing to special conditions a literal
enforcement of the Section will result in unnecessary hardship.
2. Who May Appeal. Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any aggrieved
person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the City of Onalaska affected by any
decision of the City Engineer.
D. Definitions.
1. Administering authority. A governmental employee, or a regional planning commission
empowered under Sec. 62.234 Wis. Stats., that is designated by the City Common Council to
administer this Section.
2. Agricultural facilities and practices. See Sec. 281.16, Wis. Stats.
3. Average annual rainfall. A typical calendar year of precipitation, excluding snow, and as defined
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources within models such as SLAMM, p8 or
equivalent technology.
4. Best management practice (BMP). Structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques
or devices employed to avoid or minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the
state.
5. Business day. A day the office of the City Engineer is routinely and customarily open for
business.
6. Cease and desist order. A court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is
being conducted without the required permit.
7. Combined sewer system. A system for conveying both sanitary sewage and storm water runoff.
8. Connected imperviousness. An impervious surface that is directly connected to a separate
storm sewer or water of the state via an impervious flow path.
9. Design storm. A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal
distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total depth of rainfall.
10. Development. Residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land uses and associated roads.
11. Division of land. The creation from one parcel of two (2) or more parcels or building sites at one
time or through the successive partition within a five (5) year period.
12. Effective infiltration area. The area of the infiltration system that is used to infiltrate runoff and
does not include the area used for site access, berms or pretreatment.
13. Erosion. The process by which the land’s surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice
or gravity.
14. Exceptional resource waters. See Sec. NR 102.11, Wis. Adm. Code.
15. Extraterritorial. The unincorporated area within three (3) miles of the corporate limits of a first,
second, or third class city, or within one and one-half (1.5) miles of a fourth class city or village.
16. Final stabilization. All land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been
completed and that a uniform, perennial, vegetative cover has been established, with a density of
at least seventy percent (70%) of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures, or employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
17. Financial guarantee. A performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of
credit, or similar guarantees submitted to the City Engineer by the responsible party to assure
that requirements of the Section are carried out in compliance with the storm water management
plan.
18. Governing body. The Onalaska Common Council, Board of Public Works.
19. Impervious surface. An area that releases as runoff all or a large portion of the precipitation that
falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and streets are
examples of areas that typically are impervious.
20. In-fill area. An undeveloped area of land located within existing development.
21. Infiltration. The entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the soil.
22. Infiltration system. A device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden or swale designed
specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces
such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices,
such as swales or road side channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only.
23. Karst feature. An area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock dissolution so that it is
likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may include caves, enlarged fractures, mine
features, exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
24. Land Development Activity. Any construction related activity that results in the addition or
replacement of impervious surfaces such as rooftops, roads, parking lots, and other structures.
Measurement of areas impacted by land development activity includes areas that are part of a
larger common plan of development or sale where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing
construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules but under one
plan.
25. Land disturbing construction activity. Any man-made alteration of the land surface resulting in
a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in
runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state.
Land disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit
trench dewatering, filling and grading activities.
26. Maintenance agreement. A legal document that provides for long-term maintenance of storm
water management practices.
27. Maximum Extent Practicable (MEP). A level of implementing best management practices in
order to achieve a performance standard specified in this Section which takes into account the
best available technology, cost effectiveness and other competing issues such as human safety
and welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and geographic features.
MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the
performance standard and site conditions.
28. New development. Development resulting from the conversion of previously undeveloped land
or agricultural land uses.
29. Off-site. Located outside the property boundary described in the permit application.
30. On-site. Located within the property boundary described in the permit application.
31. Ordinary High-Water Mark. See Sec. NR 115.03(6), Wis. Adm. Code.
32. Outstanding Resource Waters. See Sec. NR 102.10, Wis. Adm. Code.
33. Percent fines. The percentage of a given sample of soil, which passes through a # 200 sieve.
34. Performance standard. A narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable
outcome for a facility or practice.
35. Permit. A written authorization made by the City Engineer s to the applicant to conduct land
disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
36. Permit Administration Fee. A sum of money paid to the City Engineer by the permit applicant
for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering the permit.
37. Pervious surface. An area that releases as runoff a small portion of the precipitation that falls on
it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that
typically are pervious.
38. Pollutant. See Sec. 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
39. Pollution. See Sec. 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
40. Post-construction site. A construction site following the completion of land disturbing
construction activity and final site stabilization.
41. Pre-development condition. The extent and distribution of land cover types present before the
initiation of land disturbing construction activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development
activity are managed in an environmentally sound manner.
42. Preventive action limit. See Sec. NR 140.05(17), Wis. Adm. Code.
43. Redevelopment. Areas where development is replacing older development.
44. Responsible party. Any entity holding fee title to the property or other person contracted or
obligated by other agreement to implement and maintain post-construction storm water BMPs.
45. Runoff. Storm water or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves
on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
46. Separate Storm Sewer. A conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage
systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains,
which meets all of the following criteria:
a. Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
b. Is not part of a combined sewer system.
c. Is not draining to a storm water treatment device or system.
d. Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
47. Site. The entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing
construction activity occurred.
48. Stop Work Order. An order issued by the City Engineer which requires that all construction
activity on the site be stopped.
49. Stormwater Management Plan. A comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of
pollutants from storm water after the site has under gone final stabilization following completion of
the construction activity.
50. Stormwater Management System Plan. A comprehensive plan designed to reduce the
discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale.
51. Technical standard. A document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation
and maintenance specifications for a material, device or method.
52. Top of the channel. An edge, or point on the landscape, landward from the ordinary high-water
mark of a surface water of the state, where the slope of the land begins to be less than twelve
percent (12%) continually for at least fifty (50) feet. If the slope of the land is twelve percent
(12%) or less continually for the initial fifty (50) feet, landward from the ordinary high-water mark,
the top of the channel is the ordinary high-water mark.
53. TR-55. The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service
(previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition,
Technical Release 55, June 1986.
54. Type II Distribution. A rainfall type curve as established in the “United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149, published 1973”. The Type II curve
is applicable to all of Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern.
55. Waters of the State. See Sec. 281.01 (18), Wis. Stats.
Division 2 Illicit Discharges and Connections
6.06.21 Definitions
A. The following definitions shall be applicable in this Section:
1. Illicit Connection. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows
an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to any conveyances
which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash
water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks.
2. Person. Means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other
entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner’s agent.
3. Storm Drain System. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or
conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters,
curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
6.06.22 Discharge and Connections Prohibited
A. No person shall discharge, spill or dump substances or materials which are not entirely composed of
storm water into receiving bodies of water or onto driveways, sidewalks, parking lots or other areas
that drain into the storm drainage system. Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, no
person shall discharge roof drains, yard drains or sump pumps onto streets, sidewalks, or other areas
within City right-of-way that drain into the storm drainage system. Roof drains, yard drains, and sump
pumps shall discharge onto pervious areas at grade on private property.
B. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage
system will be allowed as grandfathered non-conforming use unless the City Engineer determines it is
a detriment. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made prior to the
adoption of this ordinance, regardless of whether the connections was permissible under law or
practice applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. Roof drain and sump pump discharge
connections to be approved by the City Engineer prior to connection to the Storm Drainage System.
6.06.23 Exemptions
A. The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this Section unless found to have an
adverse impact on the storm water:
1. Discharges authorized by a permit issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
2. Discharges resulting from fire-fighting activities.
3. Discharges from uncontaminated ground water, potable water source, air conditioning
condensation, springs, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, water main and hydrant
flushing and municipal swimming pools if the water has been dechlorinated.
6.06.24 Enforcement
A. Whenever the City of Onalaska finds a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this section, the City of Onalaska may order compliance by written notice of violation
to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
1. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
2. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
3. The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contaminated hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
4. In the event the person fails to eliminate the illicit connects or discharge, fails to cease and desist
in discharge, practices or operations in violation of this Section or fails to abate or remediate the
storm water pollution or contamination hazards, that person may be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense,
together with the costs of prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 7 Refuse and Recycling Disposal and Collection
Division 1 General Provisions
6.07.11 Purpose; Collection Service; Distribution of Rules and Regulations
A. Purpose. It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of this Section to enhance and improve
the environment and promote the health, safety and welfare of the City by establishing minimum
standards for the storage, collection, transport, processing, separation, recovery and disposal of solid
waste. It is also the intent of this Section to promote recycling, composting and resource recovery
through the effective refuse collection and recycling program.
B. Garbage, Recycling and Refuse Collection Service. All residential garbage, recycling and refuse
collection service shall be provided by City personnel or by private firms under contract with the City.
C. Distribution of Rules and Regulations. The City will distribute yearly rules and regulations
regarding refuse, recycling, yard waste, etc. on or before January 1st of each year. Any additional
rules or regulations outlined in the yearly distribution shall also be in effect along with those contained
herein.
6.07.12 General Regulations for City Serviced Dwelling Units
A. General Container Standards. City Serviced Dwelling Units shall each be issued one (1) automated
cart each for refuse and recycling collection. The size of the automated cart shall be set by the
Common Council. The Automated Refuse and Recycling Carts shall be owned by the City and shall
remain at each place of issuance.
B. Approved Containers. All Garbage, Rubbish and Recyclable Materials set out for collection shall be
placed in City Automated Refuse and Recycling Containers. No Refuse or Recyclable Materials will
be collected from non-City issued containers.
C. Yard Waste. Yard Waste Containers and Yard Waste Bags shall be used for Yard Waste disposal.
Yard waste containers including contents shall not exceed two hundred (200) pounds in weight and
yard waste bags shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight. City Serviced Dwelling Units may place
Yard Waste in paper yard waste bags (in Spring and Fall as outlined by the City) or Yard Waste
Containers. Said containers shall be picked up by City’s contractor on the approved pick-up day,
currently the same day as refuse pickup. Yard Waste Sticker must be purchased for service.
D. Request for Additional Containers. City Service Dwelling Units may request additional sixty-five
(65) gallon automated containers for refuse and recycling. Each additional cart requested shall have a
yearly fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. .
E. Automated Cart Replacement or Damage. If Automated Refuse or Recycling Containers are lost,
damaged or destroyed by City Service Dwelling unit a new automated cart will be issued at a cost as
set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. If the automated cart is damaged by the City or
Contractor a new Automated Refuse or Recycling Container will be provided at no cost. If Automated
Refuse or Recycling Containers needs maintenance due to normal wear and tear City Service
Dwelling Units shall contact Contractor for scheduling repair of Automated Refuse or Recycling
Containers.
F. Illegal Containers. Contractor shall not be obligated to pick up any Garbage, Rubbish or Recyclable
Materials not within City issued Automated Refuse or Recycling Containers.
G. Materials Deposited in Garbage Containers. Rubbish, except broken glass, and garbage shall be
deposited into Automated Refuse Containers. Liquid Garbage shall not be deposited in such
containers. Kitchen Garbage shall be drained of all moisture and completely wrapped in paper or
plastic or placed in a plastic bag before it is deposited or placed in the Automated Refuse Containers.
H. Recyclables to Be Separated & Clean. City Serviced Dwelling Units shall separate all recyclable
materials from refuse and prepare them for recycling according to requirements established and
publicized by the Board of Public Works. Recycling shall be single stream deposited into the
Automated Recycling Container. To the greatest extent practicable, the Recyclable Materials
separated in accordance with this section shall be substantially clean and kept free of containments
such as food or product residue, oil or grease or other non-recyclable materials, Recyclable Materials
shall be stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain and other inclement weather
conditions until such time as the materials are set at the Curb for collection.
I. Special Handling Recyclables. No person shall place any lead acid battery, waste oil, motor vehicle
tire or tractor tire with post-consumer waste. Any person having waste oil, lead acid battery, or said
tires shall take it to an appropriate private retail recycler, or designated City disposal site if available.
J. White Goods Disposition. All discharged major appliances shall be delivered to a facility licensed by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources to recycle appliances. Citizens must arrange to have
major appliances collected at their home by a private waste hauler or delivered to the La Crosse
County Solid Waste Facility.
K. Prohibition on Placing Recyclable Materials in Refuse. The following materials shall be separated
from Postconsumer Waste. Mixing of these recyclable materials with Postconsumer Waste from
residential, commercial, industrial or other sources is prohibited. All City Service Dwelling Units must
place the materials listed below in City issued Automated Recycling Container for pickup by
Contractor:
1. Aluminum containers.
2. Glass containers.
3. Steel or bi-metal containers.
4. Plastics #1, #2, #4, and #5.
5. Newspaper.
6. Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper, including glossy newspaper inserts.
7. Office paper/white paper.
8. Fiberboard (cereal boxes, soda cartons, beer cartons, etc.)
9. Corrugated card board.
10. These recyclable materials shall not be mixed with Garbage or Rubbish or disposed of at any
Landfill or Incinerator, without written permission of the Board of Public Works, except Waste
Tires may be burned with energy recovery in a facility licensed by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources. Board of Public Works permission may be granted only to allow disposal of
contaminated or unmarketable Recyclable Materials.
L. Brush. Brush is to be secured in bundles less than four (4) feet in length and weighing less than
seventy (70) pounds.
M. Refusal to Collect Refuse or Recycling in Violation. The City and Contractor may refuse to collect
Garbage, Rubbish, Recyclable Materials and Yard Waste if they are not prepared in accordance with
the requirements established by the City.
6.07.13 Collection of Automated Containers for City Serviced Dwelling Units
A. Placement For Collection.
1. Accessibility. City Automated Refuse and Recycling Containers shall be accessible to
Contractor’s collection crews. Automated Refuse and Recycling Containers shall be placed
immediately behind the Curb of the public street, along alley or at location as determined by
Board of Public Works, for collection with a minimum of three (3) feet clear space on either side.
Yard Waste Containers shall likewise be placed in neat, orderly fashion behind the Curb. During
winter months, Automated Refuse and Recycling Containers shall not be placed on top of the
snow bank, nor shall it be placed in the roadway. The owner shall either shovel out an area
behind the Curb or placement area in which to place the Automated Refuse and Recycling
Containers or Owner shall place it in Owner’s driveway. Collection crews will not collect refuse
and recycling unless it is placed at the curb of a public street, alley or location as determined by
the Board of Public Works. City Serviced Dwelling Units shall bring their Automated Refuse and
Recycling Containers to the public right-of-way for collection. Should collection crews be unable
to discharge contents of Automated Refuse and Recycling Containers using normal handling
procedures, the containers including contents, will be left at curb side. The owner shall make
provisions to assure that the Solid Waste therein can be collected on the next collection day.
2. No automated containers for refuse or recycling other than those of the City shall be placed, kept,
stored or located within the right-of-way of a street or alley; provided, however, that the Common
Council may authorize the location of such containers within the public right-of-way at specified
places and times when such location is necessary for the expeditious collection and disposition of
refuse.
3. City Service Dwelling Unit Physically Impaired Roll Out Service. Qualifying City Service
Dwelling Units that submit City required form and physician’s note will be eligible for Physically
Impaired Roll Out Service for one (1) year. Contractor will only pick up Automated Refuse and
Recycling Containers that are visible from street at driveway or alley and not within a building.
Automated Refuse and Recycling.
4. Containers will not be collected under this service if driveway is not clear of snow and ice.
B. Restriction on Time of Placement.
1. All Automated Refuse and Recycling Containers shall be placed in collection locations as
designated in Subsection A. above only after 4:00 p.m. on the evenings prior to the regular
collection time.
2. All Automated Refuse and Recycling Containers shall be removed from the curbside collection
point within twenty-four (24) hours after the regular collection time.
3. City employees or employees of Contractor will not enter any structures to access Automated
Refuse and Recycling Containers or refuse.
C. Collection Schedule.
1. The designation of the day or days of refuse and recycling collection shall be made by the
Common Council, or committee thereof, and such information shall be advertised so that all
occupants, tenants and proprietors of all residential units will be advised of the correct collection
schedule. Unless hardship is shown, caused by extreme weather conditions or other hazardous
situations, refuse shall be collected from all residential units weekly.
2. The occupant, tenant or proprietor of a new residential unit shall notify the Public Works
Department that collection of refuse from such place is required.
6.07.14 General Regulations for Non-City Serviced Dwelling Units
A. Non-Residential Facilities and Properties and Multiple Family Dwelling Refuse. All Non-
Residential Facilities and Properties and Multiple Family Dwelling (consisting of five (5) or more
dwelling units) shall provide for the prompt removal and proper disposal of all refuse generated by or
at that Non-Residential Facility and Property or Multiple Family Dwelling. This shall include all
buildings or facilities used wholly or partly for non-residential purposes, including those owned or
occupied by non-profit organizations and all Multiple Family Dwellings. Refuse generated by or at
Non-Residential Facilities and Properties or Multiple Family Dwellings shall not be placed along with
or mixed with refuse generated at a City Serviced Dwelling Unit.
B. Dumpster Requirement for Multiple Family Dwellings. The owner or operator of any Multiple
Family Dwelling shall be required to provide a dumpster or dumpsters consisting of appropriate size
as recommend by the City’s Inspection Department for the deposit of refuse. All dumpsters shall be
placed at safe convenient locations for use and pick-up.
C. Size Requirements for Dumpster Enclosures. All dumpsters shall be enclosed in an appropriately
sized enclosure so as to insure the safety of persons providing refuse and recycling collection.
Enclosures are required for all refuse and recycling dumpsters. Enclosures shall be four (4) sided with
doors for access to dumpsters.
1. Appropriately sized enclosures are:
a. For a one (1) to two (2) cubic yard dumpster, an enclosure of not less than:
i. One hundred twenty (120) inches in width; by
ii. One hundred ten (110) inches in length with an unobstructed gate opening (when gate is
fully open).
b. For a three (3) to four (4) cubic yard dumpster, an enclosure of not less than:
i. One hundred forty (140) inches in width; by
ii. One hundred thirty-two (132) inches in length, with an unobstructed gate opening (when
gate is fully open).
c. For a five (5) to six (6) cubic yard dumpster, an enclosure of not less than:
i. One hundred fifty-seven (157) inches in width; by
ii. One hundred thirty-two (132) inches in length, with an unobstructed gate opening (when
gate is fully open).
d. For a seven (7) to eight (8) cubic yard dumpster, an enclosure of not less than:
i. One hundred eighty (180) inches in width; by
ii. One hundred thirty-two (132) inches in length, with an unobstructed gate opening (when
gate is fully open).
2. For dumpsters over eight (8) cubic yards, location and access approval from the Inspection
Department is necessary prior to installation.
3. All enclosures shall be at least six (6) feet high and be constructed of materials which match the
principle structure’s architecture.
4. No garbage shall be collected from dumpsters in inappropriately sized enclosures.
5. All persons who presently have dumpsters in inappropriately sized enclosures shall have sixty
(60) days from the effective date of this Subsection to comply with its provisions.
D. Recycling Responsibilities for Multiple Family Dwellings and Non-Residential Facilities and
Properties.
1. Responsibilities of Owners. Owners of designated agents of Multiple Family Dwellings and
Non-Residential Facilities and Properties shall do all of the following to recycle materials as
outlined in this Section:
a. Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
b. Notify all users, tenants and occupants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the property
and at least semi-annually thereafter about the established recycling program.
c. Provide for the collection of the recyclable materials separated from the solid waste and the
delivery of the materials to a recycling facility.
d. Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which
materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing
requirements, collection methods or sites, locations, and hours of operation, and a contact
person or company, including a name, address and telephone.
2. Exemptions. The preceding requirements of Subsection D.1.a.-d. for the owners of designated
agents of Non-Residential Facilities and Multiple Family Dwellings do not apply if the refuse
generated within the facility or property is delivered to and treated at a processing facility licensed
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling all
non-combustible recyclable materials in as pure a form as is technically and practically feasible.
3. Compliance Audit. The City's Public Works Department can audit up to fifteen percent (15%) of
all non-residential recycling programs for compliance annually.
E. Reporting Requirements for Private Recyclers. All licensed waste haulers or salvage dealers in
the City of Onalaska shall report quarterly to the City the quantity in weight of each of the following
materials that they have collected for recycling. Such date shall be reported to the Public Works
Office no later than forty-five (45) days after the end of March, June, September and December each
year.
F. Enforcement of Reporting Requirements.
1. Inspections. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this Section, an
authorized representative of the Board of Public Works may inspect recyclable materials
separated for recycling, post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and
facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of Multiple Family Dwellings and Non-Residential
Facilities and Properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept
confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may refuse access for
purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct,
hamper, or interfere with such an inspection.
2. Citations. Any person who violated a provision of this Section may be issued a citation by the
City of Onalaska Police Department or an authorized agent of the Board of Public Works. The
issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to
the same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same
or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this Subsection.
6.07.15 General Regulations for All City Serviced Dwelling Units, Multiple Family
Dwelling and Non-Residential Facilities and Properties
A. Prohibited Activities and Non-Collectable Materials.
1. Dead Animals. It shall be unlawful to place any dead animal, or parts thereof, in a container for
collection provided, however, this Section shall not apply to animal parts from food preparation for
human consumption.
2. Undrained Food Wastes. It shall be unlawful to place any garbage or other food wastes in a
container for collection unless it is first drained and wrapped.
3. Ashes. It shall be unlawful to place hot ashes for collection.
4. Improper Placement. It shall be unlawful to place, or allow to be placed, any solid waste upon
the roads, streets, public or private property within the City contrary to the provisions of this
Section.
5. Compliance With Section. It shall be unlawful to store, collect, transport, transfer, recover,
incinerate or dispose of any solid waste within the boundaries of the City contrary to the
provisions of this Section.
6. Improper Transportation. It shall be unlawful to transport any solid waste in any vehicle which
permits the contents to blow, sift, leak or fall therefrom. If spillage does occur, the collection crew
shall immediately return spilled materials to the collection vehicle and shall properly clean, or
have cleaned, the area. All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of solid waste shall
be durable, easily cleanable and leak-proof, if necessary, considering the type of waste and its
moisture content. Collection vehicles shall be cleaned frequently to prevent nuisances and insect
breeding and shall be maintained in good repair.
7. Interference With Authorized Collector. No person other than an authorized collector shall
collect or interfere with any garbage or recycling materials after it has been put into automated
carts and deposited in the proper place for the collector, nor shall any authorized person molest,
hinder, delay or in any manner interfere with an authorized garbage collector in the discharge of
their duties.
8. Scavenging. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any solid waste placed for
collection. All City Service Dwelling Unit recyclable material collected and deposited, as provided
in this section, shall be the property of the City of Onalaska unless altered by written City contract
with Contractor.
9. Private Dumps. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a Dump.
10. Burning of Waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste in any manner, except
as provided elsewhere in this Section.
11. Non-Collectible Materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any of the
following wastes:
a. Hazardous waste;
b. Toxic waste;
c. Chemicals;
d. Explosives or ammunition;
e. Drain or waste oil or flammable liquids;
f. Large quantities of paint;
g. Tires;
h. Stone, concrete, rubber, earth or sod;
i. Construction debris; and
j. Appliances.
12. Animal or Human Wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place animal wastes and/or
human wastes for collection unless such waste is placed in a plastic bag. These wastes should
be disposed of in plastic bags or in the sanitary sewer system. Such items as "kitty litter" may be
placed for collection if animal wastes are removed prior to disposal unless kitty litter is placed in a
plastic bag.
13. Hospital Wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any pathogenic
hospital wastes.
14. Building Waste. All waste resulting from remodeling, construction or removal of a building,
roadway or sidewalk shall be disposed of by the owner, builder or contractor.
15. Waste Motor Oil Recycling. No person shall dispose of any waste motor oil by placing it with
refuse for regular collection by the City, by pouring it on the ground, into storm sewers, ditches or
waterways, or into gutters or City streets. Any person wishing to dispose of waste motor oil shall
utilize or at any other legal waste motor oil site.
16. Yard Waste. Yard waste shall not be disposed of with any other type of waste or refuse. Yard
waste shall be disposed of and deposited for pick up in accordance with the provisions of this
Section.
B. Construction Debris. City will not dispose of any construction debris. Property owner must contract
with private waste hauler or deliver to the La Crosse County Solid Waste Facility for disposal.
C. Large Items. City will not dispose of any large items. Property owner must contract with a private
waste hauler or deliver to the La Crosse County Solid Waste Facility for disposal.
D. White Goods. City will not dispose of any white goods. Property owner must contract with a private
waste hauler or deliver to the La Crosse County Solid Waste Facility for disposal.
E. Collection and Disposal of Refuse other than by City. Refuse which is not collected by the City, its
agents, employees or contractors may be collected and disposed of by private rubbish haulers. All
vehicles used to transport rubbish shall be provided with equipment to prevent rubbish from blowing
out of, falling from or otherwise escaping from such vehicle. All rubbish haulers shall comply with all
applicable rules and regulations established by the Common Council or Committee thereof.
F. Garbage Accumulation; When a Nuisance. The accumulation or deposit of garbage, trash or
putrescible animal or vegetable matter in or upon any lot or land or any public or private place within
the City which causes the air or environment to become noxious or offensive or to be in such a
condition as to promote the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other insects, or to provide a habitat or
breeding place for rodents or other animals, or which otherwise becomes injurious to the public health
is prohibited and declared to constitute a nuisance.
G. Refuse from Outside the Municipality. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place,
deposit or cause to be deposited, for collection, any waste or refuse not generated within the
corporate limits of the City of Onalaska.
H. Restriction on Hours of Refuse Collection. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation
to collect refuse in the City of Onalaska between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
6.07.16 Definitions
A. For the purpose of this Section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given
herein unless different meanings are clearly indicated by the context.
1. Agricultural Establishment. An establishment engaged in the rearing and slaughtering of
animals and the processing of animal products or orchard and field crops.
2. Aluminum Container. An aluminum container for food or beverages.
3. Automated Refuse Container. City issued size as approved by Common Council container for
the purposes of holding Garbage and Rubbish for pickup by City Contractor.
4. Automated Recycling Container. City issued size as approved by Common Council container
for the purposes of holding Recyclable Materials for pickup by City Contractor.
5. BI-Metal Container. A container for beverages that is made primarily of a combination of steel
and aluminum.
6. Board of Public Works. The City of Onalaska, Board of Public Works.
7. Brush Site. A site designated by the City of Onalaska Board of Public Works where citizens may
drop off brush, shrubs, branches, and other tree waste meeting criteria established by the Board.
8. Bulky Waste. Items whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by normal
collection, processing or disposal methods.
9. City Service Dwelling Unit. Any building containing four (4) or less dwelling units or any
condominium or any manufactured home park that receives refuse and recycling collection
service from the City of Onalaska.
10. Commercial Unit. Commercial units shall be all property other than City Service Dwelling Units
and Multi Family Dwellings and shall include boarding houses, motels and resorts.
11. Contractor. Shall mean the entity which the City contracts with for solid waste collection
services.
12. Curb. The back edge or curb and gutter along a paved street or where one would be if the street
was paved and had curb and gutter.
13. Demolition Wastes. That portion of solid wastes consisting of wastes from the repair, remodeling
or reconstruction of buildings, such as lumber, roofing and sheathing scraps, rubble, broken
concrete, asphalt and plaster, conduit, pipe, wire, insulation and any other materials resulting
from the demolition of buildings and improvements.
14. Disposal. The orderly process of discarding useless or unwanted material.
15. DNR. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
16. Dump. A land site where solid waste is disposed of in a manner that does not protect the
environment.
17. Dwelling Unit. A place of habitation occupied by a normal single family unit or a combination of
persons who may be considered as equivalent to a single family unit for the purposes of this
Section.
18. Enclosures for Dumpsters. An enclosure designed to screen and adequately house refuse and
recycling containers and dumpsters, constructed with like materials which match the principal
structure’s architecture.
19. Garbage. Includes every refuse accumulation of animals, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or
otherwise that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit
or vegetables originally used for foodstuffs.
20. Glass Container. A container in which food or beverages are sold that are made of clear, green,
or brown glass. Drinking glasses or crystal are not included.
21. Hazardous Waste. Those wastes such as toxic, radioactive or pathogenic substances which
require special handling to avoid illness or injury to persons or damage to property and the
environment.
22. Household Non-Combustible Recyclable Materials. Aluminum, steel, and bi-metal containers
and glass containers.
23. Industrial Waste. Waste material, except garbage, rubbish and refuse, directly or indirectly
resulting from an industrial processing or manufacturing operation.
24. Landfill. A landsite where solid waste is disposed of in a manner to provide protections for the
environment, in accordance with state regulations.
25. Large Item. Any item that does not fit into City issued automated carts with lid closed.
26. Litter. Solid waste scattered about in a careless manner, usually rubbish.
27. Major Appliance. A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes dryer, clothes washer,
dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, refrigerator, stove, furnaces, boilers, dehumidifiers,
water heaters, and any other appliances designated by the Board of Public Works.
28. Multiple Family Dwelling. A building under one (1) ownership containing five (5) or more
dwelling units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
29. Newspaper. Newspapers printed on newsprint.
30. Non-Collectable Material. Includes lead acid batteries; major appliances, waste oil; Hazardous
waste; Toxic waste; Chemicals; Explosives or ammunition; Tires. Appliances or materials that
may be designated by the Board of Public Works.
31. Non-Residential Facilities and Properties. Commercial, retail, industrial, institutional, and
governmental facilities and properties. This term does not include multiple family dwellings.
32. Non-Residential Solid Waste. Solid waste from agricultural, commercial, industrial or
institutional activities or a building or group of buildings consisting of four (4) or more dwelling
units.
33. Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, local governmental unit, as defined
in Sec. 66.0131(1), Wis. Stats., state agency or authority or federal agency.
34. Plastic Container. An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar, or carton, except for a
blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale.
35. Plastic Bottle. A Number 1 through Number 7 Type Plastic Bottle or Jug.
36. Postconsumer Waste. Solid waste other than solid waste generated in the production of goods,
hazardous waste as defined in Sec.289.01 Wis. Stats., waste from construction and demolition of
structures, scrap automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in Sec.289.01, Wis.
Stats.
37. Private Waste Hauler. A person licensed by the DNR to provide solid waste collection services.
38. Recyclable Materials. Includes yard waste; aluminum containers; glass containers; Plastic #1,
#2, #4, #6; newspaper; steel containers; fiber board; corrugated; and bi-metal containers, and
other items or materials that may be designated by the Board of Public Works.
39. Residential Solid Waste. All solid waste that normally originates in a residential environment
from residential dwelling units.
40. Residential Unit. Residential unit shall mean an individual household capable of independent
habitation by a family unit. A single family dwelling shall be considered to be one (1) residential
unit; multi-family dwelling shall be considered to be multiple residential units, the number of
residential units to equal the number of family units to be housed therein. Residential units shall
not include boarding houses, motels or resorts.
41. Rubbish. Includes combustible and noncombustible waste material, except rocks, concrete,
bricks and similar solid materials, plaster or dirt, that is incidental to the operation of a building
and shall include, by way of enumeration but not by way of limitation, tin cans, bottles, rags,
paper, cardboard, sweepings.
42. Scavenging. The uncontrolled removal of materials at any point in solid waste management.
43. Solid Waste. Garbage, rubbish, recyclables and other useless, unwanted or discarded material
from agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial or institutional activities. Solid waste does not
include solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage.
44. Solid Waste Facility. Has the meaning specified in Sec. 289.01(35) Wis. Stats.
45. Solid Waste Treatment. Any method, technique or process which is designed to change the
physical, chemical, or biological character, or composition of solid waste. Treatment includes
incineration.
46. Steel Container. A steel food or beverage container, commonly referred to as a tin can.
47. Storage. The interim containment of solid waste in an approved manner after generation and
prior to collection and ultimate disposal.
48. Storage Areas. Areas where persons place containers during non-collection days as well as
areas where containers are set out on collection day.
49. Waste Tire. A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose because of wear, damage, or
defect.
50. Whitegoods. Heavy consumer durables, namely large appliances such as air conditioners,
refrigerators, stoves etc.
51. Yard Waste. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush, including clean woody
vegetative material no greater than one-half (1/2) inch in diameter. This term does not include
stumps, roots, or shrubs with intact root balls.
52. Yard Waste Bag. Paper bag of thirty (30) gallon size.
53. Yard Waste Containers, Automated. City contractor supplied automated cart as approved by
Common Council for pickup by contractor.
54. Yard Waste Sticker. Yearly sticker for purchase to receive yard waste disposal curbside by
contractor. Cost as noted in City Fee Schedule.
55. Yard Waste Site. A site designated by the City of Onalaska Board of Public Works where citizens
may drop off non-woody yard waste.
56. Dumpster Sizing. Recommend dumpster size for Multiple Family Dwelling use shall be a
minimum of one-half (0.5) cubic yard per unit. E.g. four (4) unit = two (2) cubic yards; six (6) unit =
three (3) cubic yards, etc. If the property owner wishes to utilize a smaller size he/she shall
provide adequate proof of the Inspection Department that refuse generation will be less than
average at the proposed site. If loose debris becomes a problem at any residential or nonresidential
dumpster location, the Inspection Department in its discretion, may require pick-up
more frequently or larger sized dumpster.
Chapter 8 City Cemetery
Division 1 General Provisions
6.08.11 General Provisions
A. Policy Statement.
1. Purpose. The City of Onalaska Cemetery is owned and maintained by the City for the benefit of
all citizens. Definite rules and regulations must be set up by the Common Council to insure proper
maintenance and beauty and to prevent abuse and destruction. The following rules and
regulations are set forth in the Ordinances of this Section to govern the cemetery. The City
reserves the right to amend or change any of these Ordinances to conform with newly developed
cemetery practices.
2. Management.
a. Management. The management and control of the cemetery of the City of Onalaska shall be
vested in the Council's Administrative Committee.
b. Powers.
i. The Committee shall have the power to adopt rules, regulations, terms and conditions of
sales of lots, perpetual care, opening of graves and to make any and all regulations
necessary to maintain and manage the cemetery.
ii. The committee shall have the authority to employ necessary personnel for the proper
care and maintenance of the cemetery and to determine the conditions and remuneration
for the employees.
iii. The City Clerk and City Treasurer shall be the Secretary-Treasurer of the Cemetery Fund
and shall keep records of all receipts and disbursements.
3. Administration and Maintenance. The City Cemetery shall not have a Sexton. The City of
Onalaska Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the daily administration and
maintenance of the City of Onalaska cemetery.
B. Platting of New Cemetery Lots.
1. Platting. Before any new block of a municipal cemetery is opened for the sale of lots, the City
shall cause it to be platted and recorded in the office of the La Crosse County Register of Deeds.
2. Single Grave Section. The Common Council or its designee shall designate certain lots as a
single grave section, and lots therein shall be platted and sold as single grave lots. Unused
portions of lots repossessed for nonpayment of assessments for care may likewise be designated
and sold as single graves or otherwise.
C. Privileges and Restrictions.
1. No mound shall be raised upon any grave above the general level of the lot.
2. No hedges, fences or enclosures of any kind will be permitted on or around lots. Wooden boxes,
wire containers, glass jars, bottles, toys, cans and other such objects may not be placed on lots
and, if so placed, will be removed by the City without notice. Urns are not permitted on lots.
3. Each block in the cemetery will, prior to sale, be suitably marked by the City with metal, brick or
concrete.
4. The City reserves the right for its workers and those persons necessary to the performance of
normal cemetery operation to enter upon or cross over any lot in the cemetery in the performance
of such duties.
5. The City, or its employees, assumes no liability for damages to property or of persons, or for
physical or mental suffering arising out of the performance of its normal operations, or for loss by
vandalism or other acts beyond its reasonable control.
6. The City reserves the right to alter, change or close alleys, roadways, water mains and other
physical public properties of the cemetery.
D. Miscellaneous.
1. It is urged that lot owners interest themselves in the present and future care of their lots, as a
single neglected lot mars the beauty of the entire cemetery.
2. All fees and charges as outlined in the current schedule of fees and charged are payable at the
office of the City Clerk, where receipts will be issued for the amounts paid.
3. The City will take reasonable precautions to protect all private property, lots and/or grave owners’
property in the cemetery from loss or damage, but it distinctly disclaims all responsibility for loss
or damage from causes beyond its control and especially from the acts of thieves, vandals and
rioters and from all acts of Providence, including wind, tornadoes, hail, snow, rain and frost,
whether the damage be indirect or proximate.
4. For purposes of this Section, an infant shall be defined as a person under the age of two (2)
years old.
E. Rules and Regulations. All use of the City Cemetery shall be governed as outlined in Title 6,
Chapter 8of the City Ordinances and the City of Onalaska Rules and Regulations Standards, as
periodically updated by the Administrative Committee.
6.08.12 Purchase of Lots
A. Sale of Lots. Persons or their agents desiring to purchase a lot in the cemetery shall be referred to
the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works. The City of Onalaska Department of Public Works
will have available suitable plats showing size and price of lots, and such other information as may be
required, and will render assistance to those desiring to make lot purchases. Upon having a lot
selection, the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works will issue a lot order to the prospective
purchaser, or their agent, who will present the order at the office of the City Clerk. Upon receipt of
proper payment, the City Clerk shall issue a deed to the lot in the form prescribed by the City
Attorney. The deed shall be signed by the City Clerk and Mayor and sealed with the corporate seal
and acknowledged so as to entitle it to be recorded. The purchaser may record this deed with the La
Crosse County Register of Deeds. Lots are sold on a first-come, first-serve basis. Payment must be
made in full, lots will not be held or reserved.
B. Price of Lots. The price of a lot shall be as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. The price
of a lot(s) shall be paid at the office of the Financial Services Director no later than 5:00 P.M. two (2)
business days prior to the day of the grave opening or the grave will not be opened.
C. Fees. The fees charged for opening graves or vaults (including ashes buried in a vault) shall be as
set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. All fees shall be paid at the office of the City Clerk no
later than 5:00 P.M. two (2) business days prior to the day of the grave opening or the grave will not
be opened.
D. Cemetery Deed and Transfer Charges.
1. The consideration for the cemetery lots must be paid in full prior to the transfer of the deed.
2. There shall be a charge for the transfer of the ownership of cemetery gravesites in order to cover
the various administrative costs in effecting a transfer. Cost of transfer of a gravesite shall be as
set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule and this expense shall be borne by the seller of
the gravesite.
E. Marker and Monument Fees.
1. Marker and Monument fees shall be as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule and shall
be invoiced by the City of Onalaska at the time of placement of the marker/monument.
6.08.13 Ownership Rights of Internment
A. The lot owner or their authorized agent shall have the right to use a lot or portion of a lot for burial
purposes only in accordance with the terms of the cemetery rules and regulations.
1. Upon full payment of the purchase price of a lot, the City Clerk will issue a cemetery deed, and
the deed will be recorded in the records of the City as evidence of ownership of the lot. Lots, or
fractions of lots, for which lot deeds have been issued by the City, will not thereafter be divided
except by consent of the City. All lots are exempt from taxation and cannot be seized for debt
(except those owed to the cemetery) nor can they be mortgaged.
2. All repossessed vacant grave spaces shall be subject to the same fees and charges.
3. The lot owner shall have acquired the lot for interment of themselves and members of the owner’s
family. However, the lot owner may grant written permission (which must be notarized and placed
on file with the Clerk) for the burial of other persons. No corpse shall be interred in a lot except
the corpse of one having an interest therein, or a relative, or the husband, or wife of such person,
or their relative, except by the consent of all persons having an interest in the lot.
B. Unless otherwise directed in writing and filed with the City Clerk, the lot owner, the owner’s devisees,
or the owner’s heirs, the cemetery will permit the interment of members of the owner’s family at the
request of any interested person upon proof of eligibility for burial as follows:
1. The surviving spouse of the lot owner shall have the first right to interment or to direct the right of
interment.
2. When there is no surviving spouse, the devisees, or heirs of the owners, may, by agreement in
writing, determine who among them shall have the right of interment or direction for interment,
which agreement shall be filed with the City Clerk.
3. In the event the owner, the owner’s devisees or heirs shall not have arranged for future
interments, then the devisees or the heirs, as the case may be, of such owner, shall have the
right to interment in order of their need.
C. All burial rights in cemetery lots purchased from the City occupy the same position as real estate at
the death of the owner. Only such persons whose names appear on the cemetery records of the City
will be recognized as owners or part owners of lots. In case of the death of a lot owner, when the
cemetery lot is disposed of by a will, and when ownership is to be determined, a certified copy of the
will must be delivered to the City Clerk before the City will recognize the change of ownership. If the
deceased lot owner left no will, satisfactory proof of descent must be provided. It is recommended
that lot owners, in making their wills, include a provision covering the cemetery lots and devise the
same to one (1) person.
D. Lot owners may not resell or transfer their lots or parts of lots except as outlined below:
1. The City Clerk shall enter in the record kept for that purpose all deeds of transfer and
reconveyance of cemetery lots. No such reconveyance shall be received and recorded by the City
Clerk until the transfer fee has been paid therefor. Said fee shall go into the general municipal
fund.
2. Reconveyance of lots or parts of lots may be made only by written application therefor upon blanks
furnished by the City Clerk, the same to be approved by the Administrative Committee. Such
application shall be executed by the owner(s) of the lots, or if the owner(s) is deceased, by the
legal heirs. The application shall state the lot and block number.
3. No owner of a cemetery lot shall sell, transfer or assign the same or the unused portion thereof to
any other person without the City's consent. The City shall have the right of first refusal to
repurchase such lot or part thereof at the current grave price. If the owner of any lot or part of a lot
should sell or transfer the same without giving notice to the City, except through probate, of such
transaction, such sale or transfer shall be null and void.
E. Whenever possible, repossessed lots will be used for burials before new areas of the cemetery are
used or platted.
6.08.14 Care of Lots
A. For each saleable lot the distribution of funds is as follows: eighty percent (80%) for Cemetery
Operating, ten percent (10%) for Perpetual Care, and ten percent (10%) for Capital Improvements in
the Cemetery. A record shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. The fund may also be
increased by gifts, bequests, a portion of memorial charges and other service revenues.
B. "Perpetual care" shall be construed to mean the obligation which the City assumes to use the net
annual income received from the investments of the fund in furnishing such care as is furnished
similarly endowed lots in the cemetery. Such perpetual care shall be limited to the maintenance of
lawn, leaf disposal, filling sunken graves and raising of markers, caring for avenues, alleys, fences,
buildings and grounds in general. It is understood that such expenditures shall be made at the
discretion of the City. The City shall not be bound to make a separate investment of money set aside
for perpetual care from a particular lot sale, but the same shall be added to the perpetual care fund of
the City and the proceeds therefrom used by the City in the manner as heretofore provided. Nothing
herein shall be construed as obligating the City to any alleged existing contract as to perpetual care.
6.08.15 Rules for Visitors
A. The cemetery will be open to visitors between the hours one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise and onehalf
(1/2) hour after the official sunset. Permission to enter the cemetery at any other time must be
obtained from the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works.
B. Children under sixteen (16) years of age will be admitted only when accompanied by parents or
guardians.
C. Persons or picnic parties with refreshments or alcoholic beverages are not permitted within any
municipal cemetery.
D. All pets must be on a leash no longer than six (6) feet and under the control of the owner at all times.
Pet owners are required to curb their pets and dispose of waste in an appropriate waste receptacle.
E. Firearms shall not be allowed in the cemetery except in conjunction with military funerals. At all other
times, firearms, bows and arrows, sling shots and other like articles shall not be allowed.
F. Visitors are required to use the walks and drive whenever possible and shall not pick any flowers
(either wild or cultivated), injure any shrub, tree or plant, or mar or deface any monument, stone or
structure in the cemetery.
G. Vehicles traveling within the cemetery shall not exceed five (5) miles per hour. No vehicle shall be
driven except on roads designated for that purpose, nor shall such be driven in a reckless manner.
Vehicles may only park on established roadways.
H. Recreational walking, running, and bicycling are allowed only on paved surfaces.
I. The disposal of waste and litter is prohibited unless in the conjunction with general clean-up and
cemetery business.
6.08.16 Interments and Disinterment
A. Interments.
1. Interments will be made only during daylight hours.
2. All interments shall be made in a permanent outer container excluding the use of wood.
3. All graves shall be dug by the City under the direction of the City of Onalaska Department of
Public Works. Depth of graves shall conform to the Wisconsin State Board of Health
specifications. A charge for opening and closing a grave, including the sodding and seeding of
the plot will be made at a current rate set by the City. Said charge will be paid to the City Clerk
prior to performance of the service. No burial will be allowed until all fees have been paid to the
City Clerk and an authorization has been issued. This authorization must be presented to the
City of Onalaska Department of Public Works.
4. No burial will be permitted until a legal burial transit permit has been presented to the City of
Onalaska Department of Public Works. The interment of bodies of persons who have died of a
contagious disease shall be in strict accordance with the rules of the State Board of Health.
5. There will be no responsibility on the part of the City for the protection and maintenance of
flowers, wreaths, emblems, etc., used in conjunction with funerals.
6. The lot owner or funeral director shall designate on the interment form the location of the graves
on the lot to the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works and any change in location made
after the opening of a grave has begun shall be at the expense of the lot owner. When the
definite information for locating a grave is not available thirty-six (36) hours prior to grave
preparation to meet the time requested for interment, the cemetery may exercise its best
judgment in making a location order that the requested time for interment may be met. The
cemetery assumes no responsibility for any error or inconvenience of such location and an
additional charge will be made for any change requested.
7. The City of Onalaska Department of Public Works shall, whenever possible, be given thirty-six
(36) hours’ notice to assure the opening and preparation of a grave prior to interment. Banning
unforeseen or other untoward circumstances, such grave shall be opened and prepared in time
for interment.
8. When several burials occur in a one (1) or two (2) day period, said burials may be scheduled at
the discretion of the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works, but in a prompt and efficient
manner.
9. The interments of two (2) adult bodies in one (1) grave will not be allowed, except in case of
mother and infant, twin children, or two (2) children buried at the same time or in special
circumstances with the approval of the Administrative Committee.
10. An approved concrete liner or approved concrete vault shall be required when a body is interred.
11. No interment of any body or cremains of any body other than that of a human being will be
permitted in the cemetery.
12. Where a human body has been cremated, the cremains may be interred. The Administrative
Committee shall make proper regulations as to the receptacles and the number of interments
allowed on a single lot. Four (4) cremains or three (3) cremains and one (1) full body burial shall
be allowed on any one (1) lot, provided that the one (1) full body burial must be placed first before
any cremains can be buried. No exceptions to the maximum number of interments shall be
made. No cremains shall be scattered on private lots or on cemetery property.
13. If any structure, display or inscription placed in or on any lot is determined by the Administrative
Committee to be offensive or improper or injurious to the appearance of the surrounding lots or
grounds, the Administrative Committee shall have the right to enter upon such lot and remove the
offensive or improper object or objects.
14. No tree growing within or beside any lot shall be cut down or disturbed or any structure upon or
around any lot be removed or disturbed without the consent of the Administrative Committee.
15. The interment of up to four (4) cremains shall be allowed in a single adult grave space, as set
forth above. This grave space can have only one (1) single marker monument and may contain
the names of each individual interred.
B. Infant Burial.
1. When infants are buried in the "Infant Burial Section" of the cemetery, all markers shall be placed
at the head of the grave site and shall be flush with the ground.
2. When infants are buried on existing occupied grave sites not designated as "Infant Burial
Section," markers shall be flush with the ground. One (1) monument and one (1) marker shall be
allowed.
3. Infants buried on unoccupied grave sites other than in the "Infant Burial Section" shall be buried
at the head of the grave site so as not to interfere with future burial in the same grave. One (1)
monument with two (2) names will only be allowed.
4. The interment of only one (1) cremains will be allowed in a single infant grave site.
C. Disinterments.
1. Disinterments of bodies from graves in the cemetery shall be made only by the City in
accordance with the requirements of the State Board of Health. Charges set by the City for
removal must be paid in advance.
2. Lot owners, or their heirs, desiring graves opened may secure the necessary disinterment permit
from the State and deliver the same to the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works.
3. For sanitary reasons, graves will not be reopened for inspection except for an official
investigation.
D. Interment of Ashes in Monuments. In the event that ashes of a deceased are to be interred inside a
monument, the City shall be notified in writing of such interment prior to the interment. In addition, the
name of each deceased whose ashes are so interred shall be engraved on the monument. A charge
as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule shall be paid to the City for the ashes of each
deceased interred in a monument, which sum shall be paid prior to such interment.
6.08.17 Monuments, Markers, Vaults and Mausoleums
A. Monuments and Markers.
1. Grave markers and foundations will be set only by the monument company according to
regulations specified by the City. Except as herein otherwise provided, under no conditions will
the City construct monument or marker bases or erect monument or markers on bases. The City
reserves the right to require the construction of a foundation of such size, material and design as
will provide ample insurance against settlement or injury to the stone work. The top of the
concrete foundation will be constructed flush with the ground line. All foundations must be six (6)
inches thick with a four (4) inch overlap and have a one and one-half (1 ½) inch diameter hole on
top for placement of a flower pot holder. Large monuments may require thicker foundations
unless reinforcing is used. A permit shall be required from the office of the City Clerk, with a fee
as outlined in the City Fee Schedule. Monuments or markers are allowed on single grave sites
with a maximum length of twenty-four (24) inches by twelve (12) inches wide, except in the "Infant
Burial Section" where flush markers are allowed only. Two (2) grave lots can have either single or
double markers or monuments of thirty-six (36) inches in length and twelve (12) inches in width.
Three (3) graves may have a monument suitable to the size of the lot.
2. The setting and design of monuments, stones and markers and the transportation of all tools,
materials, etc., within the cemetery ground shall be subject to the supervision and approval of the
City of Onalaska Department of Public Works. Unless special arrangements are made with the
City of Onalaska Department of Public Works, such work shall be conducted between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, except on national holidays. Whenever
possible, at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be given to the City of Onalaska Department
of Public Works that said work is to take place. Heavy trucking will not be permitted within the
cemetery when, in the opinion of the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works, such work
might cause damage to the driveways. Except when special permission is obtained, all work as
outlined above shall be completed and debris removed immediately.
3. The City reserves the right to refuse permission to erect any monument work not in keeping with
the good appearance of the grounds. The size of the monument and/or stone work must be given
to the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works and approved before said work will be
permitted on a lot. All monuments must be set in line with other monuments so far as possible as
directed by the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works.
4. Stone work or monument work, once placed on its foundation, shall not be removed, except by
permission of the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works.
5. The lot must be paid in full or other assurance given of payment before markers and monuments
are set.
6. Temporary markers must be removed or replaced with a permanent marker within
one (1) year.
7. All monuments and markers must be of granite which has a known reputation for durability and
permanence in color. Veterans' Administration markers of bronze are acceptable.
B. Vaults and Mausoleums.
1. All vaults constructed, lots enclosed, monuments erected and other improvements made shall be
under the supervision of the Administrative Committee.
2. Plans for a vault, tomb or mausoleum must be submitted to the Administrative Committee for its
approval.
6.08.18 Trees, Shrubs, Flowers, and Decorations
A. The planting of trees and shrubs on newly purchased lots or parts of lots will not be permitted except
by approval of the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works. No yew trees or evergreens of any
kind will be allowed on cemetery lots. If any existing yew trees or evergreens die, they cannot be
replaced. If not taken care of properly, they will be removed. Nothing will be allowed to hang from any
tree, shrub, monument or marker, etc. (e.g.: bird feeders, windsocks, bird houses, etc.)
B. Lot owners may remove under the direction of the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works large
trees on gravesites that hinder the full usage of the gravesite. The expense of the tree and stump
removal shall be paid for by the lot owners.
C. Fresh cut flowers may be used anytime. Containers for cut flowers are to be of a type level with the
ground surface and not holding water when not in use, or of the type to be disposed of when flowers
are removed. The planting of perennial flowers is prohibited. If these plants and flowers are not
maintained and when they become unsightly or undesirable they will be removed by the City without
notice.
D. Potted plants may be set on lots, without disturbing the sod, on special occasions, such as Memorial
Day, birthday, anniversary, etc., but if not removed within five (5) days will be picked up without notice
and destroyed if unsightly, or preserved for use in beds within the cemetery if suitable. A flower vase
as recommended by the cemetery in front of markers or monuments is permissible. Any vase or vase
stand that is not in use for one (1) year or more will be removed by the City of Onalaska Department
of Public Works without notice. Shepherds hooks will be allowed, one (1) per site, and must be at
least twenty-four (24) inches from the lowest part of the hanging pot to the ground, and installed
immediately against the monument. Winter decorations will be allowed after November 15th but will
be removed April 15th and destroyed. Other artificial pieces, including grave blankets and wreaths
may be used during this period only. Wreaths on wire stands must also be placed at the head of the
lot.
E. Artificial decorations are prohibited unless in a vase or pot, when used, will be treated as potted
plants. All artificial flowers displayed in the cemetery must be in containers and placed at the head of
the grave lot. Any artificial flowers not in containers will be removed from the cemetery by the City of
Onalaska Department of Public Works without notice. Urns are not permitted on lots sold after
November 23, 2001. Existing urns shall be removed by the City as they become unsightly or
deteriorated and shall not be replaced. However before such an urn is destroyed or discarded the last
owner of record of the lot shall be notified by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested
that such urn has been removed from the grave and will be destroyed unless the owner thereof
claims the same within thirty days after mailing of such letter.
F. Plants or flowers may not be taken up or removed from the cemetery or cuttings removed from plants
without permission from the City of Onalaska Department of Public Works or under its direction.
G. Vines that interfere with the proper care of lots or graves and injure the grass will be removed when
found objectionable.
H. No benches will be allowed on private lots.
I. All landscaping, care of lots and other work in the cemetery shall be done by the City of Onalaska
Public Works department or its designee, but it is desired that each lot owner feel free to consult with
those in charge of the cemetery at all times. The City shall retain the ownership of all aisles, including
monument aisles.
J. Twice per year, spring and fall, all decorations, natural or artificial are to be removed from grave
spaces to allow for the general cleanup of the cemetery. Spring cleanup will be from April 1 to April
15. Fall cleanup will be from October 15 to November 1. New summer decorations may be placed
after May 1. New winter decorations may be placed after November 15. The City is not responsible
for decorations disposed of during spring or fall clean-up.
K. The following decorations are not permitted: toys, mementos, figurines, lighting border edging,
fencing, benches, rocks, gravel, bricks, or mulch. Styrofoam constructed decorations, vases, and
standing easels are prohibited.
L. All shepherd hooks must be placed as close as possible to the left or right side of the marker. Basket
must hang over the marker with no decorations infringing upon adjacent grave lots.
M. The City is not responsible for reimbursement for any plants or decorations removed or damaged by
City Staff during normal maintenance activities.
N. The City has the right to remove and maintain (trim) any tree or shrub situated on any lot which
becomes, by means of roots, branches, condition or in any other respect, detrimental to the adjacent
lots, roads or general appearance of the grounds. Trees or shrubs may also be removed or trimmed
which restrict access to grave sites for burials or maintenance purposes.
Chapter 9 Penalties and Legal Remedies
Division 1 Penalties and Legal Remedies
06.09.01 Penalties and Legal Remedies
A. General. Any person who violates any provision of this Title, or orders authorized by this Title, will,
unless otherwise indicated in this Title, upon first conviction, forfeit not less than Two Hundred Dollars
($200.00), together with the costs of prosecution for the first violation. For the second violation of the
same provision or order, the person shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) plus the costs of prosecution. A third offense for the same provision or order under this
Section, shall result, upon conviction, of a forfeit not less than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).
B. Legal Remedies. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section, shall, in addition to
the forfeiture stated above, be liable for any damage to the Water Utility, including loss of revenue
from the same of water or sewage service resulting from a violation of these rules and regulations.
Whether the Water Utility must take corrective action with respect to any parcel of property, such
parcel may be specifically assessed for such work. The payment of damages and correction of
violations may be a condition of providing future water or sewage service.
C. Other Remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the City or any authorized
officer from proceeding under any other ordinance of law or by any other enforcement method to
enforce any ordinance, regulation, or order.
Chapter 1
Licensing of Dogs and Cats
Regulation of Animals
7-1-1 Dog or Cat Licenses Required; Definitions
7-1-2 Rabies Vaccination Required for License
7-1-3 Issuance of Dog, Cat and Multiple Dog Licenses
7-1-4 Late Fees
7-1-5 Rabies Quarantine
7-1-6 Restrictions on Keeping of Dogs, Cats, Fowl and Other Animals
7-1-7 Impoundment of Animals
7-1-8 Dogs and Cats Restricted – Cemeteries and Transportation
7-1-9 Duty of Owner in Cases of Dog or Cat Bite
7-1-10 Animal Feces
7-1-11 Injury to Property by Animals
7-1-12 Barking Dogs or Crying Cats
7-1-13 Prohibited and Protected Animals, Fowl, Reptiles and Insects
7-1-14 Sale of Rabbits, Chicks or Artificially Colored Animals
7-1-15 Providing Proper Food and Drink to Confined Animals
7-1-16 Providing Proper Shelter
7-1-17 Neglected or Abandoned Animals
7-1-18 Cruelty to Animals and Birds Prohibited
7-1-19 Trapping of Animals
7-1-20 Dognapping and Catnapping
7-1-21 Vehicle Accidents
7-1-22 Keeping of Bees
7-1-23 Limitation on Number of Dogs and Cats
7-1-24 Penalties
Sec. 7-1-1 Dog or Cat License Required; Definitions.
(a) License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person in the City of Onalaska to own,
harbor or keep any dog or cat more than five (5) months of age without complying with the
provisions of this Chapter relating to the listing, licensing and tagging of the same.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-1
(b) Definitions. In this Chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise require:
(1) “Animal Shelter” means any facility operated by a humane society, or municipal
agency or its authorized agents
(2) "Owner" shall mean any person owning, harboring, fostering or keeping a dog or cat
and the occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat remains or to which it
customarily returns daily for a period of seven (7) days; such person is presumed to
be harboring, fostering or keeping the dog or cat within the meaning of this Section.
(3) "At large" means to be off the premises of the owner and not under the control of
some person either by leash, but a dog or cat within an automobile of its owner, or in
an automobile of any other person with the consent of the owner of said dog or cat,
shall be deemed to be upon the owner's premises.
(4) "Dog" shall mean any canine, regardless of age or sex.
(5) "Cat" shall mean any feline, regardless of age or sex.
(6) "Neutered" as used herein as describing a dog or cat shall mean a dog or cat having
nonfunctional reproductive organs.
(7) "Animal" means mammals, reptiles and birds.
(8) "Cruel" means causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or unjustifiable
injury or death.
(9) "Law Enforcement Officer" has that meaning as appears in Sec. 967.02(5), Wis.
Stats., and includes a humane officer under Sec. 58.07, Wis. Stats., but does not
include a conservation warden appointed under Sec. 23.10, Wis. Stats.
(10) "Farm Animal" means any warm-blooded animal normally raised on farms in the
United States and used for food or fiber.
(11) "Pet" means an animal kept and treated as a pet.
State Law Reference: Sections 174.05 through 174.10, Wis. Stats.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-2 Rabies Vaccination Required for License.
(a) Rabies Vaccination. The owner of a dog or cat shall have the dog or cat vaccinated
against rabies by a veterinarian no later than five (5) months of age and re-vaccinated
within one (1) year after the initial vaccination. If the owner obtains such animal or
brings such animal into the City of Onalaska after the dog or cat has reached four (4)
months of age, the owner shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies within thirty
(30) days after the dog or cat is brought into the City unless such animal has been
vaccinated as evidenced by a current certificate of rabies vaccination. The owner of a
dog or cat shall have such animal re-vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian before
the date of that immunization expires as stated on the certificate of vaccination or, if no
date is specified, within two (2) years after the previous vaccination. The certificate of
vaccination shall meet the requirements of Sec. 95.21(2), Wis. Stats.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-2
(b) Issuance of Certificate of Rabies Vaccination. A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or
cat against rabies shall complete and issue to the owner a certificate of rabies vaccination
bearing a serial number and in the form approved by the City stating the owner's name and
address, the name, sex, spayed or unspayed, neutered or unneutered, breed and color of
the dog or cat, the date of the vaccination, the type of rabies vaccination administered and
the manufacturer's serial number, the date that the immunization expires as specified for
that type of vaccine by the Center for Disease Control of the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services and the City.
(c) Copies of Certificate. The veterinarian shall keep a copy of each certificate of rabies
vaccination in a file maintained for this purpose until the date that the immunization
expires or until the dog or cat is revaccinated, whichever occurs first.
(d) Rabies Vaccination Tag. After issuing the certificate of rabies vaccination, the
veterinarian shall deliver to the owner a rabies vaccination tag of durable material bearing
the same serial number as the certificate, the year the vaccination was given and the name,
address and telephone number of the veterinarian.
(e) Tag to be Attached. The owner shall attach the rabies vaccination tag or a substitute tag
to a collar and a collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog or cat at all times, but
this requirement does not apply to a dog or cat during competition. The substitute tag
shall be of a durable material and contain the same information as the rabies vaccination
tag. The requirements of this paragraph do not apply to a dog or cat which is not required
to be vaccinated under Subsection (a).
(f) Duplicate Tag. The veterinarian may furnish a new rabies vaccination tag with a new
serial number to an owner in place of the original tag upon presentation of the certificate
of rabies vaccination. The veterinarian shall then indicate the new tag number on the
certificate and keep a record in the file.
(g) Cost. The owner shall pay the cost of the rabies vaccination and the cost associated with
the issuance of a certificate of rabies vaccination and the delivery of a rabies vaccination
tag.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-3 Issuance of Dog, Cat, and Multiple Dog Licenses.
(a) Dog/Cat Licenses.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person in the City of Onalaska to own, harbor or keep
any dog or cat more than five (5) months of age without complying with the
provisions of Sec. 174.05 through Sec. 174.10, Wis. Stats., relating to the listing,
licensing and tagging of the same.
(2) The owner of any dog or cat more than five (5) months of age on January 1 of any
year, or five (5) months of age within the license year, shall annually, or on or
before the date the dog or cat becomes five (5) months of age, pay a license tax and
obtain a license.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-3
(3) The minimum license tax under this Section for a spayed female or neutered dog shall
be reflected on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. The minimum license tax under
this Section for a spayed female or neutered cat shall be the same amount as for a
dog. The minimum license tax under this Section for an unsprayed female or
unneutered dog shall be reflected on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. The
minimum license tax under this Section for an unsprayed female or unneutered cat
shall be the same amount as for a dog.
(4) Upon payment of the required license tax and upon presentation of evidence that the
dog or cat is currently immunized against rabies, as required by Section 7-1-2 of this
Chapter, the City Clerk shall complete and issue to the owner a license for such dog
or cat containing all information required by state law. The City Clerk shall also
deliver to the owner, at the time of issuance of the license, a tag of durable material
bearing the same serial number as the license, the name of the county in which
issued and the license year.
(5) The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar and the collar with the tag
attached shall be kept on the dog or cat for which the license is issued at all times,
except as provided in Section 7-1-2(e).
(6) The fact that a dog or cat is without a tag attached to the dog or cat by means of a
collar shall be presumptive evidence that the dog or cat is unlicensed. Any City
police or humane officer shall seize, impound or restrain any dog or cat for which a
dog license or cat license is required which is found without such tag attached.
(7) Notwithstanding the foregoing, every dog specifically trained to lead blind or deaf
persons is exempt from the dog license tax, and every person owning such a dog
shall receive annually a free dog license from the City Clerk upon application
therefore.
(b) Multiple Dog Licenses.
(1) Any person who keeps or possesses multiple dogs may, instead of the license tax for
each dog required by this Chapter, apply for a multiple pet license for the keeping or
possession of multiple dogs. Such person shall pay for the license year a license tax
as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule for four (4) or fewer dogs plus a
City administrative fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule.
(2) The owner or keeper of a multiple pet license shall keep at all times a multiple dog
license tag attached to the collar of each dog over five (5) months old kept by the
owner or keeper under a multiple dog license but this requirement does not apply to
a show dog during competition. These tags may be transferred from one dog to
another within the location that keeps or possesses multiple dogs whenever any dog
is removed from said location. The rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag shall
remain attached to the dog for which it is issued at all times but this requirement
does not apply to a show dog during competition. No dog bearing a multiple dog tag
shall be permitted to stray or to be taken anywhere outside the limits of the location
in which said dog is kept or housed unless the dog is in leash or temporarily for the
purposes of hunting, breeding, trial, training or competition.
State Law Reference: Sec. 174.053, Wis. Stats.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-4
Sec. 7-1-4 Late Fees.
The City Clerk shall assess and collect a late fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee
Schedule from every owner of a dog or cat five (5) months of age or over if the owner failed to
obtain a license prior to April 1 of each year, or within thirty (30) days of acquiring ownership
of a licensable cat or if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the cat reached
licensable age. Said late fee shall be charged in addition to the required license fee.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-5 Biting and Rabies Quarantine.
(a) Dogs and Cats Confined. If a district is quarantined for rabies, all dogs and cats within
the City shall be kept securely confined, tied, leashed or muzzled. Any dog or cat not
confined, tied, leashed or muzzled is declared a public nuisance and may be impounded.
All officers shall cooperate in the enforcement of the quarantine. The City Clerk shall
promptly post in at least three (3) public places in the City notices of quarantine.
(b) Exemption of Vaccinated Dog or Cat from City Quarantine. A dog or cat which is
immunized currently against rabies, as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies
vaccination or other evidence, is exempt from the City quarantine provisions of
Subsection (a) if a rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag is attached to the dog's or cat's
collar.
(c) Quarantine or Sacrifice of an Animal Suspected of Biting a Person or Being Infected
or Exposed to Rabies.
(1) Quarantine or sacrifice of dog, cat or other animal. The owner of any dog, cat or
other animal which has bitten any other person, is infected with rabies or is
suspected to have been in contact with a rabid animal shall, upon demand of a
Humane Officer or Police Department, produce and surrender up such dog, cat or
other animal to be held in quarantine for a minimum of ten (10) days. If a
quarantine cannot be imposed because the dog, cat or animal cannot be captured, the
Humane Officer or Police Officer may kill the animal only as a last resort. The
officer shall attempt to kill the animal in a humane manner and in a manner which
avoids damage to the animal's head.
(d) Quarantine.
(1) Delivery to Animal Shelter or quarantine on premises of owner. An officer who
orders a dog, cat or animal to be quarantined shall deliver the animal or shall order
the animal delivered to an Animal Shelter or a veterinary hospital of the owner’s
choice as soon as possible but no later than twenty-four (24) hours after the original
order is issued or the officer may order the animal to be quarantined on the premises
of the owner if the animal is immunized currently against rabies as evidenced by a
valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence. Charges for boarding of
such animal during the quarantine period shall be assumed by the owner of such
animal. During quarantine, the animal shall be securely confined and kept from
contact with any other animal.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-5
(2) Risk to animal health. If a dog, cat or other animal is ordered by a Humane Officer,
Police Department or County Health Department to be quarantined because there is
reason to believe that the animal has been exposed to a rabid animal and if the dog,
cat or animal is not currently immunized against rabies, the custodian of an Animal
Shelter or the owner shall produce and surrender up such animal to the Department to
be held in quarantine at a veterinary hospital for a period needed by the veterinarian
to determine if it is rabid or not. The owner shall assume the charge for boarding such
animal during the quarantine period. The owner shall be required to have the animal
immunized against rabies prior to removing the animal from quarantine.
(3) Sacrifice of a dog or cat exhibiting symptoms of rabies. If a licensed veterinarian
diagnoses a dog, cat or animal in quarantine as having rabies during the original or
extended observation period, the veterinarian shall notify the owner and the officer
who ordered the animal quarantined and the animal shall be humanely euthanized
and the head of such animal sent to the State Laboratory of Hygiene for pathological
examination and confirmation of diagnosis. The State Laboratory of Hygiene shall
examine the specimen and notify the City, veterinarian and local health department
of their findings, and if the animal is suspected to have bitten a person, that person or
the person’s physician.
(e) Cooperation of Veterinarian. Any practicing licensed veterinarian who is requested to be
involved in the rabies control program by an officer is encouraged to cooperate in a
professional capacity with the City, the Laboratory of Hygiene, Animal Shelter, the local
health department, the officer involved and, if the animal is suspected to have bitten a
person, the person's physician.
(f) Responsibility for Quarantine and Laboratory Expenses. The owner of an animal is
responsible for any expenses incurred in connection with keeping the animal in an
Animal Shelter, supervision and examination of the animal by a veterinarian, preparation
and transport for laboratory examination and the fee for the laboratory examination. If
the owner is unknown, the county is responsible for preparation and testing/shipping fees
and the City of Onalaska is responsible for quarantine costs.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-6 Restrictions on Keeping of Dogs, Cats, Fowl and Other Animals.
(a) Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person within the City of Onalaska to own,
harbor or keep any dog, cat or animal which:
(1) Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway in the City.
(2) Assaults or attacks any person as described in Subsection (b) or destroys property.
(3) Is habitually at large within the limits of the City.
(4) Habitually barks or howls to the annoyance of any person or persons. (See Section
71-12.)
(5) Kills, wounds or bites any domestic animal.
(6) Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have been bitten by an
animal known to have been infected with rabies.
(7) In the case of a cat or dog, is unlicensed.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-6
(b) Vicious Dogs and Animals.
(1) For purposes of enforcing this Section, a dog shall be deemed as being of a vicious
disposition if, within any twelve (12) month period it bites two (2) or more persons
or inflicts serious injury to one (1) person in unprovoked circumstances.
(2) No person shall harbor or permit to remain on their premises any animal that is
habitually inclined toward attacking persons or animals, destroying property,
barking excessively or making excessive noises or running after automobiles.
(c) Animals Running at Large.
(1) No person having in their possession or ownership any animal or fowl shall allow
the same to run at large within the City. The owner of any animal, whether licensed
or unlicensed, shall keep its animal tied or enclosed in a proper enclosure so as not
to allow said animal to interfere with the passing public or neighbors. Any animal
running at large unlicensed and required by state law or City Ordinance to be
licensed shall be seized and impounded by a humane or law enforcement officer. For
the purposes of this section, the phrase “running at large” embraces all other places
within the City except the owner’s premises. This includes all streets, alleys,
sidewalks or other public or private property which may be about the owner’s
premises.
(2) A dog or cat shall not be considered to be running at large if it is on a leash and
under control of a person physically able to control it.
(d) Cat Control.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of a cat to permit the same to run at
large within the City. A cat is deemed to be at large when off the premises of its
owner or keeper and not under their control by means of a leash, by being carried, or
physically restrained. "Premises of the owner or keeper" is defined to be their
dwelling house, garage and other buildings located on the land they have in their
possession and the land itself. Premises also include any motor vehicle normally
driven by the owner or keeper wherever located. For the purposes of this section, the
phrase “running at large” embraces all other places within the City except the
owner’s premises. This includes all streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public or
private property which may be about the owner’s premises.
(2) It shall be the duty of every police or animal control officer to seize and impound
any stray cat or cat running at large. Said officer shall immediately ascertain, if
possible, the identity of the owner or keeper of each cat so seized by diligent
inquiry.
(3) If returned to the owner or keeper, said person shall pay to the City the
veterinary fee, if any, and a forfeiture. Any cat not claimed within seven
(7) days shall be disposed of in a proper and humane manner.
(e) Owner's Liability for Damage Caused by Dogs; Penalties. The provisions of
Sec. 174.02, Wis. Stats., relating to the owner's liability for damage caused by dogs
together with the penalties therein set forth are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-6
(f) Transportation of Animals. No person may keep or transport any animals in or upon any
vehicle in a cruel manner. No person shall lead any animal upon any street or alley from a
motor vehicle or from a trailer or semi-trailer drawn by a motor vehicle. No person may
transport or leave unattended any animal in an open vehicle bed unless it is confined inside
a carrier that is secured to the vehicle.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-7 Impoundment of Animals.
(a) Animal Control Agency.
(1) The City of Onalaska may contract with or enter into an agreement with such person,
persons, organization or corporation to provide for the operation of an animal shelter,
impoundment of stray animals, confinement of certain animals, disposition of
impoundment animals and for assisting in the administration of rabies vaccination
programs.
(2) The City of Onalaska does hereby delegate any such animal control agency the
authority to act pursuant to the provisions of this.
(b) Impounding of Animals. In addition to any penalty hereinafter provided for a violation of
this Chapter, any Police or Humane Officer may impound any dog, cat or other animal
which habitually pursues any vehicle upon any street, alley or highway of this City,
assaults or attacks any person, is at large within the City, habitually barks, cries or howls,
kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal or is infected with rabies.
(c) Claiming Animal; Disposal of Unclaimed Animals. After seizure of animals under this
Section by a law enforcement or humane officer, the animal shall be impounded at the
Animal Shelter. For those animals that are impounded as strays or abandoned, if within
four (4) days the owner does not claim such animal, the Animal Shelter may dispose of
the animal in as provided for under Wisconsin Statute, provided that if an animal before
being impounded has bitten a person, the animal shall be retained in the designated
Animal Shelter for ten (10) days for observation purposes. For all other animals, if within
seven (7) days the owner does not claim such animal, the Animal Shelter may dispose of
the animal in a proper and humane manner provided that if an animal before being
impounded has bitten a person, the animal shall be retained in the designated Animal
Shelter for ten (10) days for observation purposes. Within such times, the owner may
reclaim the animal upon payment of impoundment fees, such fees to be established by
resolution of the Common Council. No animal shall be released from the Animal Shelter
without being properly licensed if so required by state law or City Ordinance. In any case
where the owner of an animal is known and the owner does not claim such animal within
the applicable time period as set forth above, the owner shall be assessed all costs for the
impoundment and disposal of such animal. Any fees not paid within thirty (30) days of
invoice for impoundment or disposal shall be placed as a special charge on the property
tax roll pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.0207.
(d) City Not Liable for Impounding Animals. The City and/or its animal control agency
shall not be liable for the death of any animal which has been impounded or disposed of
pursuant to this Section.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-8
Sec. 7-1-8 Dogs and Cats Restricted on Cemeteries.
No dog, cat or other pet shall be permitted in any public cemetery. Every dog specially trained to
lead blind persons shall be exempt from this Section.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-9 Duty of Owner in Case of Dog or Cat Bite.
(a) General Requirements. Every owner or person harboring or keeping a dog or cat who
knows that such dog or cat has bitten any person shall immediately report such fact to the
Police Department and shall keep such dog or cat confined for not less than ten (10) days
or for such period of time as the Police Department shall direct. The owner or keeper of
any such dog or cat shall surrender the dog or cat to a law enforcement or humane officer
upon demand for examination.
(b) Specific Responsibilities of a Pet Owner.
(1) Animal Bites. The owner of any dog, cat, ferret, or other animal which has bitten
any person shall, upon demand of the Humane Officer or Health Department, produce
and surrender up such dog, cat, ferret or other animal to such department to be held in
quarantine subject to the requirements of Section 7-1-5 above.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-10 Animal Feces.
The owner or person in charge of any dog or other animal shall not permit solid fecal matter of
such animal to deposit on any street, alley or other public or private property, unless such matter
is immediately removed therefrom by said owner or person in charge. This Section shall not
apply to a person who is visually or physically handicapped.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-11 Injury to Property by Animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing an animal, dog or cat to permit such
animal, dog or cat to go upon any parkway or private lands or premises without the permission
of the owner of such premises and break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flower bed,
plant, shrub, tree or garden in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate or urinate thereon.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-12
Sec. 7-1-12 Barking Dogs or Crying Cats.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to keep or harbor any dog which habitually
barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which habitually cries or howls to the great discomfort of the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy
persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. A dog, animal or cat is considered to be in violation of this
Section when two (2) formal, written complaints are filed with the Police Department within a
four (4) week period.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-13 Prohibited and Protected Animals, Fowl, Reptiles and Insects.
(a) Protected Animals.
(1) Possession and Sale of Protected Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to possess with intent to sell or offer for sale, or buy or attempt to
buy, within the City any of the following animals, alive or dead, or any part or
product thereof: all wild cats of the family felidae, polar bear (thalarctos maritimus),
red wolf (canis niger), vicuna (vicugna vicugna), or alligator, caiman or crocodile of
the order of crocodilia, gray or timber wolf (canis lupus), sea otter (enhydra lutris),
Pacific ridley turtle (lepidochelys olivacea), Atlantic green turtle (chelonia mydas),
Mexican ridley turtle (lepidochelys kempi).
(2) Compliance with Federal Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to buy, sell or offer for sale a native or foreign species or subspecies of
mammal, bird, amphibian or reptile, or the dead body or parts thereof, which appears
on the endangered species list designated by the United States Secretary of the
Interior and published in the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to the
Endangered Species Act of 1969 (Public Law 135, 91st Congress).
(3) Regulating the Importation of Certain Birds. No person, firm or corporation shall
import or cause to be imported into this City any part of the plumage, skin or dead
body of any species of hawk, owl or eagle. This paragraph shall not be construed to
forbid or restrict the importation or use of the plumage, skin, body or any part
thereof legally collected for use by the American Indians for ceremonial purposes or
in the preservation of their tribal customs and heritage.
(b) Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection (a) above shall not be deemed to prevent the
lawful importation, possession, purchase or sale of any species by any public agency,
institute of higher learning, persons holding federal permits, or by a person holding a
Scientific Collectors Permit issued by the Secretary of the Department of Natural
Resources of the state, or to any person or organization licensed to present a circus.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-13
(c) Wild Animals; Prohibition on Keeping. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep,
maintain or have in their possession or under their control within the City any poisonous
reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal, insect or reptile, any vicious or
dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or
dangerous propensities. Specifically, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain
or have in their possession or under their control a wild animal as defined under Wis. Stat.
169.01(37) to include any animal of a wild nature that is normally found in the wild and
that is not a domestic animal.
(d) Snakes. Owners of snakes over nine (9) feet in length shall register the snake(s) with the
City Clerk’s office on a form provided by the City Clerk’s office for information
purposes. There shall be no fee to register a snake in the City of Onalaska. Snake
registration must be updated each time the snake changes residence within the City of
Onalaska or relocates outside of the City of Onalaska. Rock Pythons, Reticulated Pythons,
Green Anacondas and Scrub Pythons are illegal and prohibited at any length.
(e) Domestic Animals in Agricultural Zones. Except in properly zoned districts, horses,
mules, ponies, donkeys, cows, pigs, goats, sheep, chickens or any animal raised for
fur-bearing purposes shall not be permitted unless otherwise permitted elsewhere in this
Code. If zoned agriculturally or if a nonconforming use permits the harboring of domestic
animals such as cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats, poultry or rabbits, it is required that no
enclosure be within twenty-five (25) feet of any building used for residency purposes by
anyone other than the home owner and be it further required that the enclosure not be
within twenty-five (25) feet of where food is prepared, kept or sold.
(f) Exceptions. The prohibitions of Subsection (c) and (d) above shall not apply where the
creatures are in the care, custody or control of: a veterinarian for treatment; agricultural
fairs; shows or projects of the 4-H Clubs; a display for judging purposes; an itinerant or
transient carnival, circus or other show; dog or cat shows or trials; public or private
educational institutions; zoological gardens; if:
(1) Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the City.
(2) All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so
maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors.
(3) Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape.
(4) No person lives or resides within one hundred (100) feet of the quarters in which the
animals are kept.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-14 Sale of Rabbits, Chicks or Artificially Colored Animals.
(a) No person may sell, offer for sale, raffle, give as a prize or premium, use as an advertising
device or display living chicks, ducklings, other fowl or rabbits that have been dyed or
otherwise colored artificially.
(b) (1) No person may sell, offer for sale, barter or give away living chicks, ducklings or
other fowl without providing proper brooder facilities for the care of such chicks,
ducklings or other fowl during the time they are in such person's care, custody or
control.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-14
(2) No retailer, as defined in Sec. 100.30(2)(g), Wis. Stats., may sell, offer for sale, barter
or give away living baby rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl under two (2)
months of age, in any quantity less than six (6), unless the purpose of selling these
animals is for agricultural, wildlife or scientific purposes.
State Law Reference: Sec. 951.10 and951.11, Wis. Stats.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-15 Providing Proper Food and Drink to Confined Animals.
(a) No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding any animal may refuse or
neglect to supply the animal with a sufficient supply of food and water as prescribed in
this Section.
(b) The food shall be sufficient to maintain all animals in good health.
(c) If potable water is not accessible to the animals at all times, it shall be provided daily and
in sufficient quantity for the health of the animal.
State Law Reference: Sec. 951.13, Wis. Stats.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-16 Providing Proper Shelter.
(a) Proper Shelter. No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding any animal
may fail to provide the animal with proper shelter as prescribed in this Section. In the case
of farm animals, nothing in this Section shall be construed as imposing shelter
requirements or standards more stringent than normally accepted husbandry practices in the
particular county where the animal or shelter is located.
(b) Indoor Standards. Minimum indoor standards of shelter shall include:
(1) Ambient temperatures. The ambient temperature shall be compatible with the
health of the animal.
(2) Ventilation. Indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated by natural or
mechanical means to provide for the health of the animals at all times.
(c) Outdoor Standards. Minimum outdoor standards of shelter shall include:
(1) Shelter from Sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause heat exhaustion of an animal
tied or caged outside, sufficient shade by natural or artificial means shall be provided
to protect the animal from direct sunlight. As used in this paragraph caged does not
include farm fencing used to confine animals.
(2) Shelter from Inclement Weather. Natural or artificial shelter appropriate to the
local climatic conditions for the species concerned shall be provided as necessary for
the health of the animal. If a dog is tied or confined unattended outdoors under
weather conditions which adversely affect the health of the dog, a shelter of suitable
size to accommodate the dog must be provided.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-16
(d) Sanitation Standards. No person owning, keeping, possessing or harboring an animal as
a pet shall allow such animal to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any
private or public property. The person responsible for such animal must immediately
remove and dispose of all feces so deposited in a sanitary manner. Minimum standards of
sanitation for both indoor and outdoor enclosures shall include periodic cleaning to
remove excreta and other waste materials, dirt and trash so as to minimize health hazards.
State Law Reference: Sec. 951.14, Wis. Stats.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-17 Neglected, Abandoned and Dead Animals.
(a) Neglected or Abandoned Animals.
(1) No person may abandon any animal.
(2) Any law enforcement officer may remove, shelter and care for an animal found to be
cruelly exposed to the weather, starved or denied adequate water, neglected,
abandoned or otherwise treated in a cruel manner and may deliver such animal to
another person to be sheltered, cared for and given medical attention, if necessary. In
all cases the owner, if known, shall be immediately notified and such officer, or other
person, having possession of the animal shall have a lien thereon for its care, keeping
and medical attention and the expense of notice.
(3) If the owner or custodian is unknown and cannot, with reasonable effort, be
ascertained or does not, within seven (7) days after notice, redeem the animal by
paying the expenses incurred, it may be treated as a stray and dealt with as such.
(4) Injured or dangerous animals. A political subdivision or person contracting under
Wis. Stats. 173.15(1) who has custody of an animal may have the animal humanely
euthanized if there are reasonable grounds to believe that any of the following apply:
the animal is hopelessly injured beyond any reasonable chance of recovery, the
animal poses an imminent threat to public health or safety, or the animal poses an
imminent threat to the health or safety of itself or its custodian.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-17
(b) Injured Animals. No person who owns, harbors or keeps any animal shall fail to provide
proper medical attention to such animal when and if such animal becomes sick or injured.
In the event the owner of such animal cannot be located, the City or any animal control
agency with whom the City has an agreement or contract shall have the authority to take
custody of such animal for the purpose of providing medical treatment, and the owner
thereof shall reimburse the person or organization for the costs of such treatment. Any
fees owed the city for providing medical treatment or the cost of care for the animal not
paid within thirty (30) days of invoice shall be placed as a special charge on the property
tax roll pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.0207. A person may also contact any animal control
agency with whom the City has an agreement or contract and arrange for the pickup and
disposal of any such injured animal or bird subject to a fee as set forth on the City of
Onalaska fee schedule. Any fee not paid within thirty (30) days of invoice for the pickup
of such injured animals or birds shall be placed as a special charge on the property tax roll
pursuant to Wis. Stats. §66.0207.
(c) Dead Animals. Any person having charge or control of any dead domestic animal or bird
of any size, or any wild, feral or confirmed stray animal or bird shall remove the same
from the City within twelve (12) hours after the time the person is or should be aware of
the presence of such dead animal or bird. Any person who fails to remove or cause to be
removed any dead animal or bird within twelve (12) hours shall relinquish such rights to
any such animal and the animal control officer which may order the animal or bird
removed and a charge shall be placed on the property tax roll pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§66.0207. Any person may contact the Public Works Department for removal of dead
wild animals or birds. A person may also contact any animal control agency with whom
the City has an agreement or contract and arrange for the pickup and disposal of any such
dead animal or bird subject to a fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska fee schedule. Any
fee not paid within thirty (30) days of invoice for the removal of such dead animals or
birds shall be placed as a special charge on the property tax roll pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§66.0207.
State Law Reference: Sections 951.15, Wis. Stats.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-18 Cruelty to Animals and Birds Prohibited.
(a) Acts of Cruelty Prohibited. No person except a police officer or health or humane officer
in the pursuit of their duties shall, within the City, shoot or kill or commit an act of cruelty
to any animal or bird or disturb any bird's nests or bird's eggs.
(b) Leading Animal From Motor Vehicle. No person shall lead any animal upon a City street
from a motor vehicle or from a trailer or semi-trailer drawn by a motor vehicle.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-18
(c) Use of Poisonous and Controlled Substances. No person may expose any pet animal
owned by another to any known poisonous substance or controlled substance listed in Sec.
161.14, Wis. Stats., whether mixed with meat or other food or not, where it is reasonable
to anticipate the substance may be eaten by such animal or for the purpose of harming the
animal. This Subsection shall not apply to poison used on one's own premises and
designed for the purpose of rodent and pest extermination, nor the use of a controlled
substance used in accepted veterinarian practice or in research by persons or organizations
regularly engaged in such research.
(d) Use of Certain Devices Prohibited. No person may directly or indirectly, or by aiding,
abetting or permitting the doing thereof either put, place, fasten, use or fix upon or to any
animal used or readied for use for a work purpose or for use in an exhibition, competition,
rodeo, circus or other performance any of the following devices: a bristle bur, tack bur or
like device; or a poling device used to train a horse to jump which is charged with
electricity or to which have been affixed nails, tacks or other sharp points.
(e) Shooting at Caged or Staked Animals. No person may instigate, promote, aid or abet as
a principal, agent, employee, participant or spectator, or participate in the earnings from or
intentionally maintain or allow any place to be used for the shooting, killing or wounding
with a firearm or any deadly weapon any animal that is tied, staked out, caged or
otherwise intentionally confined in a man-made enclosure, regardless of size.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-19 Trapping of Animals.
(a) All traps set, placed or tended shall comply with Chapter 29, Wis. Stats., as they relate to
trapping.
(b) This Section shall not apply to trapping within the confines of buildings or homes.
(c) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit or hinder the City of Onalaska or its employees or
agents from performing their official duties.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-20 Dognapping and Catnapping.
No person may take the dog or cat of another from one place to another without the owner's
consent or cause such a dog or cat to be confined or carried out of the City or held for any
purpose without the owner's consent. This Section does not apply to law enforcement officers
or humane society agents engaged in the exercise of their official duties, or as otherwise
permitted herein.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-21
Sec. 7-1-21 Vehicle Accidents.
The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of a dog, cat
or other animal which appears to be a pet shall immediately notify the Police Department or an
animal control agency whose jurisdiction extends into the City.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-22 Keeping of Bees.
(a) Purpose. The Purpose of this Section is to establish certain requirements of sound
beekeeping practice intended to prevent problems associated with the keeping of bees in
populated areas, and to reduce the likelihood of public or private nuisance.
(b) Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following terms have the meaning
indicated:
(1) “Apiary” means the assembly of one (1) or more colonies of honey bees at a
single location.
(2) “Beekeeping” shall mean a person who owns or has charge of one (1) or more
colonies of honey bees.
(3) “Beekeeping equipment” shall mean any item used in the operation of an apiary,
such as hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.
(4) “Colony” shall mean an aggregate of honey bees consisting principally of
workers, but having, when perfect, one (1) queen and at times drones, brook,
combs and honey.
(5) “Hive” shall mean the receptacle inhabited by a colony that is manufactured or
created for that purpose.
(6) “Honey Bee” shall mean all life stages of the common domestic honey bee, Apis
mellifera species of European origin.
(7) “Lot” shall mean a contiguous parcel of land under common ownership.
(8) “Nucleus colony” shall mean a small quantity of honey bees with a queen housed
in a smaller than usual hive box designed for a particular issue.
(9) “Undevelopable property” shall mean any idle land that cannot be improved due
to topographic limitations or geologic soil conditions or retention and stormwater
lands or is otherwise protected as undevelopable land.
(c) License and Fees Required. A person that keeps bees within the limits of the City of
Onalaska must first obtain a license. No person shall keep, maintain or allow to be kept
any hive or other facility for the housing of honeybees on or in any property in the City
of Onalaska without a license.
(1) Applications for a license to keep or maintain bees will be made on such forms
as provided by the City.
(2) A license fee shall accompany each license application and renewal application,
such fee shall be as set forth on the City of Onalaska fee schedule. Initial
Applications and renewals shall be made to the City Clerk and the Director of
Finance/Treasurer shall collect the fee at the time of application or renewal.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-22
(3) Licenses shall not be transferrable or refundable. Only the owner of the proposed
permitted real property, or an occupant of the proposed permitted real property
with the owner’s written permission, is eligible to obtain a beekeeping license.
(4) All licenses issued shall expire on December 31st of the year of issuance unless
sooner revoked. The City Clerk shall assess and collect a late fee as set forth on
the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule from the property owner of real property on
which an unlicensed hive is present if the owner of the hive failed to obtain a
license prior to April 1 of each year. Said late fee shall be charged in addition to
the required application or renewal fee.
(5) Applicants shall provide the following information on the original application:
a. A detailed lot diagram of the beekeeping equipment location including
the distances to the property lines and from nearby structures on
neighboring properties.
b. Notice in the form provided by the City must be given to the occupants of
all real estate situated within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the proposed
permitted property. Written consent from at least eighty percent (80%) of
the owners of real estate situation within two hundred fifty (250) feet of
the applicant’s proposed permitted property must be submitted with the
application. Note the two hundred fifty (250) feet shall be from the
proposed permitted property (i.e. hive) and not from the property line.
(6) Applicants shall provide the following information on the renewal application:
a. A detailed lot diagram of the beekeeping equipment location including
the distances to the property lines and from nearby structures on
neighboring properties.
b. The first renewal license shall only be granted subject to the proof of
completion of an inspection by a State Apiary Inspector or by a member
of a local beekeeping organization approved by the City Inspection
Department that occurred during the hives first year. Proof of biennial
inspections by the State Apiary Inspector or approved member of a local
beekeeping organization shall be submitted with every renewal thereafter
occurring in an even numbered year.
(7) The City reserves the right to deny any renewal application where there have
been multiple violations of this ordinance in a one (1) year period or where
greater than twenty percent (20%) of the neighboring properties within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of the bee hive(s) request removal of the bee hives by the
City.
(8) Any properties with an existing conditional use permit for beekeeping issued on
or before October 1, 2017 shall be exempt from the license and renewal
requirements under this Section 22. If said conditional use permit is terminated
or if any violation of the conditional use permit occurs, at such time the hive
shall be required to come into compliance with this Section 7-1-22 and an annual
license and renewal shall be required.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-22
(d) Conditions and Exemptions for Keeping and Maintaining Hives.
(1) Approval of all applications is subject to reasonable restrictions, limitations,
conditions or prohibitions prescribed by the City and/or County Health
Department in consultation with City Inspection, Fire or Police Departments.
(2) The number and location of hives, colonies and/or beekeeping equipment used
for the housing of honey bees permitted by this section shall be determined by a
license issued by the City of Onalaska. Locations in districts zoned residential
shall be limited to two hives.
(3) Beekeeping equipment shall be restricted to rear-yards and shall be screened to
avoid being visible from the street or sidewalk.
(4) Beekeeping shall not be allowed on lots with two (2) or more dwellings unless
all of the owner(s) and occupant(s) of the additional dwelling(s) provide consent.
(5) Non-honey bees do not qualify for a license and are not permitted to be kept
within the City of Onalaska.
(6) Beekeeping equipment and hives shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet
from the property line, except that where the property is adjacent to an
undevelopable property the beekeeping equipment and hive shall not be located
closer than three (3) feet from the property line of the undevelopable property. If
at any time the undevelopable property becomes developable, the twenty (20) -
foot setback shall apply.
(e) Beekeeping Standards and Size Limitations
(1) A hive shall not exceed fifteen (15) cubic feet in size and the hive shall be kept
in sound and usable condition.
(2) In apiaries, the beekeeper shall conspicuously post a sign including the words
“HONEY BEE HIVE” and his/her name and telephone number clearly readable
at twenty-five (25) feet along with a copy of the license .
(3) The bees and equipment shall be kept in accordance with the provisions of the
Wisconsin State Statutes and Administrative Codes and any local or county
regulations and any unused equipment shall be secured from weather, potential
theft of vandalism and occupancy by swarm.
(4) City of Onalaska staff shall have the right to inspect any permitted beekeeping
equipment between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. Where practicable, prior notice shall be
given to the beekeeper.
(5) Beekeepers shall assume any and all liability for their bees and therefore are
advised to determine whether their homeowners or renter's insurance covers
bees, and secure additional insurance if necessary.
(6) Notwithstanding any other condition under this Section, it shall be unlawful for
any person to maintain an apiary or to keep any colony in a manner that threatens
public health or safety or creates a nuisance.
(7) A beekeeper, even if not intentionally keeping honey bees, shall not attract a
swarm.
(8) The City inspection department or their designee shall investigate any
complaints made and beekeepers shall have thirty (30) days from notice of the
complaint to bring the hive(s) into compliance.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-22
(f) Public Nuisance.
(1) Violations of this chapter may constitute a public nuisance under Wisconsin
Statutes Chapter 823. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting
the abatement of public nuisance by the City of Onalaska or its officials in
accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin, the laws of the United States
or the City of Onalaska code of ordinances. This chapter shall also not be
construed as otherwise limiting in any way, any other action the City of
Onalaska is permitted to bring under the laws of the State of Wisconsin, United
States or City of Onalaska ordinances.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-1-23 Limitation on Number of Dogs and Cats.
(a) Purpose. The keeping of a large number of dogs and/or cats within the City for a
considerable period of time detracts from and, in many instances, is detrimental to,
healthful and comfortable life in such areas. The keeping of a large number of dogs
and/or cats is, therefore, declared a public nuisance.
(b) Definitions.
(1) Dog. A dog means any canine, regardless of age or sex.
(2) Cat. A cat means any feline, regardless of age or sex.
(3) Residential Lot. A residential lot means a parcel of land zoned as residential,
occupied or to be occupied by a dwelling, platted or unplatted, and under
common ownership. For the purpose of this Section, any vacant parcel or parcels
adjoining a dwelling and under the same ownership shall constitute one (1) lot.
(c) Number Limited. Under no circumstances shall any persons residing within any one
residential unit or any one home located on any residentially zoned property or lot, own,
harbor, board or keep in its possession more than four (4) dogs or four (4) cats, or a
combined total of six (6) cats and dogs without the prior approval of the Common
Council except that a litter of pups and/or kittens or a portion of a litter may be kept for
not more than five (5) months from birth. In non-residential zoning districts, persons
make keep more cats/dogs than the number permitted under this Section if allowed
within the respective properties’ zoning district and upon receipt of a kennel license
from the La Crosse County Health Department.
Code in effect 4/9/19, Updated by Ord. No. 1641-2019
Sec. 7-1-24 Penalties.
(a) Any person violating Sections 7-1-15, 7-1-16, 7-1-17, 7-1-18, 7-1-19, 7-1-20, 7-1-21, or
7-1-23 shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) and not more
than Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00). This Section shall also permit the City
Attorney to apply to the court of competent jurisdiction for a temporary or permanent
injunction restraining any person from violating any aspect of this Ordinance.
Licensing of Dogs and Cats; Regulation of Animals
7-1-24
(b) (1) Anyone who violates Sections 7-1-1, 7-1-2, 7-1-3, 7-1-4, 7-1-5 and 7-1-22 of this
Code of Ordinances or Chapter 174, Wis. Stats., shall be subject to a forfeiture of
not less than Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) and not more than Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00).
(2) An owner who refuses to comply with an order issued under Section 7-1-5 to
deliver an animal to an officer, animal shelter or veterinarian or who does not
comply with the conditions of an order that an animal be quarantined shall be
fined not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than sixty (60) days or both.
(c) Any person who violates Section 7-1-6 through 7-1-14 of this Code of Ordinances shall
be subject to a forfeiture of not less than Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) and not more than
Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for the first violation and not less than Fifty
Dollars ($50.00) and not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for subsequent
violations.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 2
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
Article A Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-1 State Statutes Adopted
7-2-2 Definitions
7-2-3 License Required
7-2-4 Classes of Licenses
7-2-5 License Fees
7-2-6 Application for License
7-2-7 Qualifications of Applicants and Premises
7-2-8 Investigation
7-2-9 Approval of Application
7-2-10 Granting of License
7-2-11 Transfer and Lapse of License
7-2-12 Numbering of License
7-2-13 Posting Licenses; Defacement
7-2-14 Conditions of License
7-2-15 Closing Hours
7-2-16 Restrictions on Special Class "B" Fermented Malt Beverage
Picnic or Special Event Licenses
7-2-17 Revocation and Suspension of Licenses; Non-Renewal
7-2-18 Requirements for Class “A” and Class “B” Outdoor Venue License
7-2-19 Reserved for Future. Use
Article B Operator's License
7-2-20 Operator's License Required
7-2-21 Procedure Upon Application
7-2-22 Duration
7-2-23 Operator's License Fee; Provisional License
7-2-24 Issuance
7-2-25 Display of License
7-2-26 Revocation of Operator's License
7-2-27 through
7-2-29 Reserved for Future Use
Article C Penalties
7-2-30 Penalties
Article A: Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
Sec. 7-2-1 State Statutes Adopted.
The provisions of Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes, relating to the sale of intoxicating
liquor and fermented malt beverages, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be
imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by
reference is required or prohibited by this Chapter. Any future amendment, revisions or
modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this Chapter
in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of alcohol beverage control.
State Law Reference: Chapter 125, Wis. Stats.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-2 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter the terms "Alcoholic Beverages," "Intoxicating Liquors," "Sell,"
"Sold," "Sale," "Restaurant," "Club," "Retailer," "Person," "Fermented Malt Beverages,"
"Wholesalers," "Retailers," "Operators," "Non-Intoxicating Beverages," and "Reserve Class B
License" shall have the meaning given them by Chapter 125, Wisconsin Statutes.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-3 License Required.
No person, firm or corporation shall vend, sell, deal or traffic in or have in his possession with
intent to vend, sell, deal or traffic in or, for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give
away any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in any quantity whatever, or cause the
same to be done, without having procured a license as provided in this Chapter nor without
complying with all the provisions of this Chapter, and all statutes and regulations applicable
thereto, except as provided by Sections 125.16, 125.27, 125.28 and 125.51 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-4 Classes of Licenses.
(a) Retail Class "A" Intoxicating Liquor License. A retail Class "A" intoxicating liquor
license, when issued by the City Clerk under the authority of the Common Council, shall
permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic in intoxicating liquors only in original packages
or containers and to be consumed off the premises so licensed.
(b) Retail Class "B" Intoxicating Liquor License. A retail Class "B" intoxicating liquor
license, when issued by the City Clerk under authority of the Common Council, shall
permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic in intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass
only on the premises so licensed and in the original package or container in multiples not to
exceed four (4) liters at any one (1) time, to be consumed off the premises, except that wine
may be sold in the original package or otherwise in any other quantity to be consumed off
the premises.
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-4
(c) Class "A" Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer's License. A Class "A" retailer's
fermented malt beverage license, when issued by the City Clerk under the authority of the
Common Council, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale fermented
malt beverages only for consumption away from the premises where sold and in the
original packages, containers or bottles.
(d) Class "B" Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer's License. A Class "B" fermented malt
beverage retailer's license, when issued by the City Clerk under the authority of the
Common Council, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale,
fermented malt beverages, either to be consumed upon the premises where sold or away
from such premises. The holder may also sell beverages containing less than one-half (1/2)
of a percentum of alcohol by volume, without obtaining a special license to sell such
beverages.
(e) Class “B” Outdoor Venue License. A Class “B” Outdoor Venue License, when issued by
the City Clerk under authority of the Common Council, as provided for in Sec. 125.26,
Wis. Stats., shall entitle the holder of a Class B Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer’s
License to keep, maintain, conduct or operate any outdoor venue. All requirements set forth
in Sec. 7-2-18 must be satisfied prior to a Class “B” Outdoor Venue License being issued.
(f) Temporary Class "B" Fermented Malt Beverage or Wine License.
(1) License. A temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage or wine license, when
issued by the City Clerk under authority of the Common Council, as provided for in
Sec. 125.26(6) and Sec. 125.51(10), Wis. Stats., shall entitle the holder thereof to
possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt beverages, wine or both at a particular
picnic, post meeting, fair or similar gathering. Such license may be issued only to
bona fide clubs, state, county or local fairs, chamber of commerce, associations or
agricultural societies, lodges or societies that have been in existence for not less than
six (6) months prior to the date of application for such license or to posts of
ex-servicemen's organizations now or hereafter established. Such license is valid for
dates as approved by the Common Council. Irrespective of other Sections of this
Chapter, the Common Council is hereby authorized to issue a fermented malt
beverage or wine license to any local civic, or any local religious or any local
not-for-profit organization pursuant to this Section.
(2) Application. Application for such license shall be signed by the president or
corresponding officer of the organization making such application and shall be filed
with the City Clerk together with the appropriate license fee as set forth on the City of
Onalaska Fee Schedule. Such application shall clearly specify whether the application
is for fermented malt beverages, wine or both. Any person fronting for any group
other than the one applied for shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture
of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) and will be ineligible to apply for a special Class
"B" license for one (1) year. The license shall specify the hours and dates of license
validity. The application for an event lasting more than four (4) days shall be filed a
minimum of fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting of the Common Council at which
the application will be considered. The application for an event lasting four (4) days
or less shall be filed a minimum of five (5) days prior to the meeting of the Common
Council at which the application will be considered. If the application is for a license
to be used in a City park, the applicant shall specify the main point of sale facility.
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-4
(3) Issuance by City Clerk. Any license under this Subsection may be issued directly
by the City Clerk without approval of the Common Council in the event that the City
Clerk determines that all criteria for the issuance of such license are met and the
person or entity seeking such license has previously been issued a Temporary Class
"B" Fermented Malt Beverage or Wine License by the City of Onalaska within three
(3) years prior to the date of application for the current license. In the event such
person or entity has not previously been issued a license as set forth hereunder, the
application for the license currently being sought must be approved by the Common
Council before issuance.
(4) Limitation on Number of Licenses. An organization may not be issued more than
two (2) licenses for a temporary class “B” license for Fermented Malt Beverages or
Wine in any twelve (12)-month period except as provided in Section 7-2-16(d).
(g) Wholesaler's License. A wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license, when issued by
the City Clerk under authority of the Common Council, shall entitle the holder thereof to
possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt beverages only in original packages or
containers to dealers, not to be consumed in or about the premises of said wholesaler.
(h) Retail Class “C” Wine License. A retail Class “C” wine license, when issued by the
City Clerk under the authority of the Common council, shall permit its holder to sell, deal,
and traffic in wine to be consumed by the glass or in an opened original container for
consumption on the premises where sold.
Cross Reference: Section 7-2-17.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-5 License Fees.
There shall be the following classes and denominations of licenses which, when issued by the
City Clerk under the authority of the Common Council after payment of the fee hereinafter
specified shall permit the holder to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquors or fermented malt
beverages as provided in Sections 125.04(5), (6); 125.28(1)(a), (b), (d); 125.28(2);
125.31(2)(a);125.22(1), (2), (4); 125.32(4)(a); 125.31(2)(b); 125.26(2); 125.04(6); 125.17;
125.68(2);125.32(2); 125.51(2); 125.51(3); or 125.57, Wis. Stats.:
(a) Retail Class “A” Intoxicating Liquor License. To be reviewed annually and
accompanied by such fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule;
(b) Retail Class “B” Intoxicating Liquor License. To be reviewed annually and
accompanied by such fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. New
applications for Retail Class “B” Intoxicating Liquor Licenses shall first be reviewed to see
if any “Non-Reserve Class “B” Intoxicating Liquor Licenses are available, if there are no
“Non-Reserve Class “B” Intoxicating Liquor Licenses available, applicant will then be
reviewed for a Reserve Class “B” Intoxicating Liquor License. Reserve Class “B”
Intoxicating Liquor License-Initial/One Time Fee shall be as set forth on the City of
Onalaska Fee Schedule. Club licenses as defined in Wisconsin Statutes shall be issued for
as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule.
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-5
(c) Class “A” Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer’s License. To be reviewed annually and
accompanied by such fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule;
(d) Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer’s License. A fee as set forth on the City
of Onalaska fee schedule or three-fourths (3/4) of that amount for a six (6) month period
to be reviewed annually. Class “B” fermented malt beverage retailer’s license for brewers
shall be pursuant to Sections 125.31(1)(a) and 125.06(1), Wis. Stats;
(e) Special Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer’s License. To be reviewed per
event and accompanied by such fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule;
Three (3) day fermented malt beverage licenses may be issued to bona fide clubs, chamber
of commerce, lodges or societies which have been in existence for more than six (6)
months or to organizations of ex-military service personnel authorizing them to sell
fermented malt beverages at a particular picnic, gathering or meeting: To be reviewed per
event and accompanied by such fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule.
(f) Wholesaler’s License. To be reviewed annually and accompanied by such fee as set forth
on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule;
(g) Retail Class “C” Wine License. A fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
or three-fourths (¾) of that amount for a period of six (6) months or less to be reviewed
annually.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-6 Application for License.
(a) Contents. Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverages shall be made in writing on the form prescribed by the Wisconsin Department
of Revenue and shall be sworn to by the applicant as provided by Sections 887.01 to
887.04, Wis. Stats., and shall be filed with the City Clerk not less than fifteen (15) days
prior to the granting of such license. The premises shall be physically described to include
every room and storage space to be covered by the license, including all rooms not
separated by a solid wall or joined by connecting entrances.
(b) Corporations. Such application shall be filed and sworn to by the applicant if an
individual, by the president and secretary, of a corporation.
(c) Publication. The application for Class B licenses shall be published three (3) successive
times in the official City newspaper, and the costs of publication shall be paid by the
applicant.
(d) Amending Application. Whenever anything occurs to change any fact set out in the
application of any licensee, such licensee shall file with the issuing authority a notice in
writing of such change within ten (10) days after the occurrence thereof.
(e) License Quotas. The quota for licenses under this Chapter shall be pursuant to Ch. 125,
Wis. Stats.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-7
Sec. 7-2-7 Qualifications of Applicants and Premises.
(a) Residence Requirements. A retail Class "A" or retail Class "B" fermented malt beverage
or intoxicating liquor license shall be granted only to persons who are citizens of the
United States and of Wisconsin.
(b) Applicant to have Malt Beverage License. No retail Class "B" intoxicating liquor
license shall be issued to any person who does not have or to whom is not issued a
Class "B" retailer's license to sell fermented malt beverages.
(c) Right to Premises. No applicant will be considered unless he has the right to possession
of the premises described in the application for the license period, by lease or by deed.
(d) Age of Applicant. No Class "A" or "B" licenses shall be granted to any underage person
as defined by the Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) Corporate Restrictions.
(1) No license shall be granted to any corporation which does not comply with the
provisions of Sec. 125.04(6), Wis. Stats., which does not have an agent eligible for
a license under this Chapter or under state law, or which has more than fifty percent
(50%) of the stock interest, legal or beneficial, in such corporation held by any person
or persons not eligible for a license under this Chapter or under the state law.
(2) Each corporate applicant shall file with its application for such license a statement by its officers showing the names and addresses of the persons who are stockholders
together with the amount of stock held by such person or persons. It shall be the duty
of each corporate applicant and licensee to file with the City Clerk a statement of
transfers of stock within forty-eight (48) hours after such transfer of stock.
(3) Any license issued to a corporation may be revoked in the manner and under the
procedure established in Section 125.12, Wis. Stats., when more than fifty percent
(50%) of the stock interest, legal or beneficial, in such corporation is held by any
person or persons not eligible for a license under this Chapter or under the state law.
(f) Separate License Required for Each Place of Sale. A separate license shall be required
for each stand or place which is in a direct connection or communication where
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale; and
no license shall be issued to any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association
for the purpose of possession, selling or offering for sale any intoxicating liquors or
fermented malt beverages in any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-8
Sec. 7-2-8 Investigation.
The City Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police, Chief of the Fire Department, Health Officer and
Building Inspector of each new application, and these officials shall inspect or cause to be
inspected each application and the premises, together with such other investigation as shall be
necessary to determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with
the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto, including those governing sanitation in
restaurants, and whether the applicant is a proper recipient of a license. These officials shall
furnish to the City Clerk in writing, who shall forward to the Common Council, the information
derived from such investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to whether a license
should be granted or refused. No license shall be renewed without a re-inspection of the premises
and report as originally required.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-9 Approval of Application.
(a) In determining the suitability of an applicant, consideration shall be given to the moral
character and financial responsibility of the applicant, the appropriateness of the location
and premises proposed and generally the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reposed.
(b) No license shall be granted for operation on any premises or with any equipment for
which taxes or assessments or other financial claims of the City are delinquent and
unpaid.
(c) No license shall be issued unless the premises conform to the sanitary, safety and health
requirements of the State Building Code, and the regulations of the State Board of Health
and local Board of Health applicable to restaurants. The premises must be properly lighted
and ventilated, must be equipped with separate sanitary toilet and lavatory facilities
equipped with running water for each sex and must conform to all Ordinances of the City.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-10 Granting of License.
Opportunity shall be given by the governing body to any person to be heard for or against the
granting of any license. Upon the approval of the applicant by the Common Council, the City
Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license, upon payment by the applicant of the license fee to
the City.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-11
Sec. 7-2-11 Transfer and Lapse of License.
(a) In accordance with the provisions of Section 125.04(12), Wis. Stats., a license shall be
transferable from one premises to another if such transfer is first approved by the Common
Council. An application for transfer shall be made on a form furnished by the
City Clerk. Proceedings for such transfer shall be had in the same form and manner as
the original application. The fee for such transfer shall be set forth on the City of Onalaska
Fee Schedule. Whenever a license is transferred, the City Clerk shall forthwith notify the
Wisconsin Department of Revenue of such transfer. In the event of the sale of a business or
business premises of the licensee, the purchaser of such business or business premises must
apply to the City for reissuance of said license and the City, as the licensing authority, shall
in no way be bound to reissue said license to said subsequent purchaser.
(b) In accordance with the provisions of Section 125.04(6), Wis. Stats., a licensee may appoint a
successor agent to act in the agent’s place for the remainder of the license year or until
another agent is appointed. The fee for appointing a successor agent shall be as set forth on
the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. Whenever the agent of a corporate holder of a license is
for any reason replaced, the licensee shall give the City Clerk written notice of said
replacement, the reasons therefor and the new appointment along with the fee as set forth on
the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. Until the next regular meeting or special meeting of the
Common Council, the successor agent shall have the authority to perform the functions and
be charged with the duties of the original agent. However, said license shall cease to be in
effect upon receipt by the City Clerk of notice of disapproval of the successor agent by the
Wisconsin Department of Revenue or other peace officer of the municipality in which the
license was issued. The corporation's license shall not be in force after receipt of such notice
or after a regular or special meeting of the Common Council until the successor agent or
another qualified agent is appointed and approved by the City and the Wisconsin Department
of Revenue.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-12 Numbering of License.
All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the
specific premises for which granted, the date of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the
licensee. The City Clerk shall affix to the license his affidavit as provided by Sec. 125.04(4) of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-13 Posting Licenses; Defacement.
(a) Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall immediately
post such license and keep the same posted while in force in a conspicuous place in the
room or place where said beverages are drawn or removed for service or sale.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to post such license or to be permitted to post it upon
premises other than those mentioned in the application or knowingly to deface or destroy
such license.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-14
Sec. 7-2-14 Conditions of License.
All retail Class "A" and "B" licenses granted hereunder shall be granted subject to the following
conditions, and all other conditions of this Section, and subject to all other Ordinances and
regulations of the City applicable thereto.
(a) Consent to Entry. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents to the entry of
police or other duly authorized representatives of the City at all reasonable hours for the
purpose of inspection and search, and consents to the removal from said premises of all
things and articles there had in violation of City Ordinances or state laws, and consents to
the introduction of such things and articles in evidence in any prosecution that may be
brought for such offenses.
(b) Employment of Minors. No retail Class "B" licenses shall employ any underage person,
as defined in the Wisconsin Statutes, but this shall not apply to hotels and restaurants.
Family members may work on the licensed premises but are not permitted to sell or
dispense alcoholic beverages.
(c) Disorderly Conduct Prohibited. Each licensed premises shall, at all times, be conducted
in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be allowed at
any time on any licensed premises.
(d) Licensed Operator on Premises. There shall be upon premises operated under a Class
"B" license, at all times, the licensee, members of the licensee's immediate family who
have attained the legal drinking age, and/or some person who shall have an operator's
license and who shall be responsible for the acts of all persons serving as waiters, or in
any other manner, any fermented malt beverages to customers. No person other than the
licensee shall serve fermented malt beverages in any place operated under a Class "B"
license unless he possesses an operator's license, or there is a person with an operator's
license upon said premises at the time of such service.
(e) Health and Sanitation Regulations. The rules and regulations of the State Board of
Health governing sanitation in restaurants shall apply to all Class "B" liquor licenses issued
under this Chapter. No Class "B" license shall be issued unless the premises to be licensed
conform to such rules and regulations.
(f) Restrictions Near Schools and Churches. No retail Class "A" or Class "B" license shall
be issued for premises, the main entrance of which is less than three hundred (300) feet
from the main entrance of any established public school, parochial school, hospital or
church. Such distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the highway from the
closest point of the maintenance entrance of such school, church or hospital to the main
entrance to such premises. This Subsection shall not apply to premises licensed as such on
June 30, 1947, nor shall it apply to any premises licensed as such prior to the occupation of
real property within three hundred (300) feet thereof by any school building, hospital
building or church building.
(g) Clubs. No club shall sell or give away any intoxicating liquors except to bona fide
members and guests invited by members.
(h) Gambling Prohibited. No gambling or game of chance of any sort shall be permitted in
any form upon any premises licensed under this Chapter or the laws of the State of
Wisconsin.
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-14
(i) Credit Prohibited. No retail Class "A" or Class "B" liquor or fermented malt beverage
licensee shall sell or offer for sale any alcohol beverage to any person or persons by
extending credit, except hotel credit extended to a resident guest or a club to a bona fide
member. It shall be unlawful for such licensee or permittee to sell alcohol beverages to any
person on a passbook or store order or to receive from any person any goods, ware,
merchandise or other articles in exchange for alcohol beverages.
(j) Licensee or Permittee Responsible for Acts of Help. A violation of this Chapter by a
duly authorized agent or employee of a licensee or permittee under this Chapter shall
constitute a violation by the licensee or permittee. Whenever any licensee or permittee
under this Chapter shall violate any portion of this Chapter, proceedings for the suspension
or revocation of the license or permit of the holder thereof may be instituted in the manner
prescribed in this Chapter.
(k) Improper Exhibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, or for any licensee
or manager or agent of the licensee to permit any employee, entertainer or patron to engage
in any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition on the licensed premises which:
(1) Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair
region; or
(2) Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates
genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
(3) Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof; or
(4) Engages in or simulates sexual intercourse and/or any sexual contact, including the
touching of any portion of the female breast or the male and/or female genitals.
Annotation: See Colonnade Catering Corp. v. United States, 397 U.S. 72,
90 S. Ct. 774 (1970); and State v. Erickson, 101 Wis. 2d 224
(1981), for guidelines for warrantless searches of licensed
premises.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-15 Closing Hours.
Closing hours shall be established in conformance with Section 125.32(3), Wis. Stats., and
further restricted as follows:
(a) Class "B" Licenses.
(1) No premises for which a retail Class "B" liquor and fermented malt beverage license
has been issued shall be permitted to remain open for the sale of liquor or fermented
malt beverages or for any other purpose between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m., Monday through Friday, and 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Saturday and Sunday.
There shall be no closing hours on January 1st.
(2) Hotels and restaurants, whose principal business is the furnishing of food or lodging
to patrons shall be permitted to remain open for the conduct of their regular business
but shall not sell liquor or malt beverages during the closing hours of Subsection
(a)(1) above.
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-15
(3) The licensee or permittee and one (1) employee shall be permitted to check out
receipts, check the licensed premises for security and do minor cleaning after
closing hours. Under no circumstances shall the consumption of alcohol beverages
be permitted after closing hours. Commercial janitorial service personnel shall be
allowed to enter the licensed premises for the purpose of cleaning during closed
hours. The premises shall be well lighted during cleanup. Prior approval must be
requested and granted by the Chief of Police or his designee for any variance of the
above exigent circumstances.
(b) Class "A" Licenses. Class "A" licensed premises may remain open for the conduct of
their regular business daily between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-16 Restrictions on Temporary Class "B" Fermented Malt
Beverage or Wine Licenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization on a temporary basis to sell or offer to sell
any alcohol beverage upon any City-owned property or privately-owned property within the
City of Onalaska, except through the issuance of temporary Class "B" license issued by the
Common Council in accordance with Wisconsin State Statutes and as set forth in this Section.
A temporary Class "B" license authorizing the sale and consumption of fermented malt
beverages or wine on City-owned property or privately-owned property may be authorized by
the Common Council provided the following requirements are met, except that the Council
may waive or modify certain requirements due to the physical characteristics of the licensed
site:
(a) Compliance with Eligibility Standards. The organization shall meet the eligibility
requirements of a bona fide club, association, chamber of commerce, lodge or society as
set forth in Section 125.26(6) and Section 125.51(1) Wis. Stats. as applicable, and shall
fully comply with the requirements of this Section and Section 11-4-1.
(b) Posting of Signs and Licenses. All organizations issued a liquor license shall post in a
conspicuous location at the main point of sale and at all remote points of sale a sufficient
number of signs stating that no fermented malt beverage shall be served to any under-age
person.
(c) Fencing. All organizations shall install a double fence around the main point of sale when
the main point of sale is outside or in a temporary structure to control ingress and egress
and shall continually station a licensed operator or security guard at the entrance of the
main point of sale for the purpose of checking age identification. There shall be only one
(1) point of ingress and egress whether the main point of sale is indoors or outdoors. The
double fence shall be a minimum of four (4) feet high and a minimum of six (6) feet
between fences. A single eight (8) foot chain link fence may be used to meet the fence
requirements.
(d) Wine Walks and Events with Multiple Locations. Up to twenty (20) licenses may be
issued to the applying organization for the same event if all of the following apply:
(1) Each license is issued for the same date and times and the applying organization
is the sponsor of an event held at multiple locations within the municipality on
the date and times in which the temporary license is applied for.
(2) An admission fee is charged for participation in the event and no additional fee is
charged for service of alcohol at the event.
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-16
(3) The duration of the event cannot exceed one (1) day.
(4) Within the immediate twelve (12) month period, the applying organization has been
issued fewer than two (2) temporary class B licenses under this Ordinance.
(5) For purposes of the two (2) license limit, each event for which multiple licenses are
issued shall count as one license toward the two (2) license limit, as set forth in Wis.
Stat. 125.51 as may be amended.
(6) No person or organization may serve wine after 9 p.m. on premises coered by a
temporary class “B” license issued under this Section.
(d) Underage Persons Prohibited. No underage persons as defined by the Wisconsin
Statutes shall be allowed to assist in the sale of fermented malt beverage at any point of
sale, nor shall they be allowed to loiter or linger in the area of any point of sale.
(e) Licensed Operators Requirement. A licensed operator shall be stationed at all points of
sales at all times. The Council may require that police officers be employed to monitor the
event.
(f) Permitted Cups or Cans Only. Intoxicants will be sold outside only in foam or plastic
cups, or cans.
(g) Additional Requirements. In addition, requesting organizations shall comply with the
following:
(1) When the event sponsored by the requesting organization is to take place on City
park property, the organization shall work closely with the City officials in locating,
setting up and identifying the size of the snow fence area. Such information shall be
made part of the temporary Class "B" license application.
(2) When the event sponsored by the requesting organization is to take place on City
owned property other than park property and/or privately owned property, the
organization shall work closely with the Police Department in locating and setting
up the snow fence area. The Chief of Police shall work closely with the requesting
organization in identifying the size of the fenced-in area and the exact location. Such
information shall be made part of the temporary Class "B" license application. For
indoor events, the structure used must have suitable exits and open spaces to
accommodate anticipated attendance. It shall contain adequate sanitary facilities to
accommodate the size of the group.
(h) Insurance. The applicant for a temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage or wine
license may be required to indemnify, defend and hold the City and its employees and
agents harmless against all claims, death of any person or any damage to property caused
by or resulting from the activities for which the permit is granted. As evidence of the
applicant's ability to perform the conditions of the permit, the applicant may be required to
furnish a Certificate of Comprehensive General Liability insurance with the City of
Onalaska. The applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond prior to being
granted the temporary Class “B” license.
Cross Reference: Section 11-4-1.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-17
Sec. 7-2-17 Revocation and Suspension of License; Non-Renewal.
(a) Procedure. Whenever the holder of any license under this Chapter violates any portion
of this Chapter or Title 11, Chapter 4, of this Code of Ordinances, proceedings for the
revocation of such license may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure
established by this Section.
(b) Abandonment of Premises. Any licensee holding a license to sell alcohol beverages
who abandons such business shall forfeit any right or preference he may have to the
holding of or renewal of such license. Abandonment shall be sufficient grounds for
revocation of any alcohol beverage license. The loss or non-use of the licensed premises
for at least six (6) months shall be prima facie evidence of the abandonment, unless
extended by the Common Council. All persons issued a license to sell alcohol beverages
in the City for which a quota exists limiting the number of such licenses that may be
issued by the City shall cause such business described in such license to be operated on
the premises described in such license for at least one hundred fifty (150) days during the
terms of such license, unless such license is issued for a term of less than one hundred
eighty (180) days, in which event this Subsection shall not apply.
(c) License Revocation or Suspension.
(1) Notice and Hearing. Whenever a person holding a license to sell alcoholic
beverages has failed to maintain the premises according to standards prescribed
for sanitation, or in whose premises persons are permitted to loiter for purposes of
prostitution, or when the licensee has not observed and obeyed any lawful order
of the Common Council or police officers of the City, has violated City
Ordinances, or for any other good reason, the Common Council shall issue a
summons, to be signed by the City Clerk commanding the licensee complained of
to appear before the Administrative Committee or a special committee designated
by the Common Council on a day and
time and at a place named in the summons to show cause why the license should
not be revoked or suspended. Such summons shall be served not less than three
(3) and not more than ten (10) days before the time at which the licensee is
commanded to appear and may be served personally upon the licensee or the
agent of the licensee or upon the person in charge of the licensed premises. The
complaint shall be served with the summons and shall set forth the offense
allegedly committed, the date and place of said offence and the facts constituting
the alleged offense. If such licensee shall not appear as required by the summons,
the complaint shall be taken as true, and if the Committee deems its allegations
sufficient, the Committee shall recommend revocation or suspension of the
license as provided herein.
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-17
(2) Procedure on Hearing; Effect of Revocation.
a. The Administrative Committee or a designated committee shall serve as a
hearing agency for the Common Council.
b. The Chairman of the Committee, or the Chair's designee, shall conduct the
hearing, administer oaths to all witnesses and may issue subpoenas. So far
as practicable, the rules of evidence provided in Sec. 227.08, Wis. Stats.,
shall be followed. The complainant shall have the burden of proving the
charges to a preponderance of the evidence. The licensee and the
complainant may be represented by counsel, may call and examine
witnesses and cross-examine witnesses of the other party. All proceedings
and testimony shall be recorded on tape. If either party requests a
stenographic recording and transcription, the City shall make the
necessary arrangements, but the expenses shall be borne by the requesting
party. The City Clerk shall serve as secretary to the Committee and shall
make and receive all exhibits admitted into the record.
c. Within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing and filing of briefs,
if any, the Committee, upon the testimony and evidence presented at the
hearing, shall determine by simple majority vote of those present whether
the charges are true and, if so, submit a report to the Common Council
including its findings of fact, conclusions of law and a recommendation as
to what action, if any, the Common Council should take with respect to
the license. If the recommendation is to suspend the license, it shall be for
a period of not less than ten (10) days or more than ninety (90) days.
Following the procedure above, the recommendation may be to revoke the
license. If the Committee determines that the charges are not substantiated,
it shall recommend to the Common Council that the complaint be
dismissed without cost to either party. The Committee's recommendation
shall be promptly filed with the Clerk.
d. At the regular meeting of the Common Council after the filing of the
Committee's recommendation, the Common Council shall act on the
recommendation and may reverse or modify any portion thereof by a
simple majority vote. The recommendation of the Committee shall
become the decision of the Common Council unless reversed or modified.
No further testimony or evidence shall be allowed before the Common
Council. Only those members of the Common Council who have certified
to the City Clerk in writing that they have read the transcript, exhibit and
recommendation made shall be permitted to vote on the matter. The City
Clerk shall make the said certifications a part of the record. The decision
of the Common Council shall be a final determination for purposes of
judicial review.
e. If the complaint is found to be true, the licensee shall pay to the City the
actual cost of the proceedings. If the complaint is found by the Common
Council to be malicious and without probable cause, the complainant shall
pay the cost of the proceedings in the same amount.
f. When a license is revoked, it shall be so entered of record by the City
Clerk, and no other license shall be granted to such licensee or for such
premises for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-17
revocation, nor shall any part of the money paid as application fee for any
license so revoked be refunded.
(d) Non-renewal of License. The City Attorney may, after investigation, commence an
action before the Administrative Committee to hear evidence and make a
recommendation to the Common Council that a license issued pursuant to this Chapter
not be renewed. The Chairman of the Committee shall, in writing, notify the licensee of
the consideration of non-renewal. Such notification shall be in the form of and shall
serve as the summons and complaint and shall include a statement of the reasons for the
consideration of the nonrenewal of the license in the same specificity required for a
summons and complaint for revocation or suspension. If the license is recommended for
non-renewal, costs may be assessed against the licensee and any renewal application fee
shall be forfeited. In all other respects, the provisions of Subsection (c) above shall
apply. The commencement of this action shall stay action by the Common Council on
the licensee's application until the Committee makes is recommendation.
(e) Other Provisions. Any license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to such
further regulations and restrictions as may be imposed by the Common Council by
amendment to this Section or by the enactment of new ordinances. If any licenses shall
fail or neglect to meet the requirements imposed by such new restrictions and
regulations his license may be revoked in accordance with this Section. In case of
revocation of any license or any violation of any provision of this Chapter in accordance
with this Section or by the court or for any reasonable cause except the imposition of
new restrictions, no refund shall be made of any part of the license fee.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-18 Requirements for Class “A” and Class “B” Outdoor Venue
License.
A Class “A” Outdoor Venue License shall entitle the holder of a Class “A” Fermented Malt
Beverage Retailer’s License to keep, maintain, conduct or operate any Outdoor Venue which
shall be defined as an open air, roofed or unroofed area adjacent or accessory to a Class “A”
Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer’s License holders premises, where a Class “A” licensee may
provide up to two (2) taste samples per day to any one person between the hours of 11 a.m. and 7
p.m. pursuant to Section 125.25(1) Wis. Stats. A Class “B” Outdoor Venue License shall entitle
the holder of a Class B Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer’s License to keep, maintain, conduct
or operate any Outdoor Venue which shall be defined as an open air, roofed or unroofed area
adjacent or accessory to a Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer’s License holders
premises, where beer and other alcoholic beverages are served or consumed. Excluded from this
definition if such are included within the licensed premises are Class “B” alcohol beverage
licensed hotels as defined in Section 125.02(7) Wis. Stats., which have a restaurant and
recreational facilities which include a golf course. The application process and conditions for a
Class “A” and Class “B” Outdoor Venue Licenses shall be as follows:
(a) Application. Application for such licenses shall be made in writing to the City Clerk not
less than fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting of the Common Council at which the
application will be considered and must include a plan or diagram that particularly
describes the outdoor venue area. Each applicant shall pay the required license fee as set
forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule at the time of the filing of the original
application, renewals thereafter shall be annually and shall require a fee as set forth on
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-18
the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. All property owners within one hundred fifty (150)
feet of the proposed premises for an Outdoor Venue License shall receive notice of the
pendency of the original application by first class mail.
(b) Investigation. The City Clerk shall submit all applications for Outdoor Venue Licenses to
the Chief of Police, Chief of the Fire Department, Health Officer and Building Inspector of
each new application, and these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each
application and the premises, together with such other investigation as shall be necessary to
determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the
regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto, including those governing sanitation in
restaurants, and whether the applicant is a proper recipient of a license. These officials shall
furnish to the City Clerk in writing, who shall forward to the Common Council, the
information derived from such investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to
whether the license should be granted as requested, modified or denied. No license shall be
renewed without a re-inspection of the premises and report as originally required.
(c) Granting Licenses. A license shall be granted to each applicant who shall be approved by
a majority vote of the Common Council, except where otherwise provided in this code, and
shall be issued by the City Clerk and contain with particularity a description of the
premises licensed and the name and address of the licensee. The license shall be numbered
and such license shall be posted conspicuously in the premises licensed at all times.
(d) Discretion. The Common Council shall have discretion to refuse the granting of any
license or transfer thereof if in its judgment the granting or transfer of such license shall be
against the public interest, either because of unsuitability of the location, surrounding land
use, lot and building size, availability of off-street parking, undesirability or unreliability of
the applicant or manager, or because of the failure of such applicant or manager to observe
the provisions of this Code in the prior conduct of a restaurant, tavern or other similar
place.
(e) Conditions. No Outdoor Venue shall be permitted, maintained or operated except in
conformity with the following regulations:
(1) Except for open air, roofed or unroofed areas which are part of the Class “A” or “B”
premises and not at ground level which comply with all applicable safety and
building codes, the Outdoor Venue shall have a ground area of fire-resistant material
and shall be surrounded by an attractive wall, fence or barrier at least four (4) foot
high constructed of wood, brick, wrought iron, composite or vinyl and shall contain
the required fire exits. The gate(s) or exit(s) shall be of the same height as that of the
fence, wall or barrier and shall swing to egress, shall be equipped with proper
hardware, and shall swing free and clear of public sidewalks. The fence, wall or
barrier shall comply with all regulations regarding vision clearance and setback
pursuant to the City Zoning Code.
(2) All electrical wiring shall comply with national, State and City electrical codes.
(3) All combustible rubbish shall be stored in non-combustible covered containers.
(4) Any noise emanating from the Outdoor Venue shall not violate the regulations of the
City Code of Ordinances pertaining to noise.
(5) All Outdoor Venues shall comply with the City Code of Ordinances, State Industrial
Code and 2006 International Building Code, relative to the required number of
toilets, exit lights and other relevant regulations contained therein.
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-18
(6) The Class “A” or Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer licensee shall be
responsible for all violations of this Section and subject to compliance with any and
all Health Department, Building Inspections Department, Fire Department and Police
Department regulations pertaining to the Outdoor Venue, including any and all State
and local regulations.
(7) The Outdoor Venue shall be restricted to the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. for a
Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer licensee and to the hours of 11:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m. for a Class “A” Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer licensee.
(8) The Outdoor Venue shall have a capacity of one (1) person for each seven (7) net
square feet or a predetermined number set by the Common Council. Capacity shall be
posted within the outdoor premises and the adjoining premises of the Class “A” or
Class “B” establishment. Additionally these areas must have tables in place to allow
for seating of seventy-five percent (75%) of their capacity.
(9) Lighting of the Outdoor Venue must be shielded and not be of intensity or brilliance
to create glare which is distracting to adjoining property owners or can become a
hazard or danger to vehicular traffic.
(10) The Outdoor Venue shall only be used for serving food and alcohol and no part of the
outdoor venue shall be used for recreational activities, including but not limited to:
volleyball, horseshoes, darts, and softball. No live music shall be permitted.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-19 Reserved for Future Use.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Article B: Operator's License
Sec. 7-2-20 Operator's License Required.
There shall be upon the premises operated under a Class "A" or Class "B" intoxicating liquor
license or Class "B" fermented malt beverage license at all times the licensee or some other
person who shall have an operator's license and who shall be responsible for the acts of all
persons serving or selling any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages to customers. No
person other than the licensee shall serve or sell fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor
in any place operated under the Class "A" or Class "B" licenses unless he shall possess an
operator's license or unless he shall be under the immediate supervision of the licensee or a
person holding an operator's license who shall be upon the premises at the time of such service.
State Law Reference: Section 125.17, Wis. Stats.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-21 Procedure Upon Application.
The Common Council may issue an operator's license, which license shall be granted only upon
application in writing on forms to be obtained from the City Clerk only to persons eighteen (18)
years of age or older. Operator's licenses shall be operative only within the limits of the City.
Operator's licenses shall be granted only to persons of good moral character who shall be
citizens of the United States.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-22 Duration.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be valid for a period of one (1) or two
(2) years and shall expire on the thirtieth (30th) day of June. Any license issued hereunder shall
commence on July 1st of each year. The fee for a license shall be paid to the City Treasurer and
his receipt therefor filed with the City Clerk with the application for such license.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-23 Operator's License Fee; Provisional License.
(a) Fees. The fee for an operator’s license shall be Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) for one (1) year
and Twenty Five Dollars ($25.00) for two (2) years. Provided, however, that the fee of a
one (1) year operator’s license shall be Five Dollars ($5.00) and for a two year operator’s
license, Thirteen Dollars ($13.00) for the first year in which a provisional license is
obtained. The fees shall be reviewed annually.
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2-23
(b) Provisional License. The City Clerk may issue provisional operator’s licenses in
accordance with Section 125.15(5), Wis. Stats., at a cost of Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) per
license so issued. The provisional operator’s license shall expire sixty (60) days after its
issuance or when an operator’s license is issued to the holder, whichever is sooner. A
provisional license may not be issued to any person who has been denied an operator’s
license by the Common Council or who has had his operator’s license revoked or
suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. The City Clerk shall provide an
appropriate application form to be completed in full by the applicant. The City Clerk may
revoke the provisional license issued if he discovers that the holder of the license made a
false statement on the application. The fee shall be reviewed annually.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-24 Issuance.
After the Common Council approves the granting of an operator's license, the City Clerk shall
issue the license. Such licenses shall be issued and numbered in the order they are granted and
shall give the applicant's name and address and the date of the expiration of such license.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-25 Display of License.
Each license issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be posted on the premises
whenever the operator dispenses beverages or the operator shall have in his possession a wallet
license card.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-26 Revocation of Operator's License.
Violation of any of the terms or provisions of the State law or of this Chapter relating to
operator's licenses by any person holding such operator's license shall be cause for revocation of
the license.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-2-27 through Sec. 7-2-29 Reserved for Future Use.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Article C: Penalties
Sec. 7-2-30 Penalties.
(a) Forfeitures for violations of Sections 125.07(1)-(5) and 125.09(2) of the Wisconsin
Statutes, adopted by reference in Section 7-2-1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Onalaska, shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of
the comparable State Statute, including any variations or increases for subsequent
offenses.
(b) Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter of the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Onalaska, except as otherwise provided in Subsection (a) herein or who shall
conduct any activity or make any sale for which a license is required without a license,
shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in the general penalty section of this Code of
the City of Onalaska.
(c) Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing court to exercise
additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 3
Cigarette Licenses
7-3-1 Repealed
7-3-2 Cigarette License
Sec. 7-3-1 Pharmacists' Permits.
Repealed.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-3-2 Cigarette License.
(a) License Required. No person, firm or corporation shall, in any manner, directly or
indirectly, upon any premises, or by any device, sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or
give away, or keep for sale, any cigarette, cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers, or any
substitute therefor, without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided.
(b) Application for License; Fee. Every person, form or corporation desiring a license under
this Section shall file with the City Clerk a written application therefore, stating the name
of the person and the place for which such license is desired. Each license shall be filed
by the City Clerk and shall name the licensee and the place wherein he is authorized to do
business, and the same shall not be delivered until the applicant shall pay to the City
Clerk a license fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule.
(c) Issuance and Term of License. Licenses for the sale, exchange, barter, disposition of, or
giving away or keeping for sale of cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers or any substitute
therefor shall be issued by the City Clerk.
State Law Reference: Section 134.65, Wis. Stats.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 4
Direct Sellers
7-4-1 Direct Sales License Required
7-4-2 Definitions
7-4-3 Exemptions
7-4-4 License
7-4-5 Investigation
7-4-6 Appeal
7-4-7 Regulation of Direct Sellers
7-4-8 Records
7-4-9 Suspension, Revocation and Nonrenewal of License
Sec. 7-4-1 Direct Sales License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to engage in direct sales within the City of Onalaska
without obtaining a license for that purpose as provided herein. A licensee shall be responsible
for the acts and omissions of any employee, agent, or independent contractor or other
individual. This license is specific to a person, not a company, so each individual engaging in
solicitations must acquire a direct seller license.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-4-2 Definitions.
In this Chapter the following definitions shall be applicable:
(a) Direct Seller. Any person who sells goods, or takes sales orders for the later delivery of
goods, at any location other than the permanent business place or residence of said person
and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. The
sale of goods includes donations required by the direct seller for the retention of goods by
a donor or prospective customer.
(b) Permanent Merchant. A direct seller who, for at least one (1) year prior to the
consideration of the application of this Chapter to said merchant:
(1) Has continuously maintained a permanent retail location in this City and maintained
consistent business hours open to the public.
(c) Goods. Shall include personal property of any kind and shall include goods provided
incidental to services offered or sold.
(d) Charitable Organization. Shall include any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or
eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or one purporting to be
such, but shall not include religious organizations.
(e) Clerk. The City of Onalaska City Clerk.
(f) Person. All humans of any age or sex, partnerships, corporations, associations, groups,
organizations and any other description of a collection of human beings working in
concert or for the same purpose or objective.
Direct Sellers
7-4-2
(g) Special Event. An athletic event, ceremony, demonstration, exhibition, march, pageant,
parade, procession, show or other similar display which interferes with the normal flow or
regulation of traffic upon the streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way, or the normal use of
parks or other public grounds and for which a special event permit has been issued for.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-4-3 Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this Chapter:
(a) The delivery of goods to regular customers on established routes. This exemption shall not
apply to direct sales on sidewalks.
(b) The sale of goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods.
(c) The sale of agricultural products which such person has grown.
(d) A home visit requested by the buyer.
(e) A sale required by statute or by order of any court.
(f) A bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
(g) Direct sales conducted by a charitable organization or an agent thereof.
(h) Direct sales conducted by a permanent merchant or an agent thereof. Any person who
claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom complaint has been made to the
City Clerk that such person is a transient merchant, shall be exempt provided that there is
submitted to the City Clerk proof that such person has leased for at least one (1) year, or
purchased, the premises from which they are conducting business, or proof that such
person has been a permanent merchant in this City for at least one (1) year prior to the
date complaint was made.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-4-4 License.
(a) License Information. Applicants for license must complete and return to the City Clerk
an application form furnished by the City Clerk which shall require the following
information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary address, if any;
(2) Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and date of birth;
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation
that the direct seller represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being
sold;
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if
any;
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods offered and
any services offered;
(6) Proof that the applicant holds a current state seller’s permit, which include a state
sales tax number.
(7) Photograph of Applicant. Each applicant for a license shall file with the application
one recent photograph suitable to the City Clerk for inclusion on the applicant’s
official permit, of the size and shape of a passport photo.
(8) Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable;
(9) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by applicant in the
conduct of his business;
Direct Sellers
7-4-4
(10) Last cities, villages, town, not to exceed three (3), where applicant conducted similar
business just prior to making this registration.
(11) Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven (7) days after leaving this
City;
(12) Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance
violation related to applicant's transient merchant business within the last five (5)
years, the nature of the offense and the place of conviction.
(b) Identification; Licenses. Applicants shall present to the City Clerk for examination:
(1) A current driver's license or valid form of government issued identification bearing
the applicant’s photograph;
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights and
measures where applicant's business requires use of weighing and measuring devices
approved by state authorities;
(3) A state health officer's certificate where applicant's business involves the handling of
food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law; such certificate to
state that applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease,
dated not more than ninety (90) days prior to the date the application for license is
made.
(c) License Fee and Miscellaneous.
(1) At the time the application is submitted, a fee shall be paid to the City Clerk to cover
the cost of processing and issuing said license. Every person who shall be engaged in
direct sales must file a separate application form. The fee for a direct seller’s,
solicitor’s or canvasser’s license shall be as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee
Schedule. All license fees will be reviewed annually. All persons within a group must
comply with the other provisions of this Chapter. A license granted hereunder shall be
valid for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of issuance.
(2) The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the City Clerk his or her agent to
accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out
of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales
activities of the applicant, in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort,
be served personally.
(3) Upon payment of said fee and the signing of said statement, the City Clerk shall
issue a license to the applicant as a direct seller and the date of entry. The license
shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of entry, subject to
subsequent refusal as provided in Sec. 7-4-5(b) below.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-4-5 Investigation.
(a) Upon receipt of each application, the City Clerk may refer it immediately to the Chief of
Police or their designee who may make and complete an investigation of the statements
made in such registration. If the police department determines that any portion of the
application is false or that the applicant has been convicted of a violation of an
ordinance or law which substantially relates to the activity described in the application
or the applicant has pending charges and such charges substantially relates to the activity
described in the application, the application may be denied by the police department in
conference with the City Clerk.
Direct Sellers
7-4-5
(b) If the police department approves the application, and there have been no complaints of
material nature that have been received against the applicant by authorities in the last two
(2) years by any cities, villages and towns, in which applicant conducted similar business
and applicant has met all of the requirements of this Title7, Chapter 4 the City Clerk may
grant the permit without further review.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-4-6 Appeal.
Any person denied a license may appeal the denial through the appeal procedure provided by
ordinance or resolution of the Common Council or, if none has been adopted, under the
provisions of Secs. 68.07 through 68.16, Wis. Stats. An applicant whose permit has been
denied by the police department or whose appeal has been denied by the Common Council may
not apply for a permit for a period of one (1) year from the date of the original application.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-4-7 Regulation of Direct Sellers.
(a) Prohibited Practices.
(1) Direct Sellers are hereby prohibited from:
a. Calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. except by appointment;
b. Calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the
words “No Peddlers,” “No Solicitors” or words of similar meaning;
c. Calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or
d. Remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant
or other person having authority over such premises.
(2) A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading
statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any goods offered for
sale, the purpose of his visit, his identity or the identity of the organization he
represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what
portion of the sale price of goods being offered will actually be used for the
charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Said portion shall be
expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the goods.
(3) No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians or
vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations
shall be observed. No direct seller shall be upon any street used as a parade route
between the time of one-half (1/2) hour immediately preceding the commencement
of any scheduled parade until after the conclusion of any scheduled parade.
(4) No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to
attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a
one hundred (100) foot radius of the source.
(5) No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in
which such direct seller is conducting business.
(6) Sales of any type of device that expels a projectile, including but not limited to, silly
string, marshmallows, or other type of projectile are prohibited.
Direct Sellers
7-4-7
(7) No direct seller shall engage in direct sales at a special event without permission of
the organization holding the special event permit, or if no permit is needed, the
organization sponsoring the special event.
(b) Disclosure Requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective
customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose the seller’s name, the name of the
company or organization with which they are affiliated, if any, and the identity of
the goods or services they offer for sale. The direct seller shall also carry their direct
seller license on their person at all times when engaged in selling and display the
same to a prospective customer upon request.
(2) If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller or any sales order for the later delivery
of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel said
transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than
Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00), in accordance with the procedure as set forth in Sec.
423.203, Wis. Stats.; the seller shall give the buyer two (2) copies of a typed or
printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of Sections
423.203(1)(a)(b) and (c), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
(3) If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, the direct seller
shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement
containing the terms of the agreement, the amount paid in advance, whether full,
partial or no advance payment is made, the name, address and telephone number of
the seller, the delivery or performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is
provided and, if so, the terms thereof.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-4-8 Records.
The Chief of Police or their designee shall report to the City Clerk all convictions for violation
of this Chapter and the City Clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the registrant
convicted.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-4-9 Suspension, Revocation and Nonrenewal of License.
(a) Licenses may be suspended, revoked or nonrenewed for a violation of any provision of
this chapter or a violation of a statute, ordinance or regulation substantially related to the
permitted activity. A hearing for the suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a license
shall be conducted before the Common Council.
(b) Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the licensee at least seventytwo
(72) hours prior to the time set for the hearing; such notice shall contain the time and
place of hearing and a statement of the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
(c) Appeal from a decision of the Common Council shall be to the circuit court for La Crosse
county.
Code in effect 2/12/19

Chapter 5
Hotel and Motel Room Tax
7-5-1 Definitions
7-5-2 Tax Imposed
7-5-3 Clerk to Administer
7-5-4 Permit Required
7-5-5 Issuance of Permit
7-5-6 Revocation of Permit
7-5-7 Liability on Sale of Business
7-5-8 Audits
7-5-9 Failure to File Return
7-5-10 Delinquent Tax Returns
7-5-11 Bond
7-5-12 Records
7-5-13 Penalty
Sec. 7-5-1 Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable in this Chapter:
(a) Gross Receipts. Gross receipts shall mean the total revenue from the retail furnishing of
rooms, lodging or similar accommodations by a hotel or motel or short-term rental as
defined herein.
(b) Hotel or Motel. A building or group of buildings in which the public may obtain
accommodations for a consideration, including, without limitation, such establishments
as inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses,
summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins and any other building or
group of buildings in which accommodations are available to the public, irrespective of
whether membership is required for use of the accommodations, except accommodations
rented for a continuous period of more than a calendar month or thirty (30) days,
whichever is less, and accommodations furnished by any hospitals, sanitariums or
nursing homes, or by corporations or associations organized and operated exclusively for
religious, charitable or educational purposes provided that no part of the net earnings of
such corporations and associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
individual.
(c) Lodging Marketplace. An entity that provides a platform through which an unaffiliated
3rd party offers to rent a short-term rental to an occupant and collects the consideration
for the rental from the occupant.
(d) Occupant. An occupant means a person who rents a short-term rental through a lodging
marketplace.
(e) Owner. An owner means the person who owns the residential dwelling that has been
rented.
(f) Room Tax. Room tax means the tax imposed by this Ordinance.
Hotel and Motel Room Tax
7-5-1
(g) Residential Dwelling. Any building, structure, or part of the building or structure, that is
used or intended to be used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one person or by
two (2) or more persons maintaining a common household, to the exclusion of all others.
(h) Short-Term Rental. A residential dwelling that is offered for rent for a fee and for fewer
than twenty-nine (29) consecutive days.
(i) Transient. Any person residing for a continuous period of less than one (1) month in a
hotel, motel or other furnished accommodations available to the public.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-5-2 Tax Imposed.
Pursuant to Wis. Stat. 66.0615, a tax is hereby imposed on the privilege and services of
furnishing at retail, rooms or lodging to transients by hotelkeepers, motel operators, lodging
marketplaces, owners of short-term rentals, and other persons furnishing accommodations that
are available to the public, irrespective of whether membership is required for use of the
accommodations. Such tax shall be at a rate of eight percent (8.0%) of the gross receipts from
such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging. Such tax may not be imposed upon sales to the federal
government and persons listed under Wis. Stat. §77.54 (9a).
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-5-3 Clerk to Administer.
This Chapter shall be administered by the City Clerk. The tax imposed for each calendar month
is due and payable on the last day of the month next succeeding the calendar month for which
imposed. A return shall be filed with the City Finance Department by those furnishing at retail
such rooms and lodging, on or before the same date on which such tax is due and payable. Such
return shall show the gross receipts of the preceding calendar month from such retail furnishing
of rooms or lodging, the amount of taxes imposed for such period and such other information as
the City Finance Department deems necessary. The return shall be accompanied by a copy of the
Wisconsin Sales Tax Return filed by the person filing the room tax return for the same period of
time set forth in the room tax return. Upon the request of the City’s Finance Department, any
person required to file such monthly return shall file an annual calendar year return within ninety
(90) days of the close of each such calendar year. The annual return shall summarize the monthly
returns, reconcile and adjust for errors in the monthly returns and shall contain certain such
additional information as the City Finance Department requires. Such annual returns shall be
made on forms as prescribed by the City Clerk. All such returns shall be signed by the person
required to file a return or his duly authorized agent, but need not be verified by oath. The City
Finance Director may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return, but in no event
longer than one (1) month from the filing date.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Hotel and Motel Room Tax
7-5-4
Sec. 7-5-4 Permit Required.
Every person furnishing rooms or lodging under Section 7-5-2 shall file with the City Clerk an
application for a permit for each place of business. Every application for a permit shall be made
upon a form prescribed by the City Clerk and shall set forth the name under which the applicant
transacts or intends to transact business, the location of their place of business, and such other
information as the City Clerk requires. The application shall be signed by the owner if a sole
proprietor, and, if not a sole proprietor, by the person authorized to act on behalf of such
owner(s). At the time of making an application, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a fee as
set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule for a one (1) year permit or a two (2) year permit,
said fee to be reviewed annually. The permit shall be obtained annually (or every two (2) years if
so selected) and be valid for the period of July 1 to June 30 of each year.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-5-5 Issuance.
After compliance with Sections 7-5-4 and 7-5-10 by the applicant, the City Clerk shall grant and
issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of business within the City. Such permit
is not assignable and is valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and for the
transaction of business at the place designated therein. It shall, at all times, be conspicuously
displayed at the place for which issued.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-5-6 Revocation of Permit.
Whenever any person fails to comply with this Chapter, the City Clerk may, upon ten (10) days'
notification and after affording such person the opportunity to show cause why their permit
should not be revoked, revoke or suspend any or all of the permits held by such person. The City
Clerk shall give to such person written notice of the suspension or revocation of their permit(s).
The City Clerk shall not issue a new permit after the revocation of a permit unless the Clerk is
satisfied that the former holder of the permit will comply with the provisions of this Chapter. A
fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule shall be imposed for the renewal or
issuance of a permit which has been previously suspended or revoked.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-5-7 Liability on Sale of Business.
If any person liable for any amount of tax under this Chapter sells their business or stock of
goods or quits the business, their successors or assigns shall withhold an amount of the purchase
price sufficient to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the City
Treasurer that room tax has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person
subject to the room tax imposed by this Chapter fails to withhold such amount of room tax from
the purchase price as required, said person shall become personally liable for payment of the
amount required to be withheld by them to the extent of the price of the accommodations valued
in money.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Hotel and Motel Room Tax
7-5-8
Sec. 7-5-8 Audits.
(a) The City Treasurer may, by office audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the City
or the refund due to any person under this Chapter. This determination may be made
upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or on the basis of any of
the information within the City Treasurer’s possession. One (1) or more such office audit
determinations may be made of the amount due for anyone or for more than one (1)
period.
(b) The City Treasurer may, by field audit, determine the tax required to be paid to the City
or the refund due to any person under this Chapter. The determination may be made upon
the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited or upon any other information
within the City Treasurer's possession. The City Treasurer is authorized to examine and
inspect the books, records, memoranda and property of any person in order to verify the
tax liability of that person or of another person. Nothing herein shall prevent the City
Treasurer from making a determination of tax at any time.
(c) A forfeiture, not to exceed five percent (5%) of the room tax, may be imposed on a
person who fails to comply with a request to inspect and audit the person’s financial
records.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-5-9 Failure to File Return.
(a) If any person fails to file a return as required by this Chapter, the City Treasurer shall
make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts under Section 7-5-2. Such estimate
shall be made for the period for which such person failed to make a return and shall be
based upon any information which is in the City Treasurer's possession or may come into
the City Clerk’s possession. On the basis of this estimate, the City Treasurer shall
compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the City. One (1) or more such
determinations may be made for one (1) or more than one (1) period.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-5-10 Delinquent Tax Returns.
(a) Late Filing Fee Imposed. Delinquent tax returns shall be subject to a Fifty Dollar
($50.00) late filing fee. The tax imposed by this Chapter shall become delinquent if not
paid, in the case of a timely filed return, within thirty (30) days after the due date of the
return, or within thirty (30) days after the expiration of an extension period if one has
been granted. In the case of no return filed or a return filed late, by the due date of the
return.
(b) Interest Charged on Delinquent Accounts. All unpaid taxes under this ordinance shall
bear interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month from the due date of the return
until the first day of the month following the month in which the tax is paid or deposited
with the City Treasurer. An extension of time within which to file a return shall not
extend the due date of the return for purposes of interest computation.
Hotel and Motel Room Tax
7-5-10
(c) Penalty for Non-Payment. In addition to any interest or forfeiture which may be
assessed under this ordinance, there shall be a forfeiture imposed for failure to pay any
room tax determined hereunder by its due date. Said forfeiture shall be equal to twentyfive
percent (25%) of the room tax due for the previous year or Five Thousand Dollars
($5,000) whichever is less, of the tax imposed, is hereby established and due and owing
in the event that the room tax is not paid within thirty (30) days after the due date of
return.
(d) Fraudulent Return. If a person fails to file a return when due or files a false or
fraudulent return with the intent in either case to defeat or evade the tax imposed by this
Chapter, a penalty of fifty percent (50%) shall be added to the tax required to be paid,
exclusive of interest and other penalties.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-5-11 Bond.
In order to protect the revenue of the City, the City Clerk may require any person liable for the
tax imposed by this Chapter to place with him or her, before or after a permit is issued, such
security, not in excess of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) as the City Clerk determines. If any
taxpayer fails or refuses to place such security, the City Clerk may refuse to revoke such permit.
If any taxpayer is delinquent in the amount of the taxes imposed by this Chapter, the City Clerk
may, upon ten (10) days' notice, recover the taxes, interest and penalties from the security placed
with the City Clerk by such taxpayer. No interest shall be paid or allowed by the City to any
person for the deposit of such security.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-5-12 Records.
Every person liable for the tax imposed by this Chapter shall keep or cause to be kept such
records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the City Clerk requires. The
information obtained under this ordinance shall remain confidential with the exception that such
information shall be available to persons using the information in the discharge of duties
imposed by law or of the duties of their office or by order of a court. The City of Onalaska may
publish statistics classified so as not to disclose the identity of a particular return. Any person
violating this section shall forfeit not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100), nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
Code in effect 2/12/19
Hotel and Motel Room Tax
7-5-13
Sec. 7-5-13 Penalty.
Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this Chapter who fails to obtain a permit as
required in Section 7-5-4 or who fails or refuses to permit the inspection of his records by the
City Treasurer after such inspection has been duly requested by the City Treasurer or who fails to
file a return as provided in this Chapter, or who violates any other provision of this Chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof and in addition to any other penalty imposed herein, forfeit an amount as
prescribed by Section 1-1-7 of this Code of Ordinances and the costs of prosecutions and, in
default of payment of such forfeiture, be confined in the La Crosse County Jail until payment of
such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, but not exceeding ninety (90) days for each violation.
Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues is hereby deemed to constitute a
separate offense.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 6
Taxicabs
7-6-1 Regulation of Taxicabs
7-6-2 Insurance Required
7-6-3 Inspection Required
7-6-4 Conditions of License
7-6-5 Meters and Rates
7-6-6 Exceptions
7-6-7 Refusal to Pay Taxi Fare Prohibited
7-6-8 Revision of License
7-6-9 Operator's License
7-6-10 Revocation of License
Sec. 7-6-1 Regulation of Taxicabs.
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall operate a public vehicle, taxicab or automobile for the
conveyance of passengers, with or without baggage, for hire or reward, without having
first obtained a license therefor from the Common Council. Such license shall entitle such
person, firm or corporation to operate such public vehicle, taxicab or automobile for hire
or reward until the first day of July of the year subsequent to the issuance thereof. This
Section shall apply to all vehicles conveying persons or baggage for hire or offering
taxicab or cab or similar transportation service to the public, except such vehicles as
operate over a regular route or between fixed termini, excepting, also, such vehicles as are
rented to be driven by the renter or his agent, commonly known as rent-a-cars, and except
vehicles operated solely as funeral cars.
(b) (1) Application for the licensing of a taxicab business shall be addressed to the Common
Council and shall be filed with the City Clerk, together with a tendered license fee
prorated on the basis of the annual license fee set forth in Subsection (d), should
each remaining portion of the calendar license year be less than eleven (11) months.
The application shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the rates to be
charged, the number of vehicles to be licensed, number of adult persons the vehicle
is designed to carry, name of insurance carrier, name of the insured and the number,
amount and duration of the policy.
(2) Upon the filing with the City Clerk of such application, together with a receipt of the
City Clerk showing payment of the license fee required, the Common Council shall
Taxicabs
7-6-1
either grant or deny such license, whichever shall, in its judgment, appear in the interests
of the public, specifying the terms and conditions, if any, under which said person, firm or
corporation shall operate a public vehicle, taxicab or automobile for hire, including the
rates to be charged therefor and any other limitations or conditions that may be deemed
advisable in the judgment of the Council. After the granting of such license by the
Council, the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license for the operation of such
vehicle or vehicles.
(c) No license for taxicab business based on new application therefor shall be issued except
upon a showing that the available transportation facilities are not adequate to meet the
public need and that the applicant is proper and able to furnish it.
(d) The taxicab business license fee shall be as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule and
shall be paid annually. The taxicab business license shall be reviewed annually.
(e) The license year for taxicab business licenses shall be from July 1st through June 30th. As
a condition to the continued holding and renewal of license for a taxicab business, the
proprietor, owner or his agent shall pay to the City the license fees computed as set forth
in Subsection (d) above each year on or before the 15th day of May.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-6-2 Insurance Required.
(a) It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle for the conveyance of passengers for hire or
permit the same to be operated, nor shall any license be issued hereunder until and unless
the applicant for a license deposit with the City Clerk a certificate of liability insurance for
the vehicles for which licenses are sought, said certificate of liability insurance to be
acceptable and approved by the City Clerk and issued by a company authorized to do
business in the State of Wisconsin, indemnifying the applicant in the amount of One
Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) for damage to property, and One Hundred
Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to one (1) person and Three Hundred
Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to more than one (1) person caused by the
operation of said vehicles in the City.
(b) Each taxicab insurance policy shall contain a provision that the same may not be cancelled
before the expiration of its term except upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the City.
Every day upon which any vehicle is operated for the conveyance of passengers for hire or
when taxicab or cab or similar transportation is offered to the public without an insurance
policy as required herein being in effect and on file with the City Clerk shall be deemed a
separate violation. The cancellation or other termination of any insurance policy issued in
compliance with this Section shall automatically revoke and terminate all licenses issued
for the taxicab covered by such insurance policy, unless another policy shall be provided
and in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination.
(c) The insurance policy or certificate shall further provide that it cannot be cancelled until
fifteen (15) days' notice of such cancellation shall have been given by registered mail to
the City Clerk. The cancellation or other termination of any such insurance policy or
certificate shall automatically revoke and terminate all licenses issued for the taxicabs
Taxicabs
7-6-2
covered by such time of such policy cancellation or termination.
(d) The owner of any taxicab, at the time of filing with the City Clerk said insurance policy or
certificate, shall also file a receipted bill from the insurance company issuing said policy
or certificate showing that the premium for said policy or certificate for one (1) year has
been paid in full.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-6-3 Inspection Required.
(a) No vehicle shall be licensed until it has been annually examined by a reputable automobile
repair facility and found to be in a thoroughly satisfactory and safe condition for the
transportation of passengers, clean, of good appearance and well painted. The Chief of
Police shall determine whether said vehicle complies with all the other provisions of this
Chapter. If such examination and inspection shows that vehicle does not comply with any
of the provisions of this Section, no license shall be issued. At the request of the Chief of
Police, the taxicab owners shall take their vehicles to a reputable garage for an
independent inspection at owner's expense.
(b) No taxicab shall be licensed until the Police Department has approved that:
(1) The horn, footbrake, windshield, rear vision mirror, fenders, exhaust system,
windshield wipers, emergency brake, directional signals, speedometer, license
lamps, tires, headlamps, stop lamps and tail lamps are in legal working order as
required by the Wisconsin Motor Vehicle Code;
(2) The taxicab is in generally safe, sanitary and reliable condition.
(c) The inspection required by this Section is only an inspection of the taxicab's exterior and
passenger areas and shall not be a thorough mechanical inspection of the taxicab. Nothing
in this Section shall be interpreted as relieving the owner or operator of a taxicab from any
and all liability arising from any unsafe, unsanitary, unreliable or illegal conditions
existing in his taxicab, whether or not such conditions are discovered or omitted by the
inspections required herein. This Section shall not be interpreted as creating a duty or
liability on the part of the City of Onalaska, the Police Department or any employee or
agent of the City to any person.
(d) Any police officer of this City may, at all reasonable times, inspect any cab or public hack
under such taxicab business license and may prohibit the use of any cab which is unsafe or
not in proper repair.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-6-4 Conditions of License.
(a) Licenses Nontransferable. Licenses issued or granted under this Chapter shall be nonassignable
and nontransferable.
Taxicabs
7-6-4
(b) Information Card to be Displayed. A card containing the name of the owner, license
number, the number of the vehicle and rates of fare printed thereon shall be placed and at
all times kept in a conspicuous place inside such vehicle.
(c) Liability of Licensee. Any licensee shall be liable for any violations of ordinances or
statutes by any and all persons operating taxicabs under its license.
(d) Number of Passengers. No licensee or person driving a taxicab shall carry or permit to be
carried in any such vehicle more than the number of persons specified in the license
applicable to such vehicle.
(e) Common Council May Impose Further Restrictions. Any licensee hereunder shall be
subject to such further regulations and restrictions as may be imposed at any time by the
Common Council.
(f) Duty to Carry Passengers. No person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire or reward shall refuse to carry passengers to or from any part
of the City with reasonable promptness and at the rates fixed in the license to operate.
(g) Individual Service. Every patron who first engages services in a vehicle for the
convenience of passengers for hire shall receive individual service unless he shall give
consent to additional passengers being carried.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-6-5 Meters and Rates.
All taxicabs operated under the authority of this Chapter, except those operating under the
Onalaska Shared Ride Program, shall be equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the
passengers, visible to them at all times, day and night; and, after sundown, the face of the
taximeter shall be illuminated. Said taximeter shall be operated mechanically, be a mechanism
of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one (1) of the
front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. They shall be sealed at
all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect their correct reading and
recording. Each taximeter shall have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and
when it is not employed, and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of such
taximeter into a non-recording position at the termination of each trip. The said taximeters shall
be subject to inspection from time to time by the Police Department. Any police officer is
hereby authorized, either on complaint of any person or without any complaint, to inspect any
meter and, upon discovering any inaccuracy therein, to notify the person operating such taxicab
to cease operation. Thereupon said taxicab shall be kept off the highways until the taximeter is
repaired and in the required working condition. Each vehicle operated under a license required
by this Chapter shall have displayed in a prominent place therein the schedule of rates charged.
The licensee shall submit to the Council with each application a schedule of the rates proposed
to be charged during the license year. The Council may approve or disapprove the proposed
rates or may substitute in its discretion a rate or rates which shall be reasonable under the
circumstances.
Taxicabs
7-6-5
Generally, the rate applicable to the City of La Crosse shall prevail in the City of Onalaska.
Standards of service shall also be as prescribed by the Common Council. Failure to charge the
rate subsequently approved by the Council or to provide the service proposed to be performed,
or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Section shall subject the licensee to the
penalties provided by this Chapter.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-6-6 Exceptions.
This Chapter shall not apply to persons, firms or corporations engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire both interstate and intrastate between regularly established points
and on regularly established time schedules, nor to the operator of a motor vehicle engaged in
the business of transporting school students for hire.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-6-7 Refusal to Pay Taxi Fare Prohibited.
No person who has been transported by a taxicab shall refuse to pay the fare for such
transportation as such fare is shown on the taximeter or zone meter.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-6-8 Revision of License.
The Common Council may, after due hearing thereon and pursuant to notice to all interested
parties while any license required by this Chapter is in full force and effect, change such
license or licenses by inserting therein additional terms or conditions of schedules of changes
in the rates as may, to the Council, appear to be for the public good.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-6-9 Operator's License.
No person shall operate any vehicle within the City of Onalaska without a valid driver's
license. It shall be unlawful for an operator of a vehicle for hire or reward to operate said
vehicle more than twelve (12) hours out of every twenty-four (24) hours. The Police Chief
may examine operators as to their qualifications as a driver for an automobile for hire in the
City of Onalaska and may include a finding as to the moral character and other necessary
qualifications required to be a competent operator.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Taxicabs
7-6-10
Sec. 7-6-10 Revocation of License.
(a) Revocation. Licenses granted under this Chapter may be suspended or revoked at any
time by the Chief of Police for any violation of this Chapter. When a taxicab license is
revoked or cancelled as herein provided, the Chief of Police shall immediately notify the
owner to cease at once to operate the vehicle for which the license has been revoked as a
taxicab.
(b) Appeals. Any person who received a revocation of license and objects to all or part
thereof may appeal to the Common Council within seven (7) days of the receipt of the
order and the Common Council shall hear such appeal within thirty (30) days of receipt of
such written notice of the appeal. After such hearing, the Common Council may reverse,
affirm or modify the order or determination.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 7
Regulation and Licensing of Fireworks
7-7-1 Regulation of Fireworks
Sec. 7-7-1 Regulation of Fireworks.
(a) Definition. In this section, “fireworks” means anything manufactured, processed or
packaged for exploding, emitting sparks or combustion which does not have another
common use, but does not include any of the following:
(1) A cap containing not more than one-quarter (1/4) grain of explosive mixture, if
the cap is used or possessed or sold for use in a device which prevents direct
bodily contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion.
(2) A toy snake which contains no mercury.
(3) A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding thirty-six (36) inches in length
that is designed to produce audible or visible effects or to produce audible and
visible effects.
(4) A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and which contains
less than one-quarter (1/4) grain of explosive mixture.
(5) A fuseless device that is designed to produce audible or visible effects or audible
and visible effects and that contains less than one-quarter (1/4) grain of explosive
mixture.
(6) A device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic smoke-producing
mixtures, at a controlled rate, and that produces audible or visible effects, or
audible and visible effects.
(7) A cylindrical fountain that consists of one (1) or more tubes and that is classified
by the federal department of transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined
in 49 CFR 173.50.
(8) A cone fountain that is classified by the federal department of transportation as a
Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50.
(9) Fuel or a lubricant.
(10) A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell.
(11) A flare used or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency or in the
operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor vehicle.
(12) A match, cigarette, lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space heater.
(13) A model rocket engine.
(14) Tobacco and a tobacco product.
(b) Sale.
(1) No person may sell or possess with intent to sell fireworks, except:
a. To a person holding a permit under either subsection 7-7-1(b)(2) or 7-7-
1(b)(3) or
b. To a city, village or town.
Regulations and Licensing of Fireworks
7-7-1
(2) A firework seller’s permit may only be issued to a person holding or exempt from
having a valid user’s permit pursuant to subsection (c) hereof. A firework seller’s
permit may be obtained from the City Clerk upon payment of the fee set forth in
the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. A firework seller’s permit described in
subsection
7-7-1(b)(3) hereof that provides services or conducts activities in the City of
Onalaska.
(3) A fireworks location permit may only be issued to a person holding or exempt
from having a valid users permit pursuant to subsection 7-7-1(c) hereof. The
fireworks location permit shall be displayed at the location for which it was
published at all times that such location is operating. A fireworks location permit
may be obtained from the City Clerk, subject to a fee as set forth on the City of
Onalaska Fee Schedule. A separate fireworks location permit is required for every
physical location selling fireworks in the City of Onalaska.
(4) The provisions of subsection 7-7-1(c)(4) and (5) shall apply to the issuance of
every fireworks seller’s permit or fireworks location permit.
(5) For a purpose specified under subsection 7-7-1(c)(2)(a)-(f) hereof.
(c) Use.
(1) No person may possess, sell or use fireworks without a user’s permit from the
City Clerk. No person may use fireworks or a device listed under sub. (1)(a)
through (h) or (m) while attending a fireworks display for which a permit has
been issued to a person listed under subsection (2)(a)-(e).
(2) Paragraph (a) does not apply to:
a. The City but municipal fire and law enforcement officials shall be notified
of the proposed use of fireworks at least two (2) days in advance.
b. The possession of use of explosives in accordance with rules or general
orders of the Wisconsin Department of Commerce.
c. The disposal of hazardous substances in accordance with rules adopted by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
d. The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in any
manufacturing process.
e. The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in connection
with classes conducted by educational institution.
f. A possessor or manufacturer of explosives in possession of a license or
permit under 18 USC 841 to 848 if the possession of the fireworks is
authorized under the license or permit.
g. Except as provided in par. (bm)*, the possession of fireworks in the City
while transporting the fireworks to the City where the possession of the
fireworks is authorized by permit or ordinance. *(bm) Paragraph (a)
applies to a person transporting fireworks under par. (b) 7. if, in the course
of transporting the fireworks through the City, the person remains in the
City for a period of at least twelve (12) hours
(3) A permit under this subsection may be issued only to the following:
a. A public authority.
b. A fair association.
c. An amusement park.
d. A civic organization intending to display fireworks for public purposes.
Regulations and Licensing of Fireworks
7-7-1
(4) The City may require an indemnity bond with good and sufficient sureties in the
amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) or policy of liability
insurance in the amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) for the
payment of all claims that may arise by reason of injuries (including death) or
damages of whatever kind to person or property from the sale, handling, use or
discharge of fireworks under the permit. Such bond or policy of insurance shall
be obtained from a company or companies approved by the City and in a form
satisfactory to the City. The bond or insurance policy shall be taken in the name
of the City and any person injured or damaged thereby may bring an action on the
bond or policy in the person’s own name to recover the damage the person has
sustained. The bond or policy, if required, together with a copy of the permit
shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. None of the provisions of this section
shall be construed to limit the liability of the permit holder for injuries or
damages.
(5) A permit under this subsection shall specify all of the following:
a. The name and address within the City of Onalaska of the permit holder
b. The date on and after which fireworks may be purchased or sold, as
applicable c. The kind and quality of fireworks which may be purchased or sold, as
applicable
d. The date and location of permitted use or sale, as may be applicable
e. Other special conditions including but not limited to the amount of bond or insurance under f. A copy of a permit under this subsection shall be given to the municipal
fire or law enforcement official at least two (2) business days before the
date of authorized use.
g. No permit under this ordinance may be issued to a minor.
(d) Parental Liability. A parent, foster parent, treatment foster parent, family-operated
group home parent or legal guardian of a minor who consents to the use of fireworks by
the minor is liable for damages caused by the minor’s use of the fireworks.
(e) Enforcement.
(1) The City may petition the circuit court for an order enjoining violations of this
ordinance.
(2) Fireworks stored, handled, sold, possessed or used by a person who violates this
ordinance or a court order under par. (a) may be seized and held as evidence of
the violation. Except as provided in s. 968.20 (4) Wis. Stats., only the fireworks
that are the subject of a violation of this ordinance or a court order under par. (a)
may be destroyed after conviction for a violation. Except as provided in s. 968.20
(4) Wis. Stats., fireworks that are seized as evidence of a violation for which no
conviction results shall be returned to the owner in the same condition as they
were when seized to the extent practicable.
Regulations and Licensing of Fireworks
7-7-1
(f) Penalties.
(1) A person who violates a court order under subsection 7-7-1(e)(1) hereof shall be
fined not more than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000) or imprisoned not more than
nine (9) months or both.
(2) A person who violates this ordinance shall forfeit not more than One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000).
(3) A parent or legal guardian of a minor who consents to the use of fireworks by the
minor shall forfeit not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000).
(4) A person holding any permit issued under this ordinance who violates this
ordinance shall immediately forfeit such ordinance and shall be ineligible to
obtain any permit under this ordinance for one (1) year from the date of such
forfeiture.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 8
Garage Sales
7-8-1 Garage Sales
Sec. 7-8-1 Garage Sales.
(a) Times. Garage sales shall be conducted between 7:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Each sale shall
last no longer than three (3) consecutive days. No more than two (2) sales shall be held
in any calendar year. In the event that any second scheduled sale is cancelled because of
inclement weather, one (1) make-up sale may be held.
(b) Signs. Garage sale signs shall be pursuant to sign regulations in the City Sign Code.
(1) Garage sale signs shall identify the location of the sale and must be located off of the
City right-of-way.
(2) No garage sale sign may be located on traffic control devices or on property or the
adjoining right-of-way of property the owner of which has not given explicit
permission for its location.
(3) No garage sale sign shall be displayed more than one (1) day before the sale or one
(1) day following the sale.
(4) No more than one (1) garage sale sign may be located at the sale site and no more
than four (4) garage sale signs may be located off the site, except that two (2) signs
are permitted on corner lots, one (1) facing each street.
(c) Definitions. The following definitions are applicable to this Section:
(1) Garage Sale. All general sales open to the public, conducted from or on a residential
premises, for the purpose of disposing of personal property, including but not limited
to all sales entitled rummage, lawn, yard, porch, room, backyard, patio or garage sale.
(2) Personal Property. Property which is owned, utilized and maintained and acquired
in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include
merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 9
Regulation and Licensing of Amusement Arcades
7-9-1 Definitions
7-9-2 Amusement Arcade License
7-9-3 Hours of Operation for Amusement Arcades
7-9-4 General Requirements for Amusement Arcades
7-9-5 License Revocation
Sec. 7-9-1 Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable in this Chapter:
(a) Amusement Arcade. Any premises or arcade operated by any organization, whether
incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building whose primary
purpose or object of its existence or operation is that of providing "amusement devices"
to the public at retail, and/or any premises operated by any organization, whether
incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building, the majority of
whose gross receipts are derived from the providing of "amusement devices" to the
public at retail or where six (6) or more amusement devices are located.
(b) Amusement Device. Any table, platform, mechanical device or apparatus operated or
intended to be operated for amusement, pleasure, test of skill, competition or sport, the
use or operation of which is conditioned upon payment of a consideration either by
insertion of a coin or token in a slot or otherwise. Such amusement device shall include,
but not be limited to, devices commonly known as baseball, football, basketball, hockey,
pinball, shuffleboard, ray guns, bowling games, bumper games, skiball, electronic video
games, and shall also include billiard tables and pool tables (whether coin operated or
not). Such definition does not include a bowling alley, juke box or other coin-operated
music machine or a mechanical children's amusement riding device.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-9-2 Amusement Arcade License.
(a) License Required. No person, firm or corporation shall operate or keep an amusement
arcade as defined herein without having obtained and posted on the premises, in plain
view, a license to operate such arcade. Application shall be made to the City Clerk on the
Regulation and Licensing of Amusement Arcades
7-9-2
form provided by such office, accompanied by an application fee of Five Dollars ($5.00) which
shall cover the cost of processing the application and shall be nonrefundable. The application
shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant or, if a partnership, the name and addresses of
all the partners or, if a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal officers
and registered agent thereof, and the name and address of the person who will
supervise the game room.
(2) The name and addresses of the owners of the amusement devices to be located on
the licensed premises, if such others are different from that of the applicant. If the
owner of the amusement devices is a partnership, the names and addresses of all the
partners or, if a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal officers and
registered agent thereof.
(3) A building plan of the premises to be licensed specifically describing and otherwise
showing all dimensions, indicating the intended division of floor space, exits and
entrances, the areas to be used for amusement devices, and the common aisles.
(4) A site plan of the premises to be licensed which shall include the proposed
landscaping for the subject premises, and all the improvements, parking and
driveway areas, and landscaping located on property adjacent to and within twenty
(20) feet of the property lines of the premises to be licensed.
(5) If the applicant operates other game rooms in other areas, the names and addresses
of such other licensed establishments.
(6) Such application shall also contain such additional information as the City deems
necessary to assist it in determining the qualifications of the applicant for such
license.
(b) Inspection. The City Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police and Building Inspector of each
new application for license and these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each
application and the premises, together with such other investigation as shall be necessary
to determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with
the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto, including those governing
sanitation in restaurants, and whether the applicant is a proper recipient of a license. The
Chief of Police and Building Inspector shall furnish to the Common Council in writing the
information derived from such investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to
whether a license should be granted or refused. No license shall be renewed without a reinspection
of the premises and report as originally required.
(c) Public Hearing. The application shall be forwarded to the Common Council which shall
hold a public hearing prior to the granting or denial of any amusement arcade license. In
reviewing each application, the Common Council shall find:
(1) That the establishment, maintenance or operation of an amusement arcade at the
location requested will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort or general welfare.
Regulation and Licensing of Amusement Arcades
7-9-2
(2) That the proposed amusement arcade will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted, nor
substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
(3) That the establishment of the amusement arcade will not impede the normal orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the
district.
(4) That adequate measures have been or will be taken to maintain good order
surrounding the location thereof.
(d) Issuance of License; Term. The City Clerk shall issue a license upon approval of the
application by the Common Council upon the payment by the applicant of an annual
license fee of Five Dollars ($5.00). All licenses issued herein shall be for one (1) year
ending on the 30th day of June and shall not be transferable.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-9-3 Hours of Operation for Amusement Arcades.
No premises for which an amusement arcade license has been issued shall be permitted to
remain open for the offering of electronic amusement devices to the public at retail between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-9-4 General Requirements for Amusement Arcades.
The following general requirements shall apply to all amusement arcades licensed in
accordance with this Chapter:
(a) All amusement arcades shall have a supervisor, age eighteen (18) or older, on the premises
at all times in which the game room is open to the public.
(b) Every amusement arcade shall provide an adequate area and number of bicycle racks for
the orderly parking of bicycles, as determined by the Common Council, which area shall
be separate from a required vehicle parking stall and shall be so located so as to not
occupy any portion of a public sidewalk or to otherwise obstruct pedestrian passage to and
from the premises.
(c) Game rooms licensed herein shall comply with all other building, fire code and applicable
City laws and regulations.
(d) All arcades shall post rules of non-acceptable patron conduct.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-9-5 License Revocation.
Licenses may be revoked by the Common Council after notice and public hearing in the event
an amusement arcade's location or operation fails to conform to standards provided in this
Chapter or violates any other provision of the Code of Ordinances.
Code in effect 2/12/19

Chapter 10
Regulation of Nonmetallic Mining
7-10-1 Statutory Provisions Adopted
7-10-2 Definitions
7-10-3 Existing Nonmetallic Mining Operations
7-10-4 Exempt Activities
7-10-5 Permit Required for Nonmetallic Mining
7-10-6 Permit Revocations
7-10-7 Blasting and/or Rock Crushing
Sec. 7-10-1 Statutory Provisions Adopted.
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 66.038, Wis. Stats., which is adopted by reference
and made a part of this Chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-10-2 Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable in this Chapter:
(a) Environmental Pollution. Has the meaning specified under Sec. 144.01(3), Wis. Stats.
(b) Nonmetallic Mining or Nonmetallic Mining Operation. Operations or activities for the
extraction from the earth for sale or use by the operator of mineral aggregates such as
stone, sand and gravel, fill material and nonmetallic minerals such as asbestos, beryl, clay,
feldspar, peat and talc, related operations or activities such as excavation, grading or
dredging if the purpose of those operations or activities is the extraction of mineral
aggregates and nonmetallic minerals and related processes such as crushing, screening,
scalping, dewatering and blending.
(c) Nonmetallic Mining Refuse. Waste soil, rock, mineral, liquid, vegetation and other waste
material resulting from a nonmetallic mining operation. This term does not include
merchantable by-products resulting directly from or displaced by the nonmetallic mining
operation.
(d) Nonmetallic Mining Site or Site. The location where a nonmetallic mining operation is
proposed or conducted, including all surface areas from which materials are removed,
related storage and processing areas, areas where nonmetallic mining refuse is deposited
Regulation of Nonmetallic Mining
7-10-2
and areas disturbed by the nonmetallic mining operation by activities such as the
construction or improvement of roads or haulage-ways.
(e) Operator. Any person who is engaged in a nonmetallic mining operation or nonmetallic
mining site reclamation or who applies for or holds a nonmetallic mining permit issued
under this nonmetallic mining reclamation ordinance whether individually, jointly or
through subsidiaries, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors.
(f) Reclamation. The rehabilitation of a nonmetallic mining site including, but not limited to,
removal of nonmetallic mining refuse, grading of the site, replacement of topsoil,
stabilization of soil conditions, establishment of vegetative cover, control of surface water
and groundwater, prevention of environmental pollution, construction of fences and, if
practical, restoration of plant, fish and wildlife habitat.
(g) Replacement of Topsoil. The replacement of the topsoil which was removed or disturbed
by a nonmetallic mining operation or the provision of soil which is at least as adequate as
the topsoil which was removed or disturbed for the purposes of providing adequate
vegetative cover and stabilization of soil conditions.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-10-3 Existing Nonmetallic Mining Operations.
This nonmetallic mining reclamation Chapter shall apply to any portion of a nonmetallic mining
site, including un-reclaimed portions of a site which were mined prior to the effective date of
this Chapter.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-10-4 Exempt Activities.
This nonmetallic mining reclamation Chapter shall not apply to the following activities:
(a) Excavations or grading by a person solely for domestic use at his or her residence.
(b) Excavations or grading conducted for highway construction purposes within the highway
right-of-way.
(c) Grading conducted for farming, preparing a construction site or restoring land following a
flood or natural disaster.
(d) Excavations for building construction purposes.
(e) Any mining operation, the reclamation of which is required in a permit obtained under
Sections 144.80 to 144.94, Wis. Stats.
(f) Any activities conducted at a solid or hazardous waste disposal site required to prepare,
operate or close a solid waste disposal facility under Sections 144.435 to 144.445, Wis.
Stats., or a hazardous waste disposal facility under Sections 144.60 to 144.74, Wis. Stats.,
but a nonmetallic mining reclamation ordinance may apply to activities related to solid or
hazardous waste disposal which are conducted at a nonmetallic site separate from the solid
or hazardous waste disposal facility such as activities to obtain nonmetallic minerals to be
used for lining, capping, covering or constructing berms, dikes or roads.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Regulation of Nonmetallic Mining
7-10-5
Sec. 7-10-5 Permit Required for Nonmetallic Mining.
(a) Permit Required. No person shall operate any nonmetallic mining site or operation
within the City unless he obtains a nonmetallic mining permit from the Common Council.
The fee for such permit shall be Fifty Dollars ($50.00), plus any actual City
administrative expenses, payable by certified check. Operators of existing nonmetallic
mining operations shall apply for such permit within thirty (30) of the effective date of
this Chapter.
(b) Associated Permits. Applicants must also apply for and receive stormwater and erosion
control permits when applicable. Applicants shall conform to standards set forth in the
City of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements.
(c) Required Permit Information. An application for a nonmetallic permit shall be
submitted by the operator and shall include:
(1) An adequate description of the operation, including a legal description of the
property;
(2) A plan of the site showing the proposed and existing roads and drives, and the
sources, quantity and disposition of water to be used, if any;
(3) Estimated dates for completion of the extraction and commencement and
completion dates for the reclamation;
(4) A reclamation plan and such other information as maybe necessary to determine
the nature of the operation and the effect on the surrounding area;
(5) Methods of screening from adjacent properties;
(6) Hours of operation;
(7) Dust and noise control;
(8) Maximum depth;
(9) Blasting procedures;
(10) Location and height of stockpiles; and
(11) Such other information the Common Council deems pertinent to the operation.
(d) Reclamation Plan. The reclamation plan shall contain adequate provision that:
(1) All final slopes around the area be flatter than a three (3) to one (1) horizontal
slope in a sand, gravel or borrow pit operation, or in a safe angle or repose in a
quarrying operation;
(2) Excavations below the grade of the nearest abutting public street or highway shall
be set back from the street or highway a distance not less than that required for
buildings and structures in the same zoning district;
(3) Excavations made to a water-producing depth shall not be less than three (3) feet
measured from the low water mark;
(4) All final slopes shall be covered with adequate topsoil and seeded to prevent
erosion;
(5) The plan shall require that, after completion of the anticipated operation, the area
shall be cleared of all debris and be left in a workmanlike condition, subject to the
approval of the Common Council;
Regulation of Nonmetallic Mining
7-10-5
(6) There is a timetable for completion of various stages of reclamation of the
nonmetallic mining site.
(e) Applications. All applications for a license hereunder shall be made in writing upon
written form provided by the City and distributed by the City Clerk. All applications for
permits hereunder shall be signed by the applicant and filed with the City Clerk at least
sixty (60) days prior to the licensing period. The Clerk shall immediately refer all
applications for a license hereunder to the Common Council for public hearing and
approval. The operator shall receive written notice of the public hearing. The license shall
be for a period of time as stated in the application or as modified by the Council.
Modification of the application or reclamation plan may be permitted or additional
conditions may be required upon application. The Council shall consider the effect of the
operation and the proposed reclamation upon existing and future conditions, including
streets, neighboring land development, land use drainage, water supply, water pollution,
air pollution, soil erosion, natural beauty and land value of the locality. The Council may
approve, approve conditionally or reject the application and reclamation plan
(f) Financial Assurance. Before a license and reclamation plan is approved by the
Common Council, the operator shall submit an agreement and performance bond or cash
escrow agreement to assure the following:
(1) The operator shall pay for the cost of all improvements required in the
reclamation plan by the Common Council.
(2) Guaranteed completion of the required reclamation within a period determined by
the Council.
(3) Payment by the operator for all costs incurred by the City for review and
inspection. This would include preparation and review of plans and specifications
by the City Engineer and Attorney, as well as other costs of a similar nature.
(4) The City may elect to have stages of the reclamation plan performed under the
terms of a cash escrow agreement.
(5) The required performance bond or cash escrow agreement shall be equal to one
and one-quarter (1-1/4) times the City Engineer's estimated cost of the required
improvements.
(6) If the required reclamation is not complete within the designated period, all
amounts held under the escrow agreement or performance bond shall be turned
over and delivered to the City and applied to the cost of the required reclamation.
Any balance remaining after such reclamation has been done shall be returned to
the operator. The Common Council, at its option, may extend the bond period for
additional periods.
(g) Fences. Prior to reclamation, nonmetallic mining sites abutting areas zoned residential
shall be enclosed by a security fence of not less than four (4) feet in height. Fence gates
shall be locked or secured when the site is unattended so as to prevent uncontrolled
access by children to the site.
(h) Inspection. An authorized agent of the City may enter the premises of a nonmetallic
mining operation in the performance of his or her official duties by permission of the
property owner or operator or pursuant to a special inspection warrant issued under Sec.
66.0119, Wis. Stats., in order to inspect those premises and to ascertain compliance with
this nonmetallic mining reclamation Chapter.
(i) Prohibitions and Orders. Nonmetallic mining operations within the City are prohibited
if the nonmetallic mining site cannot be reclaimed in compliance with the standards of
this Chapter or if other requirements of this Chapter are not met.
Regulation of Nonmetallic Mining
7-10-5
(j) Enforcement Officer. The City Engineer shall be responsible for the enforcement of
this Chapter.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-10-6 Permit Revocation.
If any permit is revoked, cancelled, rescinded or terminated, the operator shall be given written
notice of any charges or violations against him or the reasons proposed for revocation and shall
have an opportunity to be heard before the Common Council.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-10-7 Blasting and/or Rock Crushing.
(a) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this Section:
(1) Blasting. A method of loosening, moving or shattering masses of solid matter by use
of explosive compounds to prepare stone for crushing, to prepare stone for building
and/or ornamental use, or to prepare property for development.
(2) Person. Any individual, partner, corporation, company, trustee or association,
together with the respective servants, agents and employees thereof.
(3) Rock Crusher. Any device, machine, apparatus or equipment used either
individually or in conjunction with any other device, machine, apparatus or
equipment for the purpose of crushing, grinding, breaking or pulverizing rock or
stone.
(b) Operation. No person within the City shall operate a rock crusher or perform blasting in
such a manner so that any dust, dirt or vibration from such operation shall, in any way,
damage or injure any person or property within the City. All blasting within the City shall
be performed according to the requirements of Ch. IND 5, Explosives and Blasting Agents,
Wis. Adm. Code, and all subsequent amendments thereto.
(c) Permit.
(1) Permit Required. No person within the City shall operate a rock crusher or perform
blasting who does not possess a proper permit therefor from the City.
(2) Applications. All applications for permits hereunder shall be made in writing upon
the written form provided by the City and distributed by the City Clerk. All
applications for permits hereunder shall be signed by the applicant and filed with the
City Clerk at least sixty (60) days prior to the licensing period. The City Clerk shall
immediately refer all applications for permits hereunder to the City Engineer. The
City Clerk shall issue a permit hereunder only after first receiving the recommendation
of the City Engineer, the duly executed certified check for the permit fee as
hereinafter provided and the submittal of the Plan of Operation, if required, as
approved by the City Engineer.
Regulation of Nonmetallic Mining
7-10-7
(3) Certified Check. Each application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by a
certified check in the sum of the required permit fee as hereinafter provided, or a
renewal thereof, the same to be payable to the City.
(4) Plan of Operation. Each application to permit a rock crusher hereunder or renewal
thereof shall be accompanied by a Plan of Operation which shall include: methods of
screening from adjacent properties, hours of operation, hours of blasting and
operation of rock crusher, dust and noise control, blasting procedures, location and
height of stock piles, whether a rock crusher will be needed and how often, water
supply, drainage course, maximum depth, legal description of property in question
and other information the City Engineer deems pertinent to the proposed operation.
Such Plan of Reorganization shall be approved by the City Engineer.
(5) Insurance. Each application for a blasting permit shall be accompanied by a
Certificate of Insurance identifying the City of Onalaska as a party insured in the
amount of Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) for damage to property,
and Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) for injury to one (1) person and
One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury to more than one (1) person caused
by the blasting.
(d) Renewals. All requests for renewals of permits hereunder shall be made at least sixty (60)
days prior to the expiration date of the permit and must comply with all requirements of
Subsection (c) above.
(e) Blasting Procedures and Controls.
(1) Energy Ratio. The allowable vibration of any blast at the nearest occupied or used
building off the subject premises shall not exceed an energy ratio of 0.5 or resultant
particle velocity of 1.35" per second based on the following formula:
Energy ratio = 0.5 = 10.823 f2 A2 where: f = frequency in cycles per second, A =
amplitude or displacement in inches
Energy ratio = .274 V2 (V = resultant particles velocity expressed in inches per
second)
(2) Measurement of Blasts. The operator of the quarry operation, when requested to do
so by the City Engineer, shall measure and submit data to substantiate compliance
with the above formula and the operator of the quarry operation, when requested to
do so by the City Engineer, shall measure air blast. This verification shall be
performed by a seismological engineering firm acceptable to the City or by the City
Engineer. Instrumentation shall be by seismograph similar to VME Seismolog
Model "B" and approved seismograph sound measuring equipment or approved
equivalents. All expenses for these tests shall be paid by the quarry operator.
(3) Blasting Log. A log in duplicate shall be kept of each blast on forms similar to the
one on file with the City Clerk. The original copy of this blasting log shall be filed
Regulation of Nonmetallic Mining
7-10-7
with the City Clerk within forty-eight (48) hours after the blast, and a copy shall be
kept on file at the quarry office.
(4) Cover Material. Operators of quarries for building and/or ornamental stone removal
shall cover Primacord, other detonating cord or surface-laid blasting devices with at
least one foot (1') of dirt or other suitable cover material.
(f) Permit Fee. The permit fee for any permit issued pursuant to this Section shall be as set
forth below. No permit fee shall be prorated. All permits issued hereunder shall expire on
December 31 following the date of issue:
(1) Quarries using blasting to supply buildings and/or ornamental stone: Ten Dollars
($10.00) per blasting period.
(2) Gravel crushing operations using portable or fixed crushing equipment less than
thirty (30) days per year: Ten Dollars ($10.00) per year.
(g) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Section shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in Sec. 1-1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. However, upon
conviction for the violation of any of the provisions of this Section by the holder of a
permit issued hereunder, and in addition to the forfeiture provided, such permit shall
thereupon be cancelled, revoked, rescinded and terminated.
(h) Enforcement. Before renewal of any license issued under this Section is refused or any
license is revoked, cancelled, rescinded or terminated, the licensee shall be given written
notice of any charges or violations against him or the reasons proposed for non-renewal or
revocation and shall have an opportunity to be heard before the Common Council.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 11
Transient and Temporary Public Entertainments
7-11-1 Transient and Temporary Public Entertainments
Sec. 7-11-1 Transient and Temporary Public Entertainments.
(a) License Required.
(1) No person shall maintain or operate any transient or temporary public entertainment
within the City without first obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
(2) This Section does not require a license for the giving of fairs, lectures, concerts,
exhibitions or entertainments of a scientific, historical, political, literary or musical
character for humane, religious, charitable or scientific purposes.
(b) Definition. A transient or temporary public entertainment is one to which the public may
gain admission by payment of an admission charge. It includes shows,
circuses, exhibitions, carnivals and vaudeville.
(c) Application. Application for carnival licenses shall be made by the applicant to the
Common Council in writing at least thirty (30) days before the planned event and all of the
information regarding insurance, etc., shall be filed within thirty (30) days and referred to
the Council for examination of the qualifications, character and reputation of the applicant
and into the desirability of permitting the carnival to operate, show or exhibit in the City.
(d) Requirements.
(1) Insurance Required. No license shall be granted unless the applicant therefor shall
have filed with the City Clerk a public liability insurance policy in a sum as set by
the City Clerk from time to time, with the condition that the applicant shall
indemnify and save harmless the City and its officers and agents and citizens against
any injuries and damages resulting or arising from the conducting of any carnival for
which the license is issued or from the performance by the applicant or his agents of
any negligence incident to or connected with the conduct of such carnival and that
the applicant shall pay all judgments, costs and charges that may be recovered
against the City or any of its officers or agents by reason of the conduct of such
carnival.
(2) License Fee Required. No permit shall be issued unless applicant pays the applicable
permit fee for the operation or maintenance of the public entertainment as set forth on
the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. All public entertainments listed in Subsection (b)
shall be exempt from any license fee is sponsored by a nonprofit organization.
Transient and Temporary Public Entertainments
7-11-1
(3) Posting of License. Such permits when issued shall be prominently displayed while
the carnival is in operation.
(4) Inspection of Mechanical Devices. The applicant shall indicate the date of the last
State inspection of rides, merry-go-rounds and other mechanical devices. The City
reserves the right to require inspections of all mechanical devices that would be
available to the public. All inspection costs shall be paid for by the licensee.
(e) Revocation. Any license granted by the Common Council under the provisions of this
Section may be revoked by the Mayor or Chief of Police, including when the person who
maintains, owns, controls or operates such carnival permits the violation of any provisions
of this Code of Ordinances or State laws or where, in the opinion of the Mayor or Chief of
Police, the carnival is deemed undesirable or presents a threat to the public safety.
Revocations or suspensions may be appealed to the Common Council.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 12
Special Events Permits
7-12-1 Purpose
7-12-2 Definitions
7-12-3 Permit Required
7-12-4 Permit Requirements
7-12-5 Regulations
7-12-6 Application Review
7-12-7 Fees and Reimbursement Schedule
7-12-8 Indemnification and Hold Harmless
7-12-9 Insurance
7-12-10 Event Cancellation
7-12-11 Penalties
7-12-12 Severability
Sec. 7-12-1 Purpose
The City of Onalaska recognizes that Special Events organized by individuals, private
organizations, and non-profits serve an important role in enhancing the city’s quality of life and
can provide benefits to the community as a whole. In an effort to treat all persons and groups
uniformly, to facilitate the successful staging of these special events, and to be mindful of the
efficient use of available facilities and resources, the City will commit staff time and facilities to
review applications to hold special events and assist the organizers as needed to ensure that
special events have an overall positive effect upon the community and its resources.
The City will review Special Event applications for the purpose of assisting the event organizer
in complying with various applicable public safety requirements, as well as be involved during
the special event as needed to protect the safety and welfare of the public, and resources owned
by the public.
During the City’s review and oversight in this process, the City will address traffic and parking
issues, health and safety issues related to the participants and the public, effects upon
neighboring properties, fire potential, explosions, disorder and other dangers to persons or
property, preservation of peace and order, sanitation, and the overall safeguarding of the public
health. The City will also consider the potential diversion of public health, safety, and emergency
services from their regular and necessary duties, and the additional costs of providing public
services necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare associated with special events.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-12-2 Definitions
(a) “Special Event” means a temporary gathering of people on public or private property and
involving at least one of the circumstances listed below. The City Administrator, or their
designee, shall have the exclusive authority to determine whether or not an event meets
the definition of “Special Event.”
Special Events Permits
7-12-2
(1) Exclusive use of all or part of waterways, or City owned facilities, within the City
boundaries such as buildings, parks, open spaces, streets, parking lots, athletic
fields, etc., but does not include normal park shelter rentals or Omni Center
rentals;
(2) Will involve the temporary closing of a public street, alley, or public right of way;
(3) Over three hundred (300) people at any one time attending the event on private
property, except those situations meeting the definition of a “public assembly”,
which shall be governed under Chapter 20 of this Title.
(4) Temporary installation or construction of structures, including but not limited to
tents;
(5) City ordinances and rules require public safety support by City employees;
(6) Will require Extraordinary Services by any City Department;
(7) Hours of the event extend beyond those otherwise adopted in City ordinances; or,
(8) Alcohol, beverages, food, and/or merchandise will be offered.
Examples of Special Events include but are not limited to activities such as
running/jogging/walking events, boat, bicycle, running or road races and other forms of
competition and athletic events, music, theater, film performances or concerts, water ski
demonstrations, air shows, carnivals, equipment shows, cultural events such as art fairs,
antique shows, religious services, classes, meetings, parties, and other gatherings meeting
the above criteria. A Special Event is not intended to include events such as a family
gathering; nonprofit organization, business, or company picnic; or other similar events
unless other criteria listed above apply.
Interested persons will follow a two-step process to determine if an event must obtain a
Special Events permit and comply with this Policy. The first step is to determine if a
particular event meets the definition of a “Special Event.” The second step is to
determine if a Special Event needs to obtain a Special Event permit. Not all Special
Events will need to obtain a Special Event permit. The following section, “Permit
Required” identifies certain Special Events that do not need to obtain a Special Event
permit or to comply with the terms of this Ordinance. Events that do not need to obtain a
Special Event permit must still comply with all other City Ordinances and laws.
(b) “City property” includes all municipal buildings, parks, beaches, athletic fields and
complexes, streets and other rights of way, parking lots, boating and docking facilities,
and any other property owned, leased or controlled by the City of Onalaska.
(c) “Extraordinary Services” means reasonable and necessary services provided by the City
which specifically result from the Special Event. Extraordinary services result in
measureable financial costs which are above and beyond the normal levels of public
health and safety services on a nonevent day. Extraordinary services will normally be
those services requiring city employees to be specifically assigned to tasks in support of
the Special Event and/or those services resulting in overtime pay or similar costs which
result from the event. Examples of extraordinary services may include police protection,
traffic control, fire monitoring, dedicated paramedic service, parks services, and other
services necessary to ensure the protection of participants and citizens, the proper
functioning of City services, and the proper administration of this ordinance and policy.
Special Events Permits
7-12-2
The City will make reasonable efforts to adjust the schedules of employees to minimize
the requirement for overtime pay or other costs for Extraordinary Services where
sufficient advanced notice of the event is provided. (At least sixty (60) days.)
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-12-3 Permit Required
No person or entity acting as an event organizer shall set up for, hold, or conduct a Special
Event, within the municipal boundaries of the City of Onalaska without first obtaining a Special
Event permit.
The City Clerk, or their designee, shall have the exclusive authority to determine whether or not
a permit is required for any particular event. The City’s review of any permit application and/or
its subsequent issuance of a permit shall not be construed as acceptance by the City or its
representatives of any liability or responsibility for any injury or damage relating to the Special
Event. Special Event permits are temporary in nature, and do not vest any permanent rights.
Not all Special Events will require a Special Event permit. If an event meets the definition of
“Special Event,” then a Special Event permit is required except for the following situations:
(a) Athletic events wholly contained on property specifically designed or suited for the
athletic event. (Examples: baseball tournaments, soccer tournaments, golf tournaments)
(b) Funeral processions.
(c) Events organized solely by the City. In these instances, notices shall be given to all
affected departments so that they may determine their level of sponsorship. Events in
which the City participates as one of the organizers are not exempt from the requirement
of obtaining permits.
(d) Recurring events which enter into a separate and specific agreement, which is approved
by the Common Council, to hold the event pursuant to the terms of the individual
agreement. The Council is authorized to modify the terms or requirements of this
Ordinance within such an agreement, provided the modifications meet the spirit if not the
letter of this Ordinance.
(e) Events on property otherwise exempt from City of Onalaska permitting requirements,
such as events wholly contained on property owned by the State of Wisconsin, La Crosse
County or School District Property.
(f) Military Convoys.
(g) Events fully contained on private property within a commercial zoning district with two
hundred ninety-nine (299) people or less people in attendance.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Special Events Permits
7-12-4
Sec. 7-12-4 Permit Requirements
(a) Special Events
(1) Completed written applications for a Special Event permit along with the
application fee shall be filed with the City Clerk. Applications shall be on the
form approved by the City and signed by the person or authorized
representative(s) of the entity or person organizing the Special Event. In lieu of
the application fee, the event organizer may submit with its application a request
that the fee be waived and provide in detail the reasons of financial hardship and
any other reasons for such request. The application may be filed as early as
desired by the applicant, but shall be filed no more than one (1) year before, and
no less than sixty (60) days prior to the event.
(2) Special Events must comply with all applicable City ordinances and requirements,
including but not limited to traffic rules, park rules, state health laws, fire codes,
building codes, zoning, food service, merchant, and liquor licensing requirements.
Special Event organizers shall use all reasonable efforts to ensure compliance of
participants / attendees with all applicable City ordinances, traffic rules, park
rules, state health laws, fire codes, and other licensing requirements, unless
otherwise waived herein.
(3) The applicant shall identify a designated individual who can be contacted at any
time by any person regarding the event, including City representatives such as the
Police, Fire, Health, Inspections Services, Parks, Public Works, Transportation, or
Legal departments to provide information or answer questions, or to whom City
representatives may refer questions and comments from the public.
(4) The following City departments will be provided with copies of the Special Event
permit application for their review and comment: City Administrator, Police, Fire,
Inspection Services, Public Works, Parks. Additional City officials or legal may
need to review the application as may be warranted by the specific circumstances
of the event. City departments shall notify the City Clerk that they recommend the
approval or denial of the Special Event permit as requested, approval of the
permit contingent upon changes or modifications of the original request, or take
no position on the application. At the time each City department comments upon
an application, they shall also provide the City Clerk with their best estimate of
the cost of extraordinary services which may be necessary for the event.
(5) The approval of any Special Event permit application shall always be conditioned
upon the approval of all other necessary permits, licenses, and inspections by City
departments, in addition to approval of the Special Event permit.
(6) Special Event permits shall not be transferred or assigned without approval of the
Common Council. Special Event permits are automatically revoked at the time of
transfer or assignment without prior approval of the Council.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Special Events Permits
7 12 5
Sec. 7-12-5 Regulations
Special Event permit applications shall address the following issues and attach additional
supporting material if necessary. A summary of required information follows, and more specific
requirements can be obtained from City departments when planning the event and seeking City
approval.
(a) Duration and hours of Operation. The Special Event application shall specify the
specific days upon which the event shall occur or, in the case of seasonal or recurring
events, the days within the season or period within the calendar year upon which the
event will occur. No Special Event shall be open except between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m., unless such other hours of operation are specifically listed in the Special
Events application and approved. The permit application shall also specify the hours
during which pre-event set up and post-event takedown operations will occur, and no
such pre-event and post-event activities may be conducted other than as specified.
(b) Maximum Attendance. A Special Event permit application shall specify the maximum
daily peak number of people reasonably expected to attend.
(c) Parking. A Special Event permit application shall include a plan identifying areas that
may be reasonably expected to be utilized by event participants for off-street and onstreet
parking. The applicant shall take all reasonable precautions to minimize adverse
effects on the neighborhoods that will be directly affected by parking and traffic related
to the event. The police department shall post temporary parking-related regulations on
public streets for Special Event only if it is determined to be necessary by the Police
Chief for public safety or as may be directed by the Common Council within a permit
approval process.
(d) Sanitary Facilities and Potable Water. All sanitary facilities and potable water facilities
shall be provided for as required in the applicable codes.
(e) Illumination. If the Special Event is to continue during hours of darkness, it shall comply
with all applicable codes related to illumination.
(f) Security. The Special Event applicant shall work with the Onalaska Police Department to
ensure that appropriate security and safety is provided for the event. If the event has more
than three hundred (300) or more participants and/or is serving beer, wine or liquor
applicant shall submit a proposed security plan for approval by the Police Department. If
the event has three hundred (300) or more participants a proposed emergency medical
care and ambulance support plan shall be submitted for review by the Fire Chief. The
Police and/or Fire Department may be required, at its discretion, to be directly involved
in the Special Event, with the costs of any Extraordinary Services to be borne by the
Special Event applicant if required by the Common Council.
(g) Fire Department Protection. All fire protection applicable to the Special Event
activities on the premises, shall be provided by the applicant as required by the municipal
Fire Prevention Code and the Wisconsin Administrative Code, including alarms,
extinguishing devices, fire lanes, and fire escapes.
Special Events Permits
7-12-5
(h) Compliance with other Code Provisions. No Special Event shall be held unless all
necessary municipal permits, licenses, and approvals applicable to the activities to be
held during the Special Event have been issued.
(i) Refuse Removal. The Special Event sponsor shall be responsible for taking all
reasonable efforts to pick up litter and refuse during the event, and for removing all litter
and refuse created during the event within twenty-four (24) hours after the conclusion of
the event. The event organizer is responsible not only for the event grounds, but will also
take all reasonable measures for the removal of litter and refuse attributable to the event
from the surrounding neighborhoods and properties.
(j) Notification. The Special Event organizer may be required by the City to provide
reasonable advance notice to residents and/or businesses, or to neighborhoods if
individual notice is impractical, who may be expected to experience a substantial traffic
and/or noise impact from the event.
(k) Barricades. Barricades may be required for street closures or pursuant to a security plan.
Barricades may be available for rent from the City or from private companies. All
barricades used for the Special Event shall meet the standards as set forth in the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), unless they are manned barricades.
(l) Temporary Tents/Structures. If temporary tents/structures will be utilized for the
Special Event that would last longer than one (1) day, applicants are to obtain a
Temporary Tent Permit from the Inspection Department. All temporary tent/structures
that will include electrical services (temporary lighting, sound systems, etc.) regardless of
whether a Temporary Tent Permit is needed shall contact the Inspection Department for
an inspection a minimum of two (2) days prior to the event to schedule an inspection.
For events being held over a weekend, applicant shall call prior to 3:00 p.m. on the
Friday before the event.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-12-6 Application Review.
(a) Applications for Special Event permits shall be processed in the order of their receipt.
Allocation of City resources shall be based upon the applications as they are received
without regard to events that may have been held in previous years. Recurring events
with separate agreements approved by the Council will have priority over the above
reservations for the reservation of dates and the allocation of City services. Application
for a Special Event does not reserve use of City park or Omni Center facilities.
Reservation of such facilities is done through the City Park and Recreation Department.
(b) Upon receiving an application for a Special Events permit, the City Clerk may schedule a
meeting or meetings involving the applicant, any of the affected City departments, the
public, and/or other interested persons or officials. Meetings will be scheduled at the
discretion of the City Clerk based upon the circumstances of the Special Event. The
purpose of the meeting will be to discuss the Special Event and its potential impacts, the
City services requested, and the City services which may be required. Such a meeting
will be held as soon as practical after the application has been submitted.
Special Events Permits
7-12-6
(c) The City Clerk may approve any Special Event permit for an event with two hundred
ninety-nine (299) event participants or less and no waiver of fees for Extraordinary
Services is being sought. For Special Event permits with three hundred (300) event
participants or more or waiver of fees is sought, as soon as practical after the Special
Event permit application is submitted, the City Clerk shall provide a recommendation to
the Common Council regarding the Special Event permit application. Potential
recommendations may include:
(1) The permit be issued as requested and without conditions;
(2) The permit be denied; or,
(3) The permit be approved subject to certain conditions deemed reasonable and
necessary by the City Clerk and applicable departments. The City Clerk may also
recommend to the Council that the permit fee be waived, that the costs for
Extraordinary Services anticipated by the City to be necessary should be recouped
from the event sponsor(s) or that the costs for Extraordinary Services provided
should be waived. The Common Council shall approve or deny Special Event
permit applications, place conditions upon any permit, require that the permit fee
be paid or waived, and require that some or all of the costs incurred by the City
for providing Extraordinary Services be reimbursed or that such costs will be
waived.
(d) To the extent permitted by law, the Common Council may deny an application for a
permit if the applicant has on prior occasions made material misrepresentations regarding
the nature or scope of any event or activity previously permitted, has held prior special
events without proper permitting or licensing, or has violated the terms of a prior permit
issued to or on behalf of the applicant. Additionally, a prior experience of the applicant in
holding any event, or in holding the Special Event which is the subject of the application,
will be considered and may impact the issuance of Special Event permits. A permit may
be denied, or conditions placed thereon, based upon considerations of the health, safety,
and welfare of the community, and of the anticipated costs of holding such event.
Additionally, the City Clerk (for events with two hundred ninety-nine (299) people or
less with no waiver requests) or Common Council may base their decision on one or
more of the following grounds:
(1) The application is not fully completed and/or fails to include necessary
attachments;
(2) The applicant asserts that they cannot or will not pay the application fee and the
Council determines that such fee should not be waived;
(3) The applicant asserts that they cannot or will not pay the cost for Extraordinary
Services and the Council determines that such costs should not be waived;
(4) The application for permit contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation;
(5) The applicant is not legally competent to sign a contract, or to be held responsible
for its actions;
(6) The applicant has, on prior occasions, been required to pay for Extraordinary
Expenses or damages to City property and has not paid in full for such expenses
or damages;
Special Events Permits
7-12-6
(7) A Special Event permit application for the same time and place, or utilizing
extraordinary City resources, has previously been received, and a permit for such
previous application has been or will be granted which will authorize uses or
activities which does not reasonably permit the multiple occupancy of City
facilities or would result in a utilization of City resources which would adversely
affect the health, safety, and welfare of the community;
(8) The Special Event use or activities intended by the applicant would conflict with
previously planned events and programs which have been organized by others
either through the use of City facilities or the unavailability of sufficient City
resources for the proposed event;
(9) The intended Special Event use or activity would present a grave or unreasonable
danger to the health or safety of the persons expected to participate in the event,
the neighborhood in which the event will occur, the community as a whole, or
City property and resources required to be involved with the proposed event;
(10) The number of persons expected to participate in the Special Event would result
in a concentration of persons, vehicles, or things which cannot be supported at the
requested time or location due to a lack of sufficient open area, streets, offsite
parking, or traffic controls;
(11) Activities reasonably expected to occur at the intended Special Event are
prohibited by law.
(e) Amendment or Revisions of Applications. Any amendment or revision of any permit
application shall, for purposes of determining the priority of the application, relate back
to the original filing thereof unless the original filing is unreasonably incomplete or
lacking sufficient information to allow for an adequate review of the proposed event.
(f) Mapped Routes and Alterations of Mapped Routes. Routes for Special Events such as
parades or run/walks must be submitted with the permit application. Proposed routes may
be altered at the discretion of the City in the interests of the health, safety, and welfare of
the community. Any deviation from the approved route without approval of the City will
constitute a violation of the permit conditions and of these requirements. Additionally,
unapproved changes may result in the denial of future Special Event permit applications.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-12-7 Fees and Reimbursement Schedule
A non-refundable fee is required for all Special Event permit applications as set forth in the City
fee schedule. Permit applications may include a request to waive the application fee. However,
permits shall not be issued unless the fee is paid or it is specifically waived by the Council. The
permit application fees identified herein are separate from other specific fees or licenses
required, and separate from any requirement to reimburse the City for the actual cost of any
Extraordinary Services required for the permitted event, or for damage or destruction resulting
from the event.
Special Events Permits
7-12-7
(a) Permit Fees.
(1) Special Event Permit fees (non-refundable) shall be as set forth in the City
Fee Schedule and shall be categorized as follows:
a. Events with one thousand (1,000) or more people in attendance*
b. Events with five hundred (500) to nine hundred ninety-nine (999)
people in attendance*
c. Events with three hundred (300) to four hundred ninety-nine (499)
people in attendance*
d. Events with two hundred ninety-nine (299) people or less in
attendance*
e. Parades
f. Events which are two (2) or more days**
* Attendance shall be based on the highest attendance over the last two
years of the event. New events with no prior participation shall
automatically fall under subsection (c) three hundred (300) to four
hundred ninety-nine (499) people unless event organizers anticipate one
thousand (1,000) or more people in attendance.
** Multi day events (f) fee shall be in addition to the fee based on the
number of attendees.
(2) All other required charges and/or fees, including but not limited to facility
rental, food and beverage sale permits, temporary structure fees, and
equipment rental fees, etc., must be paid in addition to the permit
application fee. Submittal of a permit application does not reserve a park
or any other City facility, property, or services necessary for the event.
(3) Applicants for Special Events permits may include in their initial
submission a request that the permit administrative fee be waived due to
substantial financial hardship.
(4) There is currently no fee for Parades except those fees for Extraordinary
Services.
(b) Extraordinary Services Charges.
The Common Council shall approve by Resolution each year a list of standard
fees and charges by department which will be used to determine the amount of
charges attributed to Extraordinary Services provided to Special Events by the
City. The Resolution may provide for standard hourly charges or flat fee charges
for services provided, and may specify tasks that may or may not be subject to
Extraordinary Service charges.
(c) Extraordinary Services Reimbursement.
(1) Special Events.
a. For those Special Events in which costs for Extraordinary Services
are not waived by the Common Council, event organizers shall be
liable for and shall pay to the City Treasurer the actual cost of all
Extraordinary Services provided by the City. If the Special Event
has more than one person or entity organizer, then each of the
organizers are liable to the City for the total amount due, regardless
of how the multiple organizers may separately agree to divide
these expenses. If the City is a co-organizer of a Special Event, the
Special Events Permits
7-12-7
cost of the Extraordinary Services the City is responsible for will be based
upon the level of City involvement, and that amount shall be deducted
from the total cost for the Extraordinary
Services provided by the City. The costs for Extraordinary Services
charged to event organizers shall not exceed the actual costs of providing
these services. This fee shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days of
the date an itemized invoice for the same is prepared and mailed by the
City at the conclusion of the Special Event.
b. Prior to any approval of a Special Event permit, the Police and Fire
Departments, along with all other departments potentially affected by the
proposed Special Event, shall review the application and report to the City
Clerk their respective findings as to an estimate of the costs reasonably
expected to be incurred by the City for providing Extraordinary Services
at or for the Special Event. The application shall be required to provide
enough detail to allow the City departments and to determine the level of
Extraordinary Services required and their associated costs for the Special
Event. The estimates provided by City departments shall provide enough
detail to allow the event organizer to reasonably understand the
Extraordinary Services that are expected to be necessary.
c. After reviewing the findings of the City departments, the City Clerk may
recommend to the Common Council that conditions relating to advance
payment or reimbursement of the costs for Extraordinary Services be
placed upon the Special Event permit if approved. Alternatively, the City
Clerk may recommend that payment or reimbursement of some or all of
the costs for Extraordinary Services to be provided be waived.
d. The Common Council shall address the issue of Extraordinary Services
before or at the time it takes action on a Special Event permit application.
The Council may address the issue of Extraordinary Services through one
or more of the following actions:
1. The Council may require that event organizers pay all actual costs
for Extraordinary Services provided by the City for the event, with
the total costs incurred to be mailed via invoice to the organizer(s)
within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the event.
2. The Council may require the event organizer(s) pay less than the
actual costs for Extraordinary Services provided by the City in an
amount to be determined by the Council depending upon the
unique circumstances of the event, with the remaining actual costs
to be waived. Any amounts required to be paid shall be mailed via
invoice to the organizer(s) within thirty (30) days after the
conclusion of the event.
3. The Council may waive all costs for Extraordinary Services
provided by the City for the event.
4. In the event that the Council requires that the event organizer(s)
pay some or all of the costs for Extraordinary Services provided by
the City for the event, then the Council may require that funds be
placed in escrow, or other necessary security be provided, before
the permit is issued. The amount of the cash deposit or other
Special Events Permits
7-12-7
security shall be based upon the cost estimate of the Extraordinary
Services which may be incurred. The Special Events permit shall
not be issued until the event organizer(s) have complied with any
requirements for security.
5. Security for the estimated costs of Extraordinary Services may be
in the form of a cash deposit in an escrow account, bond, letter of
credit, or similar instrument, with the type and form of the
instrument to be at the discretion of the City.
6. If the actual costs for Extraordinary Services exceeds the security
provided and has not otherwise been waived by the Council, then
the difference shall be billed to and paid by the event organizer(s).
If the actual costs for Extraordinary Services provided is less than
the amount of funds deposited in advance of the event, then any
unused amounts must be returned to the event organizer(s) within a
reasonable time after the event concludes. Any other security
instrument must be either used or released by the City within a
reasonable time after the conclusion of the event
(d) Considerations for Reviewing Application Fees and/or Extraordinary Costs.
The Common Council will review applications for waivers of application fees, as well as
recommendations from the City Clerk relating to the assessment or waiver of City costs
for providing Extraordinary Services based upon relevant and lawful criteria. The
Council should at a minimum consider the following criteria for making these
determinations, as well as other criteria which may be relevant on a case by case basis.
As each Special Event is different, the Council may place different weight on different
criteria in each circumstance and therefore the following list does not set any priorities
for any particular event.
(1) The Special Event’s benefit to the quality of life to the City has a whole;
(2) The Special Event’s financial benefit to the City as a whole;
(3) The Special Event is of interest to a smaller segment of the City’s population
which the City seeks to encourage;
(4) The tradition of the event in the City;
(5) The cultural and/or historical significance of the Special Event;
(6) Whether or not the Special Event provides services or functions that are
traditionally organized or sponsored by other Cities or governments;
(7) Whether or not the Special Event organizers are making good faith efforts to
minimize adverse effects on the health, safety, and welfare of the community and
as a result minimizing the need for City employee involvement;
(8) The effect of the Special Events on the neighborhood(s) surrounding the site of
the event;
(9) The financial burden the Special Event places on the City’s taxpayers as a whole;
and
(10) The financial condition of the event organizer(s).
Code in effect 2/12/19
Special Events Permits
7-12-8
Sec. 7-12-8 Indemnification and Hold Harmless.
Organizers of Special Events shall be required to sign an agreement in a form acceptable to the
City in which they agree to indemnify the City of Onalaska, and its departments, and hold the
City and its departments, employees, and agents, harmless from any liability to any person
resulting from any damage or injury to property or any person which occurs in connection with
the permitted event proximately caused by any actions or inactions of the event’s organizer, their
officers, employees, or agents, or any person under their control insofar as permitted by law.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-12-9 Insurance.
All Special Event organizers shall procure at their expense, a policy of insurance subject to the
City’s minimum requirements for Special Events as set forth in the City’s Special Event
application.
The insurance required by the City of Onalaska is primary coverage for incidents which may
occur on City property or to City employees during the event, and any insurance or selfinsurance
maintained by the City of Onalaska, its officers, council members, agents, employees
or authorized volunteers will not contribute to a loss. All insurance shall be in full force prior to
commencing the event and remain in force throughout the entire event, including the cleanup
period after the event.
The certificate of insurance shall be satisfactory proof of insurance of said policies and shall be
filed at the office of the City Clerk for the City of Onalaska a minimum of five (5) days prior to
the scheduled event. The certificate of insurance shall include the City as additional insured,
specifically stating “The City of Onalaska and its officers, council members, agents, employees
and authorized volunteers are named as additional insureds”
A copy of the certificate of insurance may be accepted by facsimile transmission or an email
attachment with the original to be received no later than three (3) days prior to the event. The
event shall not be allowed to proceed without submission of insurance documentation. The
City’s act of receiving and retaining proof of insurance information without comment shall not
be considered acceptance, waiver, or modification of any term or requirement herein, or any
applicable law.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-12-10 Event Cancellation.
The City Clerk may cancel a Special Event, regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued, without prior notice for any significant change in conditions which would or may
adversely affect the public health or safety of the community, or for any condition that would
place facilities, grounds, or other nature resources at risk of damage or destruction if the event
were permitted to take place.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Special Events Permits
7-12-11
Sec. 7-12-11 Penalties.
In addition to other potential fines, penalties, and/or charges as described in the Onalaska
Municipal Code, the violation of the terms of the Special Event permit shall be punishable by
forfeiture of not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and not more than One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00). Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. In addition, the
City may enforce this section by way of immediately revoking the permit, seeking injunctive
relief, and all other remedies available at law and in equity.
The penalties set forth herein shall also apply to all persons, organizations, and entities that
organize events which are required to obtain a Special Event permit but fail or refuse to do so. If
any person violates any provision of this Ordinance, the City shall have the authority to institute
the appropriate legal action or proceedings to ensure compliance and to thereby prohibit such
person from violating these conditions.
The failure to obtain a Special Event permit before holding or conducting a Special Event, or the
failure to abide by Special Event permit requirements, will constitute a violation of this section
and may result in the termination of the event, denial of future permit applications, or issuance of
a City Ordinance citation.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-12-12 Severability.
If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person or circumstances be held
invalid, the remainder of this Ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected. The City of Onalaska reserves the right to amend or repeal
this Ordinance at any time upon proper notice; and all rights, privileges and immunities
conferred by this Ordinance or by acts done pursuant hereto shall exists subject to such power.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 13
Pawn Brokers and Secondhand Article Dealers
7-13-1 Statutes Adopted
Sec. 7-13-1 Statutes Adopted.
(a) Statutes Adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code of Ordinances,
the statutory provisions of Sec. 134.71, Wis. Stats., describing and defining regulations
with respect to pawn brokers and secondhand article dealers, exclusive of any regulations
for which the statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment or exclusively state
charges, is hereby adopted and by reference made part of this Chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any regulation incorporated
herein by reference is required or prohibited by this Chapter. Any future amendments,
revisions or modifications of the statutory regulations in Sec. 134.71 as incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this Chapter in order to secure to the extent legally
practicable uniform regulation of pawn brokers and secondhand dealers. Any person who
shall, within the City of Onalaska, Wisconsin, violate any provision of said statute shall be
deemed guilty of an offense under this Section.
(b) Statutes Specifically Incorporated by Reference. Whenever this Chapter incorporates
by reference Sec. 134.71, Wis. Stats., such reference shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes of
1991-92 as from time to time amended, repealed or modified by the Wisconsin
Legislature.
(c) Exceptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, Sec. 134.71(12) and
(14), Wis. Stats., are not adopted by this Chapter.
(d) Applications and Forms. The City of Onalaska shall develop application and other forms
required under this Chapter.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 14
Licensees to Pay Local Claims;
Appellate Procedures
7-14-1 Licensees Required to Pay Local Taxes, Assessments and Claims;
Appellate Procedures
Sec. 7-14-1 Licensees Required to Pay Local Taxes, Assessments and
Claims.
(a) Payment of Claims. The City shall not issue or renew any license to transact any business
within the City of Onalaska:
(1) For any purposes for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the City are
delinquent and unpaid.
(2) For any person who is delinquent in payment:
a. Of any taxes, assessments or other claims owed the City; or
b. Of any forfeiture resulting from a violation of any City Ordinance.
(b) Exception. This Section shall apply to licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of Title 7
of this Code of Ordinances, except Chapters 1 and 5.
(c) Applicability. An application for renewal of a license subject to this Chapter shall be
denied pursuant to the provisions of Subsection (a) only following notice and opportunity
for hearing as provided by Subsection (d) below.
(d) Hearings. Prior to any denial of an application for renewal of a license, including denials
pursuant to Subsection (a), the applicant shall be given notice and opportunity for a
hearing as hereinafter provided:
(1) With respect to licenses renewable under Chapter 2 of Title 7 of this Code of
Ordinances, notice and opportunity for hearing shall be as provided by Section
125.12, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time, and by City ordinance.
(2) With respect to licenses other than those described in Subsection (a) herein, the
Common Council or its assignee shall notify the applicant in writing of the City's
intention not to renew the license and shall provide the applicant with an opportunity
for hearing. The notice shall state the reasons for the intended action and shall
establish a date, not less than three (3) days nor more than ten (10) days after the date
of the notice on which the applicant shall appear before the Common Council. If the
Licensees to Pay Local Claims; Appellate Procedures
7-14-1
applicant shall fail to appear before the Council on the date indicated on the notice,
the Council shall deny the application for renewal. If the applicant appears before the
Council on the date indicated in the notice and denies that the reasons for non-renewal
exist, the Common Council shall conduct a hearing with respect to the matter. At the
hearing, both the City and the applicant may produce witnesses, cross examine
witnesses and be represented by counsel. The applicant shall, upon request, be
provided a written transcript of the hearing at the applicant's expense. If the Common
Council determines the applicant shall not be entitled to renewal pursuant to
Subsection (a), the application for renewal shall be denied.
(e) Hearing for Other Denials. Where an individual, business or corporation wishes to appeal
the City Clerk's decision not to issue a license or permit under this Title on grounds other
than those specified in Subsections (a) through (d) above, the applicant may file a request
in writing with the City Clerk that the matter be referred to the Common Council. A public
hearing shall be scheduled within fourteen (14) calendar days by the Common Council. All
parties may be represented by counsel. The Council shall consider all relevant information
and shall render a decision which shall be binding.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 15
Weights and Measures Regulations
7-15-1 Weights and Measures Regulations
Sec. 7-15-1 Weights and Measures Regulations.
(a) Application of State Codes. The provisions of Ch. 98, Wis. Stats., and Wis. Adm. Code
Ch. ATCP 92 are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the regulations
of the City pertaining to weights and measures. All performance required thereunder
shall be required in the City and all acts thereunder prohibited shall also be prohibited in
the City. In addition, should either the statute or administrative code chapter be
amended, revised, modified or replaced, any such amendments, revisions, modifications
and replacement provisions shall be enforced under this Ordinance without the necessity
of a specific amendment hereto. This Ordinance is adopted under the authority of
§98.04(1), Wis. Stats.
(b) Appointment of Inspectors. Pursuant to §98.04(2), Wis. Stats., enforcement of this
Ordinance shall be performed in the City by the Department of Agriculture, Trade and
Consumer Protection in accord with a contract entered for that purpose in the City.
(c) Definitions.
(1) Commercial Weighing or Measuring Devices. Devices used or employed in
establishing the size, quantity, extent, area or measurement of quantities, things,
produce or articles for sale, hire or award, or in computing any basic charge or
payment for services rendered on the basis of weight or measure.
(2) Weights and Measurers Program. The program that includes administration
and enforcement of this section, Chapter 98, Wis. Stats., and applicable Wis.
Adm. Code provisions, and any related actions.
(d) Weights and Measures License Required.
(1) License Requirements. Except as provided in sub. (2), no person shall operate
or maintain any commercial weighing or measuring devices or any other weights
and measures or systems and accessories related thereto which are used
commercially within the City of Onalaska for determining the weight or measure
of count unless each device is licensed by an annual weights and measures license
issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(2) Exemptions. Sales which are otherwise exempted by law from operation of this
Ordinance and the statute and administrative code provisions incorporated by
reference, including those taking place at farmers markets and under Direct
Sellers, Transient Merchants and Solicitors regulations are exempted from the
licensing requirements under this Ordinance.
Weights and Measures Regulations
7-15-1
(e) Application for License. An application for a weights and measures license shall be
made in writing on a form provided for such purpose by the City Clerk and shall be
signed by the owner of the commercial business, or by its authorized agent. Such
applications shall state the type and number of weighing and measuring devices to be
licensed, location of the devices, the applicant’s full name and address, and whether such
applicant is an individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other
entity. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the names and
addresses of each partner. If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company,
the application shall state the name and address of all officers and agents of the applicant,
including the registered agent thereof.
(f) Issuance of License and Fees. Upon compliance with this section, the City Clerk shall
issue a license to the applicant upon payment of an annual license fee as established by
the City Council by resolution. Each separate store or business location shall require a
separate license. The license fee shall not be prorated for a partial year.
(g) License Term. A license issued under this section shall expire on June 30 of each year.
(h) Enforcement for Violations. In the event that the City Clerk is informed of violations of
this Ordinance and/or statutes and administrative code provisions incorporated herein by
reference, the City Clerk shall refer the alleged violation to the State of Wisconsin,
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection for enforcement.
(i) Failure to Renew a License. Any person failing to obtain or renew a license as required
under this Ordinance shall be subject to injunctive relief as well as to assessment of a
forfeiture as provided in Section 1-1-7 of the Code of Ordinances.
(j) Fee Assessment.
(1) Annual Assessment. On an annual basis, the Common Council shall assess the
costs of enforcement against those licensees whose activities required such
enforcement activity during the preceding year. Each licensee shall be
responsible for all of the charges levied against the City by the State of Wisconsin
for enforcement activities pertaining to that particular licensee’s regulated
weighing and measuring activities under this Ordinance. For purposes of this
Ordinance, each year shall run from July 1 to June 30.
(2) Clerk to Prepare Assessment Schedule. Annually, the City Clerk shall prepare
a proposed schedule of assessments and the Clerk’s proposed schedule shall be
submitted to the Common Council. A copy of the proposed schedule together
with notice of the date and time at which the Council will consider the
assessments shall be mailed to each licensee.
(3) Common Council Determines Assessment. No sooner than ten (10) days after
such mailing, the Common Council shall consider the Clerk’s proposed schedule
of assessments and determine the schedule of assessments on a reasonable basis.
The City Clerk shall mail to each licensee an invoice for the amount of the fee
assessed to the licensee as determined by the Common Council and each licensee
shall pay the fee assessed within thirty (30) days after the date the invoice is
mailed.
Weights and Measures Regulations
7-15-1
(4) Failure to Pay Assessment. If the assessed fee is not paid within thirty (30) days
of the date of mailing of the invoice, an additional administrative collection
charge of ten percent (10%) of the fee shall be added to the amount due, plus
interest shall accrue thereon at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or fraction
thereof until paid. If the licensee is the owner of the real estate premises where
the licensed weights and measures devices are located, any delinquent assessment
shall be extended upon the current or the next tax roll as a charge against the real
estate premises for current services, as provided in §66.0627, Wis. Stats. No
licenses shall be issued or renewed under this section if the licensee is delinquent
in the payment of a fee assessed under this section.
(5) Mailing of Notices. Schedules, notices and invoices shall be considered
delivered to a licensee when mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
licensee at the licensee’s address as shown on the application form.
(6) Change of Ownership. If the ownership of a commercial business licensed
under this section is transferred during a license year, the owner of the business as
of July 1 of the license year shall be liable and responsible for the payment of the
fees assessed under this section.
(k) Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation made
hereunder may be subject to penalties as provided in Section1-1-7 of the Code of
Ordinances.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 16
Junk Dealer Licenses
7-16-1 Definitions
7-16-2 License Required
7-16-3 License Fee
7-16-4 Application
7-16-5 Inspection
7-16-6 Requirements
7-16-7 Limitation of Location
7-16-8 Issuing License
7-16-9 Second Application
7-16-10 Posting License
7-16-11 Duplicate License
7-16-12 Permits to Move
7-16-13 Marking Vehicles
7-16-14 Regulations
7-16-15 Health Regulations
7-16-16 Burning Operations
Sec. 7-16-1 Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable to this Chapter:
(a) "Junk" shall mean old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals; old
cordage, ropes, rags, fibers, or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones; wood,
bricks, cement blocks; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be
prepared to be used again in some form; machinery or appliances no longer used for their
intended use; and any or all of the foregoing; and motor vehicles, no longer used as such,
to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but "junk" shall not include materials or
objects accumulated by a person as by-products, waste, or scraps from the operation of
his own business or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral
part of his own manufacturing processes.
(b) "Junkyard" shall mean a yard, lot, or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an
enclosed building, containing junk as defined above, upon which occurs one or more acts
of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling, or offering for sale any such junk, in
whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the
proceeds from such act or acts are to be used for charity.
(c) "Junk dealer" shall mean a person who operates a junkyard, as defined above, within the
city.
(d) "Itinerant junk dealer" shall mean any person who buys, sells, collects, or delivers junk
within the city as a business or employment within the city, but who is not an operator of
a junkyard within the city or an employee of such an operator.
(e) "Business premises" or "premises" shall mean the area of a junk yard as described in a
junk dealer's license or application for license, as provided for in this Chapter.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Junk Dealer Licenses
7-16-2
Sec. 7-16-2 License Required.
No person shall keep, conduct or maintain any building, structure, yard, or place for keeping,
storing, or piling in commercial quantities, whether temporarily, irregularly or continually, any
old cloth, rags, paper, rubbish, bottles, rubber, iron, brass, copper, or other metal, motor vehicles
or parts thereof, or other articles which from their worn condition render it practically useless for
the purpose for which it was made and which is commonly classed as junk, whether with a fixed
place of business or as an itinerant buyer, without first having obtained a license therefor. One
carrying on the aforesaid business shall be referred to herein as a "junk dealer." Provided,
however, that no person shall be required to be licensed under this section if it is engaged in the
business of storing, piling or shipping processed metal, and provided further that this storing,
piling, or shipping of processed metal is not conducted in an area that is contiguous to or
adjacent to an operation which is subject to licensing hereunder.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-16-3 License Fee.
(a) Every person who conducts business as a "junk dealer" shall pay an annual license fee of
One Hundred Twenty-Five Dollars ($125.00).
(b) Any "itinerant junk dealer" shall pay an annual license fee of Twenty Dollars ($20.00).
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-16-4 Application.
Anyone desirous of obtaining a license to engage in the business of junk dealer shall pay to the
City Clerk the license fee and a written application upon a form prepared and provided by the
City, signed by the applicant or applicants, which shall contain an agreement that the applicant
will accept the license, if granted, upon the condition that it may be suspended for cause at any
time by the Council. Such application shall state:
(a) The names and residences of the applicant if an individual, partnership or firm, or the
names of the principal officers and their residences if the applicant is an association or
corporation.
(b) The length of time such applicant or applicants, if an individual, partnership, or the
manager or person in charge, if the applicant is a firm or corporation, has or have resided
in the City, his or their places of previous employment, whether he or they, and, if so,
what offense, when, and in what court.
(c) The detailed nature of the business to be conducted and the kind of materials to be
collected, bought, sold or otherwise handled.
(d) The premises where such business is to be located or carried on.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Junk Dealer Licenses
7-16-5
Sec. 7-16-5 Inspection.
The City Clerk shall report every application made pursuant to the preceding subsection to the
Chief of Police, Director of Inspection, Fire Chief and County Health Officer, who shall inspect
or cause to be inspected such premises to determine whether it complies with all laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations. The reports of the Chief of Police, Director of Inspection,
Fire Chief and County Health Officer shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the Council
prior to that time that such applications are considered.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-16-6 Requirements.
Any premises and all structures thereon used for the purposes set forth in Sec. 7-15-2 of this
section shall be so situated and constructed that the business of junk dealer may be carried on in
a sanitary manner, shall contain no fire hazards, and shall be arranged so that thorough
inspection may be made at any time by the proper health, fire, building or police authorities. The
premises of a junk dealer shall be enclosed by a proper fence, or other structure not less than six
(6) nor more than eight (8) feet in height, constructed so that none of the material stored within
said fence may pass through. Such enclosure shall be maintained in good condition at all times.
Articles may be piled above the height of said fence provided there is no dust or dirt emanating
from said materials and being deposited beyond the fence and further provided that there is no
safety hazard to passersby. Premises not enclosed by fence prior to March 1, 2004, shall not be
required to install such a fence.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-16-7 Limitation on Location.
No premises established after March 1, 2004, shall be used for carrying on the business of junk
dealing unless it is properly zoned and unless it is more than of one thousand (1,000) feet from
land zoned for single family residence district, residence district, multiple dwelling district,
special multiple dwelling district, or low density multiple dwelling district.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-16-8 Issuing License.
Upon the filing of an application as provided in Sec. 7-15-4, the Council may, upon its approval
of such application, after the investigation provided for in Sec. 7-15-5 has been made, order the
issuance of a license to engage in the businesses described in Sec. 7-15-2 of this section. All
licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the
location of the junk business, the date of issuance and expiration of the license, and the name and
address of the licensee. All applications for license shall be filed no less than fifteen (15) days
prior to the meeting of the proper Council Committee and shall only be acted upon after the
inspection and report as provided for in Subsection (e) hereof. All licenses shall be issued for a
one (1) year period and expire June 30th of each year, unless revoked or suspended.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Junk Dealer Licenses
7-16-9
Sec. 7-16-9 Second Application.
No applicant to whom a license has been refused shall make further application until a period of
at least six (6) months shall have elapsed since the last previous rejection, unless he can show
that the reason for such rejection no longer exists.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-16-10 Posting of License.
Every holder of junk dealer's license shall at all times keep said license posted while in force in
a conspicuous place on the premises described in the application for such license. It shall be
unlawful for any person to post such license or to permit it to be posted upon the premises other
than those mentioned in the application, or knowingly deface or destroy any such license.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-16-11 Duplicate License.
Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed, a duplicate license in lieu thereof under the
original application shall be issued by the City Clerk upon the filing of an affidavit setting forth
the circumstances of the loss or destruction.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-16-12 Permits to Move.
No licensee shall move his place of business from the place designated in the license until a
written permit to do so has been secured from the City and the same shall have been endorsed
upon the license. All signs required by the next section shall be altered to show the new address.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Section 7-16-13 Marking Vehicles.
Each vehicle kept or used by a junk dealer in the exercise of his business shall be marked on both
sides with the words "Junk Dealer" and "Onalaska, Wisconsin" and the number corresponding to
the number of his license in plain letters and figures at least two (2) inches high and of such color
as to be plainly read at a distance of sixty (60) feet.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-16-14 Regulations
(a) No junk dealer shall conduct his business at or from any place other than the one
designated in the license, nor shall said business be carried on after such license has been
revoked or has expired.
(b) No junk dealer shall make any purchase from any person or receive any articles between
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(c) No junk dealer shall purchase or acquire from any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years any junk, other than old rags or paper, without the written consent of a parent or
guardian.
Junk Dealer Licenses
7-16-14
(d) No junk dealer shall purchase or acquire any item from an intoxicated person.
(e) The contents of the premises of any junk dealer shall be arranged in an orderly manner
with all similar things located together so as to facilitate inspection by the proper
authorities. The premises of every junk dealer shall be subject to inspection by the proper
municipal authorities at any time.
(f) In the case of motor vehicles, the junk dealer shall keep a record of the purchase, which
shall include the trade name, the motor and serial numbers, the style of body, model,
color, and the license number, if any.
(g) Any junk dealer or itinerant junk dealer who shall have or receive any goods, articles, or
things lost or stolen, or alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen, shall exhibit the
same on demand to any police officer.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-16-15 Health Regulations.
The County Health Officer shall formulate reasonable rules and regulations relating to the
conduct of the business of junk dealing which shall protect the health of the community. No
junk dealer shall violate any such rule or regulation.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-16-16 Burning Operations.
Burning of wrecked or destroyed automobiles or any parts thereof, or junk, or any waste material
shall be done in approved incinerator enclosures approved for burning purposes by the Chief of
the Fire Department, or his duly appointed representative. The Fire Chief may, in appropriate
cases, permit burning without incinerators in specific open places designated by him.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 17
Manufactured/Mobile Home Communities
7-17-1 Definitions
7-17-2 Monthly Municipal Permit Fee
7-17-3 Penalties
7-17-4 Revocation
7-17-5 Mobile Homes outside of Mobile Home Parks
Sec. 7-17-1 Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable in this Chapter:
(a) “Community” shall mean a manufactured and mobile home community.
(b) “Licensee” shall mean any person licensed to operate and maintain a manufactured and
mobile home community.
(c) “Licensing Authority” shall mean the Common Council of the City of Onalaska.
(d) “Manufactured and Mobile Home Community” shall mean any plot or plots of ground
upon which three (3) or more manufactured homes or mobile homes, occupied for
dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether a charge is made for the
accommodation.
(e) “Manufactured home” shall have the meaning as defined in Sec.101.91(2), Wis. Stats.,
insofar as applicable and includes any additions, attachments, annexes, foundations, and
appurtenances.
(f) “Mobile home” shall have the meaning as defined in Sec. 101.01(10), Wis. Stats., insofar
as applicable and includes any additions, attachments, annexes, foundations and
appurtenances.
(g) “Person” means any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association, corporation or
limited liability company.
(h) “Recreational Vehicle” means a prefabricated structure that is no larger than four
hundred (400) square feet, or that is certified by the manufacturer as complying with the
code promulgated by the American National Standards Institute as ANSA A119.5, and
that is designed to be towed and used primarily as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal purposes.
(i) “Space” means a plot of ground within a manufactured and mobile home community,
designed for the accommodation of one manufactured or mobile home.
(j) “Unit” means a single manufactured or mobile home.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-17-2 Monthly Municipal Permit Fee.
(a) Monthly Fee. In addition to the license fee, the City of Onalaska shall collect from each
unit occupying space or lots in a community in the City of Onalaska, except from
manufactured and mobile homes that constitute an improvement to real property under
Sec. 70.043(1), a monthly municipal permit fee computed as follows:
(1) The City Assessor shall determine the total fair market value of each mobile home
in the City subject to the monthly municipal permit fee.
Manufactured/Mobile Home Communities
7-17-2
(2) The fair market value, minus the tax-exempt household furnishings thus
established, shall be equalized to the general level of assessment for the prior year
on other real and personal property in the City.
(3) The value of each mobile home thus determined shall be multiplied by the general
property gross tax rate, less any credit rate under Wis. Stats. Sec. 79.10
established on the preceding year’s assessment of general property.
(4) The total annual permit fee thus computed shall be divided by twelve (12) and
shall represent the monthly municipal permit fee.
(b) Collection. It shall be the full and complete responsibility of the licensee of a mobile
home park to collect the monthly municipal permit fee from the owner or occupant of
each unit occupying space in a mobile home community and the licensee shall be equally
liable for the monthly fees on or before the 10th of the month following the month for
which such fees are due in accordance with the terms of this Chapter. Prior to such
payment the licensee may deduct, for administrative purposes, two percent (2%) of the
monthly fees collected.
(c) Reporting. The monthly municipal permit fee is applicable to units moving into the City
at any time during the year. The licensee shall furnish information to the City Clerk and
the City Assessor on units added to the community within five (5) days of their arrival,
on forms prescribed by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue. As soon as the City
Assessor receives the notice of an addition of a unit to a community, the City Assessor
shall determine its fair market value and notify the City Clerk of that determination. The
City Clerk shall equate the fair market value established by the City Assessor and shall
apply the appropriate tax rate, divide the annual permit fee thus determined by twelve
(12) and notify the unit holder of the monthly fee to be collected from the unit owner.
Liability for the payment of the fee shall begin on the first day of the next succeeding
month and continue for the months in which the unit remains in the City of Onalaska.
(d) Valuation and Fee Rate. A new monthly municipal permit fee and a new valuation shall
be established each January and shall continue for that calendar year. The valuation
established shall be subject to review as are other values established under Chapter 70 of
the Wisconsin Statutes. If the Board of Review reduces a valuation on which previous
monthly payments have been made the City shall refund the excess payments and shall
collect the tax paid back from the school district.
(e) Distribution of Fees. The City may retain ten percent (10%) of the monthly municipal
permit fees collected in each month, without reduction for the two percent (2%) licensee
administration fee, to
cover the costs of administration. The City shall pay to the school district in which the
community is located, within twenty (20) days after the end of each month, such portion
of the remainder of the fees collected in the preceding month as the ratio of the more
recent property tax levy for school purposes bears to the total tax levy for all purposes in
the City.
(f) Delinquencies. Failure to timely pay the monthly municipal permit fees shall be treated
as a default in payment of personal property tax and is subject to all procedures and
penalties applicable under Chapters 70 and 74 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Manufactured/Mobile Home Communities
7-17-2
(g) Exemptions. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the monthly municipal permit fee.
The exemption shall also apply to steps and a platform, not exceeding fifty (50) square
feet that lead to a recreational vehicle but does not apply to any other addition,
attachment, patio or deck.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-17-3 Penalties.
Any person who violates a provision of this Chapter 17 shall upon conviction thereof, and in
addition to any other penalty imposed herein, forfeit an amount as prescribed by Section 1-1-7 of
this Code of Ordinances, together with costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until said forfeitures
and costs are paid, but not exceeding ninety (90) days for each violation, except that the
forfeiture for violation of the reporting requirements under 7-17-2 (c) shall not exceed twenty
five dollars ($25.00). Each and every day that such violation continues is hereby deemed to
constitute a separate offense.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-17-4 Revocation.
Any license or permit granted under Title 13 of this Code of Ordinances shall be subject to
revocation or suspension by the Common Council for any violation of this ordinance. Upon
complaint filed with the City Clerk signed by any law enforcement officer, health officer,
building inspector or city official, the Common Council shall order a public hearing. At least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing, the holder of the license shall be furnished with a copy of the
Complaint and shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing whereat the
holder of the license may appear and be heard as to why the license should not be suspended or
revoked. If the license is suspended or revoked, the holder of the license may within twenty (20)
days of the date of revocation or suspension appeal the decision to the La Crosse County Circuit
Court pursuant to Sec. 66.0435(2)(d) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-17-5 Mobile Homes Outside of Mobile Home Parks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any mobile home in the City of Onalaska at any site
other than a space within a mobile home community. A recreational vehicle shall not be
considered a mobile home for the purposes of this section.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 18
License Replacement Fees
Sec. 7-18-1 Fees
Sec. 7-18-1 Fees.
(a) Fees. The City shall assess and collect a fee of Five Dollars ($5.00) for the replacement
or reissuance of the following licenses and/or permits:
(1) Dog and Cat Licenses (Sec. 7-1-1)
(2) Intoxicating Liquor Licenses (Class A & B) (Sec. 7-2-4 (a-b))
(3) Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer’s License (Class A& B) (Sec. 7-2-4 (c-d))
(4) Fermented Malt Beverage Picnic License (Sec. 7-2-4 (e))
(5) Wholesaler’s License (Sec. 7-2-4 (f))
(6) Retail Class C Wine License (Sec. 7-2-4 (g))
(7) Operator’s License (Sec. 7-2-20)
(8) Cigarette License (Sec. 7-3-3 (a))
(9) Direct Seller’s License (Sec. 7-4-1)
(10) Hotel/Motel Permit (Sec. 7-5-4)
(11) Taxicab License (Sec. 7-6-1 (a))
(12) Firework Seller’s Permit (Sec. 7-7-1(2))
(13) Fireworks Location Permit (Sec. 7-7-1(3))
(14) Amusement Arcade License (Sec. 7-9-2)
(15) Non Metallic Mining Permit (Sec. 7-10-7 (a))
(16) Rock Crushing/Blasting Permit (Sec. 7-10-7 (c)(1))
(17) Transient or Temporary Public Entertainment Licenses (Sec. 7-11-1 (a))
(18) Parade Permit (Sec. 7-12-2)
(19) Procession Permit (Sec. 7-12-2)
(20) Walk Permit (Sec. 7-12-2)
(21) Run Permit (Sec. 7-12-2)
(22) Bicycle Race Permit (Sec. 7-12-2)
(23) Marathon Permit (Sec. 7-12-2)
(24) Weights and Measures License (Sec. 7-15-1 (d))
(25) Junk Dealer License (Sec.7-16-2)
(26) Recreational Burning Permit (Sec. 5-2-9 (c)) and (Sec. 7-16-16)
(27) Mobile Home Operator’s License (Sec. 13-2-8 (g))
(b) Payment. All fees shall be paid to the City Clerk prior to the replacement or reissuance
of the lost license.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 19
Refund of License and Permit Fees
Sec. 7-19-1 Refund of License and Permit Fees
Sec. 7-19-1 Refund of License and Permit Fees.
Once an application for licensure or permit been made under this Title and the required fee paid,
the fee is non-refundable regardless of whether the license or permit is granted.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Chapter 20
Marches and Public Assemblies
7-20-1 Purpose
7-20-2 Definitions
7-20-3 Permit Required
7-20-4 Permit Requirements
7-20-5 Permit Fees
7-20-6 Extraordinary Services
7-20-7 Indemnification and Hold Harmless
7-20-8 Event Cancellation
7-20-9 Penalties
7-20-10 Severability
Sec. 7-20-1 Purpose.
The City recognizes that Marches and Public Assemblies held for the purpose of conveying
messages protected by the Constitution play an important role in enhancing the public life of
citizens as well as the interrelationship between citizens and their government. To that end,
the City will review requests to hold Marches and Public Assemblies in the context of the
safety and welfare of the community and the availability of resources, but will do so in an
expedited and abbreviated manner to ensure that those wishing to hold and/or participate in
such events may do so without unreasonable delays or restrictions.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-20-2 Definitions.
(a) “Business Days” means those days in which municipal offices are open for
conducting City business and does not include Saturday, Sunday or those holidays
published yearly on the City’s website.
(b) “March” means a group of persons, of any number, moving from one place to
another on a public way or public place, which requires a street closing or otherwise
requires police officers to stop, reroute, or alter the normal flow in of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic because marchers are unlikely to comply with traffic regulations
and controls. A march is for the purpose of conducting activities which are protected
by the Constitution. All circumstances which do not meet the specific definition of a
March will be reviewed as a Special Event under Chapter 12. A walk/run does not
constitute a March and shall be reviewed as a Special Event under Chapter 12.
Marches and Public Assemblies
7-20-2
(c) “Public Assembly” means an organized public gathering or group of persons, of any
number, which is reasonably anticipated to obstruct the normal flow of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic upon a public way or the normal use of a public place because those
assembled will not comply with the traffic regulations or controls, or with other
public place use laws or policies, and will be located in one (1) place, but does not
meet the definition of a march. A public assembly is for the purpose of conducting
activities which are protected by the Constitution. All circumstances which do not
meet the specific definition of a Public Assembly will be reviewed as a Special Event
under Chapter 12.
(d) “Extraordinary Services” means reasonable and necessary services provided by the
City which specifically result from the Public Assembly or March. Extraordinary
services result in measureable financial costs which are above and beyond the normal
levels of public health and safety services on a nonevent day. Extraordinary services
will normally be those services requiring city employees to be specifically assigned to
tasks in support of the Public Assembly or March and/or those services resulting in
overtime pay or similar costs which result from the event. Examples of extraordinary
services may include police protection, traffic control, fire monitoring, dedicated
paramedic service, parks services, and other services necessary to ensure the
protection of participants and citizens, the proper functioning of City services, and the
proper administration of this ordinance and policy. The City will make reasonable
efforts to adjust the schedules of employees to minimize the requirement for overtime
pay or other costs for Extraordinary Services where sufficient advanced notice of the
event is provided. (At least forty-five (45) days.)
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-20-3 Permit Required.
No person or entity acting as an event organizer shall set up for, hold or conduct a March or
Public Assembly within the municipal boundaries of the City of Onalaska without first
obtaining a March of Public Assembly permit. The following Public Assembly or Marches
do not require a permit:
(a) Groups of fifty (50) people or fewer may hold a Public Assembly in a City Park or
other similar City owned property without a permit.
(b) Marches and Public Assemblies on sidewalks that do not obstruct the normal flow of
pedestrian traffic do not require a permit.
(c) Protests, marches and public assemblies in response to breaking news where such
protest, March or Public Assembly is a spontaneous and immediate (within twelve
(12) hours of the event occurring) response to a current event.
Marches and Public Assemblies
7-20-3
The City Clerk, or their designee, shall have the exclusive authority to determine whether or
not a permit is required for any particular event. The City’s review of any permit application
and/or its subsequent issuance of a permit shall not be construed as acceptance by the City or
its representatives of any liability or responsibility for any injury or damage relating to the
March or Public Assembly. Marches and Public Assemblies are temporary in nature and do
not vest any permanent rights.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-20-4 Permit Requirements.
It shall be the policy of the City of Onalaska to review permit applications for Marches and
Public Assemblies solely on the basis of their effect on the Health, Safety, and Welfare of the
community. The City does not discriminate against any particular group or type of speech
expected to be present when reviewing and acting upon any March and/or Public Assembly
permit application.
(a) Completed written applications for any March or Public Assembly permit along with
the application fee* should be filed with the City Clerk a minimum of ten (10)
business days prior to the proposed March or Public Assembly. The City will review
applications filed less than ten (10) business days prior to the proposed March or
Public Assembly but cannot guarantee that necessary City services will be available.
Applications shall be on the form approved by the City and signed by the person or
authorized representative of the entity organizing the March or Public Assembly. In
lieu of the application fee, the event organizer may submit with the application form a
request that the fee be waived and provide in detail the reasons for financial hardship
and any other reasons for such request.
* No application fee at this time for March – waiver request unnecessary.
(b) The Chief of Police, or designee within the Police Department, shall have the
authority to take all necessary action regarding the March or Public Assembly permit
application, including the approval or denial of the application. Applications shall be
reviewed and approved as submitted, denied as submitted, approved with conditions,
or tentatively approved within three (3) business days after the application is
submitted.
(c) Tentative City approval may be given within the response period for circumstances
which involve property or right of way controlled by other persons or governmental
entities, such as circumstances involving right of way or property controlled by the
State of Wisconsin.
Marches and Public Assemblies
7-20-4
(d) During the review of the application, the Chief of Police may consult with all persons
reasonably necessary and available for such consultation, including the event
organizers and all other persons, entities, agencies, and governmental officials
deemed necessary by the Chief in order to make an informed decision regarding the
application’s effect upon the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
(e) March and Public Assembly permit applications shall be reviewed for their effect
upon traffic control, public safety, as well as other considerations affecting the public
health, safety and welfare including the date, time, location and/or route, police and
fire protection necessary, and sanitation provisions required. The application review
will also include analysis of the organizer’s plans to reasonably ensure that
participants/attendees will also comply with all applicable laws.
(f) The City’s decision related to March and Public Assembly permit applications shall
include a requirement that the application fee be paid or that the fee is waived, a
requirement that the costs for Extraordinary Services be paid by the organizer(s) or
that the costs are waived, and a requirement that any other condition(s) allowed by
law and which are necessary to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the
community shall be incorporated into the terms of any approved permit. Request for
waiver of extraordinary services must be made to the Common Council.
(g) In those circumstances in which it is determined that costs for Extraordinary Services
shall be paid by the organizer(s), the Chief of Police shall have the authority to
require that some or all of the estimated costs for such services be paid to the City in
advance or deposited in an approved escrow account for the purpose of paying for
such costs, or to require that another form of security be submitted by the organizer(s)
for the purpose of paying for such costs.
(h) Before any March or Public Assembly permit is denied in whole or in part, the Chief
of Police shall make all reasonable efforts to discuss with the applicant the proposed
event and its effect upon the public safety, and shall provide or suggest to the
applicant reasonable alternative dates, times, locations, or other terms, conditions, and
parameters of the March or Public Assembly, to the extent that any such alternatives,
terms, or conditions may be reasonably carried out while protecting the public’s
health, safety, and welfare.
Marches and Public Assemblies
7-20-4
(i) Any applicant seeking to appeal the decision of the Chief of Police shall make such
appeal, in writing, to the City Administrator, or designee. The City Administrator, or
designee, and Council President shall meet with the Chief of Police and the applicant
within three (3) business days after receiving an appeal. Legal counsel and other
persons with relevant factual information may participate in this appeal meeting. The
City Administrator, or designee and Council President shall provide the parties with
an oral decision at the conclusion of the meeting. A written decision may be
requested by either the applicant or the Chief of Police, and shall be made available
by the City Administrator as soon as practicable.
(j) An applicant may appeal the decision of the City Administrator, or designee and
Council President to the Common Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City
Clerk. The Clerk shall place this issue on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled
Council meeting in which legally required notice may be provided to the public.
(k) The Council may affirm, reverse, or modify the determination of the City
Administrator, or designee, at the conclusion of the agenda item and after all
interested persons have had an opportunity to be heard at the noticed public meeting.
(l) Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the Common Council may seek such other
legal relief as may be available.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-20-5 Permit Fees.
A non-refundable fee is required for all Public Assembly permit applications as set forth in
the City fee schedule. Permit applications may include a request to waive the application fee.
However, permits shall not be issued unless the fee is paid or it is specifically waived by the
Council. The permit application fees identified herein are separate from other specific fees or
licenses required, and separate from any requirement to reimburse the City for the actual cost
of any Extraordinary Services required for the permitted event, or for damage or destruction
resulting from the event.
(a) Permit Fees
(1) Public Assembly Permits (non-refundable) shall be as set forth in the City Fee
Schedule and shall be categorized as follows:
a. Events with one thousand (1,000) or more people in attendance*
b. Events with five hundred (500) to nine hundred ninety-nine (999)
people in attendance*
c. Events with three hundred (300) to four hundred ninety-nine (499)
people in attendance*
d. Events with two hundred ninety-nine (299) people or less*
e. Events which are two (2) or more days**
** Multi day events (e) fee shall be in addition to the fee based on the
number of attendees.
Marches and Public Assemblies
7-20-5
(2) All other required charges and/or fees, including but not limited to facility
rental, food and beverage sale permits, temporary structure fees, and
equipment rental fees, etc., must be paid in addition to the permit application
fee. Submittal of a permit application does not reserve a park or any other
City facility, property, or services necessary for the event.
(3) Applicants for Public Assembly permits may include in their initial
submission a request that the permit administrative fee be waived due to
substantial financial hardship.
(4) There is currently no fee for Marches except those fees for
Extraordinary Services.
(5) Fees for Extraordinary Services shall be as set forth in Sec. 7-12-7(b).
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-20-6 Extraordinary Services.
The City, through the Chief of Police, shall address the issue of costs for Extraordinary
Services before or at the time final action is taken on a March and Public Assembly permit
application. Extraordinary Services will generally consist of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
control and of efforts to ensure the safety of persons and property in crowded and/or
potentially volatile situations.
(a) The City may require that event organizers pay all costs for Extraordinary Services
provided by the City for the event, with the total costs incurred to be mailed via
invoice to the organizer(s) within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the event.
(b) The City may require the event organizer(s) pay less than the costs for Extraordinary
Services provided by the City in an amount to be determined by the Chief of Police
depending upon the unique circumstances of the event, with the remaining actual
costs to be waived. Any amounts required to be paid shall be mailed via invoice to the
organizer(s) within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the event.
(c) The City may waive all costs for Extraordinary Services provided for the March or
Public Assembly. Requests for waiver will be reviewed by the Common Council and
shall consider the event sponsors are making good faith efforts to minimize adverse
effects on the health, safety and welfare of the community and as a result minimizing
the need for City employee involvement, the burden the Public Assembly or March
places on the City’s taxpayer’s as a whole and the financial condition of the event
organizers.
(d) In the event that the City requires that the event organizer(s) pay some or all of the
costs for Extraordinary Services provided by the City for the event, then the City may
require that funds be placed in escrow, or other necessary security be provided, before
the permit is issued. The amount of the cash deposit or other security shall be based
upon the cost estimate of the Extraordinary Services which may be incurred. The
Special Events permit shall not be issued until the event organizer(s) have complied
with any requirements for security.
Marches and Public Assemblies
7-20-6
(e) Security for the estimated costs of Extraordinary Services may be in the form of a
cash deposit in an escrow account, bond, letter of credit, or similar instrument, with
the type and form of the instrument to be at the discretion of the City.
(f) If the actual costs for Extraordinary Services provided exceed the security and has not
been waived by the Chief of Police, then the difference shall be billed to and paid by
the event organizer(s). If the actual costs for Extraordinary Services provided is less
than the amount of funds deposited in advance of the event, then any unused amounts
must be returned to the event organizer(s) within a reasonable time after the event
concludes. Any other security instrument must be either used or released by the City
within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the event.
Code in effect 2/12/19
7-20-7 Indemnification and Hold Harmless.
Organizers of Marches and Public Assemblies shall be required to sign an agreement in a
form acceptable to the City in which they agree to indemnify the City of Onalaska and its
departments and hold the City and its departments, employees and agents harmless from any
liability to any person resulting from any damage or injury to the property or any person
which occurs in connection with the permitted event proximately caused by any actions or
inactions of the event’s organizer, their officers, employees or agents or any person under
their control insofar as permitted by law.
Code in effect 2/12/19
7-20-8 Event Cancellation.
The Chief of Police may cancel a Public Assembly or March, regardless of whether or not a
permit has been issued, without prior notice for any significant change in conditions which
would or may adversely affect the public health or safety of the community, or for any
condition that would place facilities, grounds, or other nature resources at risk of damage or
destruction if the event were permitted to take place.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-20-9 Penalties.
In addition to other potential fines, penalties, and/or charges as described in the Onalaska
Municipal Code, the violation of the terms of the March or Public Assembly permit shall be
punishable by forfeiture of not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and not more than
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00). Each day of violation shall be considered a separate
offense. In addition, the City may enforce this section by way of immediately revoking the
permit, seeking injunctive relief, and all other remedies available at law and in equity.
Marches and Public Assemblies
7-20-8
The penalties set forth herein shall also apply to all persons, organizations, and entities that
organize events which are required to obtain a March or Public Assembly permit but fail or
refuse to do so. If any person violates any provision of this Ordinance, the City shall have the
authority to institute the appropriate legal action or proceedings to ensure compliance and to
thereby prohibit such person from violating these conditions.
The failure to obtain a March or Public Assembly permit before holding or conducting a
March or Public Assembly or the failure to abide by, March or Public Assembly permit
requirements, will constitute a violation of this section and may result in the termination of
the event, denial of future permit applications, or issuance of a City Ordinance citation.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Sec. 7-20-10 Severability.
If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person or circumstances be
held invalid, the remainder of this Ordinance and the application of such provision to other
persons or circumstances shall not be affected. The City of Onalaska reserves the right to
amend or repeal this Ordinance at any time upon proper notice; and all rights, privileges and
immunities conferred by this Ordinance or by acts done pursuant hereto shall exists subject to
such power.
Once an application for licensure or permit been made under this Title and the required fee
paid, the fee is non-refundable regardless of whether the license or permit is granted.
Code in effect 2/12/19
Title 8 Parks and Recreation
Chapter 01 Parks
Division 1 Park Regulations
8.01.11 Generally
A. Purpose. In order to protect the parks, parkways, recreational facilities and conservancy areas within the
City from injury, damage or desecration, these regulations are enacted.
B. Park. The term "park" as hereinafter used in this Chapter shall include all grounds, structures and
watercourses which are or may be located within any area dedicated to the public use as a park,
parkway, recreation facility or conservancy district in the City.
8.01.12 Park Regulations
A. Specific Regulations.
1. Littering & Dumping Prohibited. No person shall litter, dump or deposit any rubbish, refuse, earth
or other material in any park. No person shall dispose of trash not generated incidental to park usage
in a dumpster or other refuse container located in or upon park property unless specific written
authority is first obtained from the Parks and Recreation Director.
2. Sound Devices. No person shall operate or play any amplifying system after 9:00 p.m. unless
specific authority is first obtained from the Parks, Recreation & Library Board.
3. Bill/Flyer Posting. No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or attach any placard, bill, notice, sign
or advertising matter upon any structure, tree or other natural object in any park, except park
regulations and other signs authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director or their designee.
4. Removal of Park Equipment Prohibited. No person shall remove benches, seats, tables or other
park equipment from any park.
5. Trapping. No person shall trap in any park unless specific written authority is first obtained from the
Parks, Recreation & Library Board.
6. Making of Fires. No person shall start, tend or maintain a fire except in personal grills or designated
fireplaces. Personal grills shall be used only in designated picnic areas. The use of personal grills is
permitted provided lawns and vegetation are not endangered. Unburned fuel and ashes shall be
disposed of in such a manner as to prevent fire or damage to any park property.
7. Protection of Park Property. No person shall kill, injure or disturb or attempt to injure or disturb
waterfowl, birds or animals, wild or domestic, within any park, except as permitted by this Chapter. No
person shall climb any tree or remove flowers, break, cut down, trample upon, remove or in any
manner injure, deface, write upon or ill use any tree, shrub, flower, flower bed, turf, soil, sand,
fountain, ornament, building, structure, apparatus, bench, table, official notice, sign or other property
within any park. Edible fruits, edible nuts, wild mushrooms, wild asparagus, and watercress may be
sustainably harvested by hand for the purpose of personal consumption by the collector. The
collection of seeds from herbaceous plants such as grasses and wildflowers is not allowed without
written authorization from the Parks, Recreation & Library Board.
8. Motorized Vehicles & Snowmobiles. Except for authorized maintenance vehicles, no person shall
operate an unlicensed or licensed motorized vehicle or snowmobile outside of areas specifically
designated as parking areas or areas where the operation of such vehicles is specifically permitted.
Motor vehicles are restricted to the roads and drives and parking areas. No motor vehicles of any
nature may be used on the seeded areas except vehicles which have a Parks, Recreation & Library
Board authorization for shows, rides or exhibits and then only for the purpose of loading and
unloading.
9. Glass Beverage Bottles in Parks Prohibited. No person shall bring into, carry onto or possess
while in any public park glass bottles or glass containers, including those containing or normally used
for containing soda water, fermented malt beverages or alcohol.
10. Reckless Driving in Parks Prohibited. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a reckless
manner in any of the public parks of the City.
11. Parking in Parks. No person shall park any motor vehicle in any park in the City except in a
designated parking area. No overnight shall be allowed in any public park, including the OMNI
Center, without approval of the Parks and Recreation Director or their designee.
12. Horse and Carriages. No person shall ride a horse or drive a horse-driven vehicle in any park,
except on roads or designated bridle paths, and where approval of the Parks and Recreation Director
is first obtained. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or drive a horse-driven vehicle in a
careless, negligent or reckless manner which may endanger the safety and well-being of others.
13. Removing Tree Protectors. No person shall remove any device for the protection of trees or shrubs.
14. Golfing and Sporting Activities. No golfing or practicing golf in City parks or recreation areas shall
be allowed, unless specific written authority is first obtained from the Parks and Recreation Director or
Parks, Recreation & Library Board.
15. Arrows. No person shall use or shoot any bow and arrow in any City park except as may be allowed
as part of a managed hunt through the Onalaska Urban Deer Management Program.
16. Fees and Charges. The Common Council, upon the recommendation of the Parks, Recreation &
Library Board, shall have the authority to establish such fees as deemed necessary for use of any
park facility, shelter or land area. It shall be unlawful to use such areas without payment of such fee
or charge when required.
17. Pets.
a. No person shall permit any dog, cat or other pet owned by, or under the care or control of them to
run at large in any park, except that dogs are permitted in designated dog exercise areas. Pets
shall be allowed on leash, no longer than six (6) feet, or in a stroller or bag/carrier made for the
purposes of carrying pets, on trails and pathways only. All pet waste must be picked up and
disposed of off park property. Bags, scoops or other appropriate implements for the removal of
pet waste must be carried by any person, bringing a pet onto park property.
b. No person in any park shall train or exhibit animals without written approval by the Parks and
Recreation Director.
c. Owners of any pet or animal whether legally or illegally in any park are responsible for the
immediate removal and disposal of fecal matter deposited by the animal.
d. Service dogs assisting persons with disabilities and which are controlled by the use of a harness
or other restraint are exempt from this Section.
18. Firearms; Hunting. Discharging of any firearm or weapon is prohibited in all City parks. A person
who complies with state law regarding the possession of firearms may have in their possession or
under their control a firearm in City parks unless there is a special event as defined by Sec.
943(1e)(h), Wis. Stats. and the person has been notified not to enter or remain at the special event in
the City park while carrying a firearm.
19. Fish Cleaning. Cleaning of fish in shelters, toilet facilities or picnic areas is prohibited in all City
parks.
20. Controlled Substances. Possessing, using or dispensing of a controlled substance in violation of the
Uniform Controlled Substances Act is prohibited in all City parks.
21. Camping. Overnight camping is not permitted in any City park. Notwithstanding this prohibition,
however, the Parks and Recreation Director or their designee may permit individual persons or
groups of persons having a common purpose to remain in one (1) or more designated area/s of a
park for some or all of the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., during recognized special events
open to the general public such as, but not limited to, Fishing Tournaments, Farmer’s Markets and/or
Craft Markets and Shows, subject to the terms and conditions which the City deems necessary and/or
desirable.
22. Utility Installation and Construction. Any private construction which may in any manner encroach
upon or affect the parks and parkways shall be under the direction and jurisdiction of Parks,
Recreation & Library Board and no such installation, repair or construction shall commence without
the written permission therefor from the Board. All public works, including construction and installation
of power lines, hydrants, sewers and the like shall be commenced only after notice to the Board of the
City's intention so to do. Where practicable, such construction and installation shall be performed
pursuant to recommendations by the Board.
23. Tennis and Pickle Ball Courts. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, ride or use a
skateboard, bicycle, tricycle or other similar device, or roller skates or rollerblades on any public
tennis or pickle ball courts.
24. Swimming or Bathing.
a. No person shall swim or bathe in any lake, river, lagoon, beach or public swimming pool under
the jurisdiction of the City Parks and Recreation Department except at such places and at such
times as the Parks, Recreation & Library Board may direct.
b. No person shall swim or bathe in any detention or retention pond under the jurisdiction of the City.
25. Bicycles, Electric Personal Assistive Mobility, Electric Scooters and Motor Bicycles. Bicycles,
electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric scooters and motor bicycles shall be defined as
set forth in Sec. 340.01, Wis. Stats., and may be ridden on trails and pathways only. Motor bicycles
shall not be operated with the motor in use. The Parks, Recreation & Library Board may designate
certain trails or pathways as off limits for bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric
scooters and motor bicycles and no person shall ride a bicycle or any such vehicle on such trails or
pathways. Bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric scooters and motor bicycles
shall be parked only in areas so designated. Electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric
scooters and motor bicycles are prohibited within the Onalaska Skate Park. Any Person with a
disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk as defined in Sec. 340.01(43g), Wis. Stats., is exempt
from this Ordinance section. Statutory Reference Secs.340.01, 349.23 and 349.237 Wis. Stats.
26. Smoking Prohibited. Smoking is prohibited in specified outdoor areas. No person may smoke in the
following areas of a City park or outdoor areas of City property:
a. Playgrounds;
b. Sports fields and sports field seating areas;
c. Swimming pools and inside the fenced area of all swimming pools;
d. Onalaska Skate Park;
e. Within fifty (50) feet of the areas listed in Subsection a.-d. above;
f. Within the fenced area of tennis or pickle ball courts;
g. Those park areas posted as no smoking by the Parks and Recreation Director or their designee;
h. Those areas posted no smoking during an approved Special Event held in such park and which is
open to the public with no admission charge and for which no smoking has been requested by the
event permit holder;
Upon written request of a special event applicant, the prohibition of this section may be waived by the
Parks, Recreation & Library Board and Common Council for specified designated areas for those
events where admission is restricted by the event organizer through the sale of tickets. A request for
a waiver must be submitted at least sixty (60) days in advance of the event. Signs prohibiting smoking
in designated outdoor areas shall be of sufficient size and placed so that the general public has
reasonable notice of the prohibition.
8.01.13 Radio-Controlled Model Airplanes and Drones Prohibited in Parks
A. No person shall launch or land a drone, radio-controlled model airplane or helicopter in any park in the
City except as authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director. City of Onalaska employee(s) may
launch or land a drone in a City park with the approval of the Parks and Recreation Director.
8.01.14 Turf Protection on Public Property
A. Except as authorized by the Parks, Recreation & Library Board, no person shall dig into the turf of any
City-owned property for any purposes whatsoever or remove any trees or flowers.
8.01.15 Park Hours
A. Park Hours. Subject to certain exceptions listed below, all City parks shall be closed from 11:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m. Persons launching or transporting watercraft from park property may do so only within park
hours.
B. Exceptions to Closing Hours. A person driving through a park on a public road; however, stopping shall
not be permitted within a park. The Common Council may modify closing hours for particular events.
C. Park Closing and Opening Dates. The Parks, Recreation & Library Board will have full authority to open
and close any park, beach, facility or area because of season, condition, construction or when, in the
interest of public safety, it is deemed necessary.
8.01.16 Ultra-light Aircraft Regulated
A. Definition. An ultra-light aircraft, vehicle or hang glider is an unpowered or powered aircraft which is not
subject to extensive regulation by the Federal Aviation Administration by virtue of its characteristics and
which is defined as an ultra-light vehicle by 14 C.F.R. Sec. 103.1 and which is defined as an ultra-light
aircraft by Sec. 114.195, Wis. Stats.
B. Regulations Regarding Use.
1. No person shall operate any ultra-light aircraft within the City in such a manner or in such a location
as to endanger or injure any person or property. No person shall operate an ultra-light aircraft in the
City in violation of any applicable state and federal regulations and standards. No person shall cause
an ultra-light aircraft to land or to take off from any property without permission of the owner or
occupant of said property, provided that an emergency landing may be made to prevent a
catastrophe. In the case of landing or taking off from a City public park or other City property, the
operator of such ultra-light aircraft shall first obtain a permit from the Parks, Recreation & Library
Board. No fee shall be charged by the Board for such permit which may be issued for a period up to
thirty (30) days nor shall the Board sponsor such activity.
2. Any person desiring to land or to take off from any property owned by the City of Onalaska shall, prior
to receiving a permit, procure evidence of insurance providing for not less than One Million Dollars
($1,000,000.00) of coverage for each occurrence for damage to property or personal injury. Evidence
of such insurance shall include a certificate of insurance naming the City of Onalaska as an additional
insured, and said certificate shall be filed with the City Clerk at the time the applicant seeks a permit.
8.01.17 Reservation of Park Space
A. Policy on Reservation. The City-owned parks and park facilities and shelter areas are primarily for the
nonexclusive use of the residents and visitors of the City. However, under proper circumstances,
exclusive use of the same or parts thereof may be permitted. This Section is intended to regulate
exclusive use of municipally-owned parks, park facilities, park shelters or parts thereof in the City to the
end that the general welfare of the City is protected.
B. Reservation of Park Space. A person or group, firm organization, partnership or corporation may
reserve the use of a park facility or a park shelter by application filed with the Parks and Recreation
Department for a permit for exclusive use of the same, provided all of the requirements on the application
have been met and the appropriate fee has been paid.
C. Fee and Deposit. The Common Council shall establish a schedule of fees for park space and shelter
use. In addition to any required fee, all applicants for reservation or use of park space or shelters for
which a permit is required shall also be required to pay a deposit as set forth on the City’s Fee Schedule
to insure compliance with the permit’s terms and to pay for the City’s maintenance and clean-up
expenses. Applications for reservations or use of park space or shelters shall not be accepted unless
accompanied by the non-refundable park fee and a signed agreement for such reservation and/or use.
The deposit can be paid at the time of the reservation or when the key is picked up prior to the rental and
shall be returned after the use if clean-up or repair by the City is not required and if all terms of the permit
have been fully complied with. Keys are available for pick up at the Parks and Recreation Department
one (1) or two (2) day(s) prior to the event. Weekend rentals should pick up on Thursday or Friday prior to
the event.
D. Reasons for Denial. Applicants may be denied for any of the following reasons:
1. If it is for a use which would involve a violation of Federal or State law or any provision of this
Chapter.
2. If the granting of the permit would conflict with another permit already granted or for which application
is already pending.
3. If the Applicant does not fully complete the Application.
4. The application is made less than the required days in advance of the scheduled exclusive use.
5. If it is for a use of the park or park facility at a date and time when, in addition to the proposed use,
anticipated nonexclusive use by others of the park or park facility is expected and would be seriously
adversely affected.
6. If the law enforcement requirements of the exclusive use will require so large a number of persons as
to prevent adequate law enforcement to the park, park facility or shelter area involved or of the rest of
the City.
7. The exclusive use will reasonably create a substantial risk of injury to persons or damage to property.
8. The exclusive use is so poorly organized that participants are likely to engage in aggressive or
destructive activity.
E. Indemnification. Prior to granting any permit for exclusive use of the park, the City may require the
permittee to file evidence of good and sufficient sureties, insurance in force or other evidence of adequate
financial responsibility, running to the City and such other third parties as may be injured or damaged, in
an amount depending upon the likelihood of injury or damage as a direct and proximate result of the
exclusive use sufficient to indemnify the City and such third parties as may be injured or damaged
thereby, caused by the permittee, its agents or participants.
F. Permit Not Required For City Activity. A permit is not required for exclusive use of the park or a park
facility sponsored by the City.
G. Permit Revocation. The Common Council, Parks, Recreation & Library Board, Parks and Recreation
Director and/or the Chief of Police or their designee(s) after granting a permit may revoke a permit
already issued if it is deemed that the terms of the permit are not being complied with, or that such action
is justified by an actual or potential emergency due to weather, fire, riot, health emergency, catastrophe or
by a major change in the condition forming the basis of the permit.
H. Form of Permit. Each permit shall be in a form prescribed by the Parks and Recreation Department and
shall designate the park, park facility or shelter area involved, date, hours of the exclusive use, purpose of
the exclusive use and the name of the person, group, firm, organization, partnership or corporation to
which the permit is issued.
I. Class B Fermented Malt Beverage Licenses. When fermented malt beverages are sold at any event
authorized by this Section, a valid Fermented Malt Beverage license shall be obtained and the provisions
of Titles 7 and 11 shall be fully complied with. Said license must be held by the person who filed the
original license and shall be presented to any law enforcement officer upon request.
J. Violation of Terms of Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person, organization or other entity to which a
permit is issued for a specific park, park area or shelter to use or occupy a park, park area or shelter other
than that for which the permit is issued. Any person, organization, or other entity violating this Section
shall be subject to immediate revocation of their permit and removal from the park, park area or shelter,
forfeiture of the deposit paid, together with forfeiture as provided in Title 1 of the Code of Ordinances.
8.01.18 Penalty
A. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction shall be subject to a
penalty of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per offense, and in addition, shall pay the
costs and expense of prosecution. Failure to promptly pay such forfeiture shall subject the violator to be
sentenced to the County Jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days.
Chapter 02 Regulation of Boating
Division 2 Authority
8.02.11 State Boating Laws Adopted
A. The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to boating in the followingenumerated
sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the
penalties to be imposed or the punishment for violation of said Statutes, are hereby adopted and by
reference made a part of this Chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or
prohibited by any Statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this Chapter:
30.50 Definitions.
30.501 Capacity plates on boats.
30.505 Certificate of number system to conform to federal system.
30.51 Certificate of number and registration; requirements; exemptions.
30.52 Certificate of number and registration; application; certification and registration
period; fees; issuance.
30.523 Certification or registration card to be on board; display of stickers or decals and
identification number.
30.525 Voluntary contributions for non-motorized boats.
30.53 Certificate of origin; requirement; contents; guaranteed asset protection waivers.
30.543 Report of stolen or abandoned boats.
30.549 Transfer of ownership of boats with a certificate of number or registration.
30.55 Notice of abandonment or destruction of boat or change of address.
30.60 Classification of motorboats.
30.61 Lighting equipment.
30.62 Other equipment.
30.63 Sale and use of certain outboard motors restricted.
30.635 Motorboat prohibition.
30.64 Patrol boats.
30.65 Traffic rules.
30.66 Speed restrictions.
30.67 Accidents and accident reports.
30.675 Distress signal flag.
30.678 Boating safety certificates, requirements; exemptions; operation by minors.
30.68 Prohibited operation.
30.681 Intoxicated boating.
30.682 Preliminary breath screening test.
30.683 Implied consent.
30.684 Chemical tests.
30.686 Report arrest to department.
30.687 Officer's action after arrest for violating intoxicated boating law.
30.69 Water skiing.
30.70 Skin diving.
30.71 Disposal of waste from boats equipped with toilets.
30.742 Water exhibitions and races; rules.
30.75 Service of process on nonresident.
30.77 Local regulation of boating.
30.772 Placement and use of moorings; restrictions; permits.
30.773 Designated mooring areas.
30.78 Municipal regulation of seaplanes.
30.79 Municipal water safety patrols; state aids.
30.80 Penalties.
30.81 Local regulations on icebound inland waters.
30.99 Parties to a violation.
8.02.12 No Wake Restriction
A. No person shall operate a motor boat in the canal within the First Addition to Lauderdale Addition to the
City of Onalaska at a speed greater than five (5) miles per hour (MPH) (no wake) and shall not create a
washing situation.
8.02.13 Penalties
A. Any person violating any section of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties as set forth on the City of
Onalaska Schedule of Deposits in accordance with Sec. 30.80, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 03 Bulkhead Lines
Division 1 Authority
8.03.11 Bulkhead Lines Established
A. The City of Onalaska, La Crosse County, Wisconsin, has established in the interest of the public and
pursuant to Sec. 30.11, Wis. Stats., a new bulkhead line along a part of the shore of the Black River, La
Crosse County, as hereinafter described: That the bulkhead line of that part of the east shore of the Black
River, hereinafter described and more particularly shown by the map on file with the City Clerk, is
established and determined as set forth in the following description, subject to the approval of the
Department of Natural Resources, namely:
1. Commencing at the Southeast corner of Government Lot 1, Section 8, T16N, R7W, City of Onalaska,
Wisconsin; thence S89°43'W along the North line of Lauderdale Place and said North line extended
West 1733.16 feet to the meander line of First Addition to Lauderdale Addition; thence continuing
S89°43'W 22 feet to the starting point of the bulkhead line; thence along a line parallel to and 22 feet
from said meander line to its intersection with a line 22 feet North of the North line of Lauderdale
Place, said meander line described as N9°16'E 113.68 feet, N87°30'24"E 395.44 feet, S88°48'38"E
704.24 feet, S25°46'E 76.71 feet and S39°48"E 51.85 feet to the North line of Lauderdale Place;
thence N89°43'E along a line parallel to and 22 feet from said North line of Lauderdale Place 208.35
feet; thence NO°21 'W 369.91 feet; thence N89°59'50"E 330.35 feet to the West line of Outlot 163,
Assessor's Plat of Onalaska; thence south 0’21’20” east along said west line 390.30 feet; thence
north 88’31’28” east 343.00feet; thence north 13’30’28” east 682.28 feet to the south line of outlot 92,
assessor’s plat of Onalaska; thence south 88’34’07” west along said south line 506.52 feet to the
southwest corner of said outlot 92; thence north 0’21’20” west along the west line of said outlot 92 a
distance of 563.57 feet; thence N89°31'40"E 304.55 feet; thence N5°11'40"W 331.97 feet; thence
N76°30'20"E 421.04 feet to a point on the Burlington and Northern Railroad R-O-W and the terminus
of said bulkhead line.
Title 9 Public Utilities
Chapter 01 Water Utility
Division 1 General Provisions
9.01.11 Compliance with Rules
A. All persons now receiving a water supply from the City of Onalaska Water Utility, or who may
hereafter make application therefor, shall be considered as having agreed to be bound by the rules
and regulations as filed with the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin.
9.01.12 Establishment of Service
A. Application for water service shall be made in writing on a form furnished by the Public Works
Department. The application shall require the legal description of the property to be served, name of
the owner, the exact use to be made of the service, and the size of the supply pipe and meter
desired. (Note: particularly any special refrigeration and/or air-conditioning water-consuming
appliances).
B. Service will be furnished only if:
1. Premises have a frontage on a properly platted street or easement in which a ductile iron or other
long-life water main has been laid, or where property owner has agreed to and complied with the
provisions of the City specifications.
2. Property owner has installed or agrees to install a service pipe form the curb line to the point of
use, and laid not less than six (6) feet below the surface of an established or proposed grade, and
according to Utility's specification; and
3. Premises have adequate piping beyond metering point.
C. The owner of a multi-unit dwelling has the option of being served by individual metered water service
to each unit if it is under eight (8) units. If it is over eight (8) units, the property must be served by a
master meter. The owner, by selecting this option, is required to provide interior plumbing and meter
settings to enable individual metered service to each unit and individual disconnection without
affecting service to the other units. Each meter and meter connection will be a separate water utility
customer for the purpose of the filed rules and regulations.
D. No division of the water service of any lot or parcel of land shall be made for the extension and
independent meterage of the supply to an adjoining lot or parcel of land. No division of a water supply
service shall be made at the curb for separate supplies therefrom for two (2) or more separate
premises having frontage on any street or easement whether owned by the same or different parties,
unless approved by City Engineer and each metered location has an individual curb stop shut off.
E. The City Engineer is hereby empowered to withhold approval of any application wherein full
information of the purpose of such supply is not clearly indicated and set forth by the applicant
property owner.
F. Accounts shall be maintained and billed in the name of the property owner unless otherwise required
by Statute or Administrative Code.
9.01.13 No Claims for Damages and Inspections
A. No person using water shall enter a claim against the City as a Water Utility or any officer thereof, for
damages to any fixtures or appurtenance by reason of interrupted water supply or variation of
pressure, or for damage of any nature caused by turning off or on, either partially or entirely, of the
water supply for any premises, either for the repairs or alterations of any water main, or for the
discontinuance of the service to their premises for violation of any rule or regulation of the Water
Department. No claims will be allowed against the Utility or the City on account of interruption of
supply caused by breaking of pipes or by stoppage for repairs or fire or other emergency. In case of
a probable stoppage of water supply when time of interruption can be forecast, every reasonable
attempt will be made by the Water Department to acquaint the users with the action proposed.
B. During reasonable hours any officer or authorized employee of the Utility shall have the right of
access to the premises supplied with service, for the purpose of inspection or for the enforcement of
the Utility's rules and regulations. As required by the Public Service Commission, the Utility will make
a systematic inspection of all unmetered water taps for the purpose of checking waste and
unnecessary use of water. If entry to the premises is denied, the authorized inspector may seek an
inspection warrant pursuant to Sec. 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
9.01.14 Private Well Abandonment and Permits
A. Purpose. Residents of the City of Onalaska depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking
water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater
quality. The purpose of this article is to institute regulations and restrictions to protect the city's
municipal water supply and well fields and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the City of Onalaska.
B. Applicability and Authority. These regulations are established pursuant to the authority granted by
the state legislature in 1983, Wisconsin Act 410 (effective May 11, 1984) which specifically added
groundwater protection to the statutory authorization for municipal planning and zoning in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare. This ordinance applies to all wells located within the
City’s corporate limits. Water Utility customers outside the jurisdiction of the municipal water system
may be required under contract agreement or utility rules to adopt and enforce equivalent ordinances
within their jurisdiction for purpose stated in Subsection A. above.
C. Use of Private Wells; Use of Water Supply.
1. Private Well Abandonment Generally. All structures and buildings used, or intended to be
used, for human habitation shall connect to the municipal water supply within one (1) year of the
availability of said water. All private wells shall, within ninety (90) days after connection to the
City water supply, be permanently abandoned pursuant to Subsection 9.01.14.C.6. below unless
the owner or owners obtain a well operation permit from the City of Onalaska Water Utility. In the
event permission is granted to use a private well, it is expressly provided that the water therefrom
shall be used on outside hose bibs only.
2. Well Operation Permit. A permit may be granted to operate a well if the following requirements
are met, except as otherwise provided herein:
a. The well and pump installation meet the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code NR 812 and
subsequent amendments, a well constructor’s report is on file with the DNR or certification of
the acceptability of the well has been granted by the private water supply section of the DNR.
b. The well construction and pump installation have a history of producing safe water as
evidenced by at least two (2) samplings taken a minimum of two (2) weeks apart. No
exception to this condition may be made for unsafe wells unless the state department of
natural resources approves in writing the continued use of the well.
c. The proposed use of the well can be justified as being necessary in addition to water
provided by the public water system.
d. No physical connection shall exist between the piping of the public water system and the
private well. The City may elect to do a cross connection inspection to verify compliance.
e. A permit fee shall have been paid once every five (5) years in an amount determined
annually by the City Council and set forth on the City Fee Schedule.
3. Additional Conditions of Permit. The right to construct, install and maintain a well as authorized
by permit under this section shall be expressly conditioned upon the owners and successors in
interest complying with the following:
a. The owner shall permit the Water Utility or its designee access to the well for inspection and
testing at anytime during working hours.
b. No repair or modification of any well may be performed unless prior notification is given to the
Water Utility and the plan and resulting construction is reviewed and inspected by the City
Engineer or designee.
c. The City shall have the right to sample the water after completion of any such repairs or
modification. Such sampling shall be at the owner’s cost and may either be done by the City
or by the owner at the City’s direction.
d. The City shall have the right to randomly test or direct the owner to test the well not more
than two (2) times in any six (6) month period. The City may require additional testing if there
is reason to believe some contamination may be present or that the results of previous tests
may be invalid.
e. The cost of any testing and sampling as provided in this Section shall be paid by the owner
upon invoice by the City.
f. A permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this Section shall be revoked by the City
Engineer or designee upon notice to the permittee that any of the following have occurred:
1. The owner of the well has refused access to a well for testing or has failed to follow a
direction of order of the Water Utility in regard to testing or sampling.
2. The owner of any well has neglected to pay for any tests authorized with thirty (30)
days of billing invoice.
3. Any test results demonstrate well contamination and do not meet reasonable health
standards or are in violation of any state or municipal ordinance dealing with well
operation.
4. The parties aggrieved by permit revocation may appeal the initial decision of the water
superintendent to the Board of Public Works by filing a written for review with the City
Clerk.
4. Application for Permit. Applications for a well operation permit shall be made in writing by the
owner or owners of the well to the City of Onalaska Water Utility. Application shall be upon a
form provided by the Water Utility and shall be made concurrently with the application for a
plumbing permit to connect the premises with municipal water. A fee as determined by the City of
Onalaska Common Council and reflected on the City’s Fee Schedule shall accompany the well
operation permit application. Applications for a well operation permit must be approved by the
City Engineer, upon approval by the City Engineer the application will be forwarded to the Board
of Public Works and the Common Council for approval. Applications to drill a new well shall
require a separate application for new well in addition to the well operation permit, the application
to drill a new well shall be on a form provided by the City Engineer’s office and shall require a
needs assessment and any other information deemed necessary by the City Engineer and shall
be reviewed in conjunction with the well operation permit. The application to drill a new well shall
be accompanied with the applicable permit fee.
5. Terms of Permit. The well operation permit shall be valid for five (5) years from the date of
issuance.
6. Renewal Permit. Renewal permits shall be issued for the term and upon payment of the permit
fee hereinabove mentioned. Renewal Well Operation Permits are subject to the same conditions
as initial Well Operation Permits, as outlined in Subsection 9.01.14.C.3. above. The owner or
owners shall certify when applying for a renewal permit that the well is in good operable condition
and is in conformity with all applicable state and local laws and shall provide proof of safe water
by providing at least one (1) sample, having been taken within two (2) weeks of the date of
application. In the event the first sample fails, the owner can provide an additional two (2)
samples taken a minimum of two (2) weeks apart to verify that the first sample was related to
domestic hygiene issues and not well safety problems. No exception to this condition may be
made for unsafe wells unless the State Department of Natural Resources approves in writing the
continued use of the well. In the event it is found, upon any inspection, that any cross connection
has been made between the municipal water supply system and the piping of a private well water
system, or that the well equipment is inoperable, or does not meet state or local regulations, all
permits shall be immediately suspended. In the case of a cross connection, the permit shall be
revoked and the well ordered properly abandoned in accordance with applicable ordinances. In
the event any inspection results in a suspension of a permit and a second inspection is made to
determine if the reason for suspension has been eliminated, the owner shall bear the cost of any
re-inspection fee as set forth on the Inspection Department’s Fee Schedule.
7. Well Abandonment. Upon revocation of a well permit in accordance with this Section or upon
voluntary determination to abandon the use of any well previously permitted hereunder, all wells
under the jurisdiction of this section shall be abandoned in accordance with the procedures of
Wis. Admin. Code NR Ch. 812. All debris, pump, piping, unsealed liners, and other obstructions
which may interfere with the sealing operations shall be removed prior to abandonment. The
owner of the well or the owner's agent shall notify the City Engineer or its designee at least fortyeight
(48) hours prior to commencement of any well abandonment activities. The abandonment of
the well shall be observed by the Water Utility Superintendent or its designee and an
abandonment report form, supplied by the State Department of Natural Resources, shall be
submitted by the well owner to the Water Utility and the State Department of Natural Resources
within ten (10) days of the completion of the well abandonment.
8. Abandonment of Unused or Previously Abandoned Wells. It shall be the responsibility of the
landowner of any real property upon which a well is located to see to it that all wells located on
the owner's property have been properly abandoned in accordance with the procedures of Wis.
Admin. Code NR Ch. 812, regardless of whether such owner has used such well. Upon discovery
of any unused or previously abandoned well, the owner shall notify the Water Utility and comply,
insofar as is practicable, with the procedures of Subsection 9.01.14.C.6. In the case of a
previously abandoned well, if the owner can produce proof of compliance with state well
abandonment requirements to the satisfaction of the utilities manager/engineer, compliance with
this section may be deemed unnecessary. Such determination shall be at the discretion of the
utilities manager/engineer upon considering the present and future possibility of ground water
contamination at the well site.
9. Failure to Properly Abandon Well Public Nuisance. Failure to abandon any well after
revocation of a permit to follow the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code NR Ch. 812, in abandoning
such well is hereby deemed a public nuisance, and the City may cause such well to be property
abandoned and may assess the cost against the owner of the affected property and collect it as a
special tax.
9.01.15 Outdoor Water Usage Restrictions
A. Water Usage Restrictions. The City Engineer, in concurrence with the City Council, may request
voluntary or impose mandatory outdoor water usage restrictions on all water users in the City of
Onalaska. The restrictions may apply to all properties using City water or to alternate sides of the
street as deemed necessary by the City Engineer. Alternate side restrictions would apply to evennumbered
sides of the street on even-numbered calendar days and odd-numbered sides of the street
on odd-numbered calendar days respectively. Restrictions may be for all day or for specified times
each day. Reasons for such restrictions will be given with each notice. Notice of the restrictions shall
be given to all news media in the City of Onalaska and posted to the City’s website and social media
sites.
B. Criteria for Mandatory Restrictions. Criteria for mandatory restrictions shall be as follows:
1. To avoid undue stress upon the resources and reserve capacity of the Water Utility.
2. To avoid sustained low pressure.
3. To maintain reservoir levels sufficient to provide adequate fire protection.
4. To compensate for loss of one (1) or more wells.
C. Outdoor Water Usage Restrictions. The following restrictions would be imposed based on the
needs and concerns of the Water Utility. The level of severity of the imposed restrictions would be
based on such factors as weather conditions and/or forecasts; water distribution system pressure;
reservoir levels, and groundwater levels:
1. Voluntary water restrictions.
2. Mandatory water restrictions.
3. Mandatory water restrictions even/odd sides of the street and specified times each day.
4. Mandatory water restrictions on certain days of the week.
5. Mandatory water restrictions for complete ban of outdoor water usage.
9.01.16 Cross Connection Control
A. Cross-Connection Prohibited. No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or
permit to be maintained any cross-connection. No interconnection shall be established whereby
potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply, other than the public water supply
of the Utility, may enter the supply or distribution system of the Utility, unless such private, auxiliary,
or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been
approved by the Utility and the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
B. Inspections. It shall be the duty of the Utility to cause inspection to be made of all properties
serviced by the Utility where cross-connection with the public water system is deemed possible.
Residential properties serviced by the Utility shall be inspected at a minimum of one (1) time every
twenty (20) years or coinciding with meter replacement program. All non-residential high hazard
properties serviced by the Utility shall be inspected at a minimum of once every two (2) years, all nonresidential
low/medium hazard shall be inspected every twenty (20) years or with meter replacement
program. The Utility may, but is not required to, perform the cross-connection inspection of the
owner’s property. If, in the opinion of the Utility is not able to perform the inspection, the property
owner must, at their own expense, have the plumbing inspected for cross-connections by a State of
Wisconsin Certified Cross-Connection Inspector/Surveyor or by a State of Wisconsin licensed
plumber. The frequency of required inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards
involved may be shortened by the Utility. The Utility may charge fees as approved by the Common
Council for on-premises follow-up visits by Utility personnel for re-inspection due to customer noncompliance
and for after-hours inspections or re-inspections.
C. Right of Entry. Upon presentation of credentials, representatives of the Utility shall have the right to
request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property sewed by a connection to the public
water system of the Utility for cross-connection. If entry is refused, such representatives shall obtain a
special inspection warrant under Sec. 66.0119, Wis. Stats. The Utility may disconnect service for
refusal to allow entry to examine any property. Upon request, the owner, lesser, or occupant of any
property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the
piping system on such property.
D. Authority to Discontinue Service. The Utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water
service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists and to take such
other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any damage of contamination of the
public water system. Water service shall be discontinued if the means of backflow prevention required
by the Utility is not installed, tested, maintained, and repaired in compliance with this ordinance and
Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 810, Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services
Ch. 382.22, Wis. Stats., or if it is found that the means of backflow prevention required by this
ordinance has been removed or bypassed. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable
notice and opportunity for hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats.
E. Reconnection of Service. Water service to any property discontinued under the provisions of this
ordinance shall not be restored until the cross-connection has been eliminated or a backflow
prevention device approved by the Utility has been installed in compliance with the provisions of this
section. The Utility may charge fees as approved by the Common Council for the reconnection of the
water service.
F. Emergency Discontinuance of Service. If it is determined by the Utility that a cross-connection or
an emergency endangers public health, safety, or welfare and requires immediate action, service may
be immediately discontinued. The owner, lessee, or occupant shall have an opportunity for hearing
under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., within ten (10) days of such emergency discontinuance. Such hearing shall
be before the City of Onalaska Board of Public Works.
G. Owner Responsibility. The property owner shall be responsible for the elimination of or protection
from all cross-connections on their premises. The owner shall, at their expense, have installed,
maintained, and tested any and all backflow preventers on their premises in compliance with
Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 810 and SPS administrative code. The property owner shall have
corrected any malfunction, revealed by periodic testing, of any backflow preventer on their premises.
The property owner shall inform the Utility of any proposed or modified cross-connections and also
any existing cross-connections that are not protected by an approved backflow prevention device.
The property owner shall not install a by-pass around any backflow preventer unless there is a
backflow preventer of the same type on the by-pass. Property owners who cannot shut down
operation for testing of the backflow prevention device must supply additional devices necessary to
allow testing to take place. In the event the property owner installs plumbing upstream of the backflow
preventer, such plumbing must have its own approved backflow preventer. The property owner is
required to follow the protection practices described in the American Water Works Association
publication AWWA Ml4 titled “Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection
Control," unless the Utility requires or authorizes other means of protecting the public water system.
These requirements or authorizations will be at the discretion of the Utility.
H. Additional Protection. In the case of premises having internal cross-connections that cannot be
permanently corrected or controlled or intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to
all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable
or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system
shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow preventer in
the service line. In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health that is
handled in such a manner that, in the opinion of the Utility, could create an actual or potential hazard
to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap
separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow preventer. Examples of premises
where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, hospitals, mortuaries, plating
plants, and carwash establishments. In the case of any premises where, in the opinion of the Utility,
an undue health threat is posed because of the presence of toxic substances, the Utility may require
an approved air gap at the service connection to protect the public water system. This requirement
will be at the discretion of Utility.
I. Wisconsin Administrative Code. Wisconsin Administrative Code is hereby adopted, except any
penalty provisions therein. Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 810 is hereby adopted.
J. Plumbing Code. This Section does not supersede the State of Wisconsin Plumbing Code, SPS
administrative code, or the City Plumbing Code, City of Onalaska Municipal Code, but is
supplementary to them.
K. Fee Schedule. Where the use of a cross connection controlled device has been approved as put
forth above, the property owners shall pay to the City of Onalaska a fee as outlined in the City Fee
Schedule. Additional water charges and deposits may apply per P.S.C Rate Schedule BW-1. Costs
related to the cross connection control of the device will be reviewed annually and may be subject to
change.
9.01.17 Protective Devices
A. Protective Devices in General. The owner or occupant of every premise receiving water supply
shall apply and maintain suitable means of protection of the premise supply, and all appliances
thereof, against damage arising in any manner from the use of the water supply, variation of water
pressure, or any interruption of water supply. There shall likewise be provided means for the
prevention of the transmission of water ram or noise of operation of any valve or appliance through
the piping of their own or adjacent premises. (See Title 15, Chapter 1, Division 3 “Plumbing Code”).
B. Relief Valves. On all "closed systems" (i.e., systems having a check valve, pressure regulator, or
reducing valve, water filter or softener) an effective pressure relief valve shall be installed either in the
top tapping or the upper side tapping of the hot water tank, or on the hot water distributing pipe
connection at the tank. A one-half (1/2) inch drain pipe shall be connected to the relief valve for
discharge on the floor or into a sink or open drain through an air gap. No stop valve shall be placed
between the hot water tank and the relief valve or on the drain pipe. (See Title 15, Chapter 1, Division
3 “Plumbing Code”).
C. Air Chambers. An air chamber or approved shock absorber shall be installed at the terminus of each
riser, fixture branch, or hydraulic elevator main for the prevention of undue water hammer. The air
chamber shall have a diameter not less than that of the pipe it serves and a length not less than
fifteen (15) diameters of said supply pipe. Where possible, the air chamber should be provided at its
base with a valve and drain cock for water drainage and replenishment of air. (See Title 15, Chapter
1, Division 3 “Plumbing Code”).
9.01.18 Definitions
A. For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply. Words used in the singular shall
include the plural, and the plural, the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future
tense; the word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary; the word “may” is permissive.
1. Backflow. The undesirable flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other
substances under positive or reduced pressure into the Onalaska Water Utility (hereinafter
“Utility”) distribution pipes of the potable supply of water from any source.
2. Backflow Preventer. A device or means designed to prevent backflow caused by backpressure
or back-siphonage; most commonly categorized as air gap, reduced pressure principle backflow
preventer, double cheek valve assembly, pressure vacuum breaker, atmospheric vacuum
breaker, hose connection vacuum breaker, hose connection backflow preventer, backflow
preventer with intermediate atmospheric vent, and barometric loop.
3. Backpressure. An elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (i.e., pump, elevation
of piping, or steam and/or air pressure) above the Utility supply pressure, which would cause or
tend to cause a reversal of the normal direction of flow.
4. Back-siphonage. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution
pipes of the Utility’s potable water supply system from any source caused by the sudden
reduction of pressure in the Utility’s potable water supply system.
5. Cross-connection. Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise
separate systems, one (1) of which contains potable water from the Utility, and the other
containing water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam,
gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one (1) system to the other, the direction
of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two (2) systems.
6. Customer. The owner of the property.
7. Customer service. The portion of the service lateral that is between the curb box and the
premises being served by the Water Utility.
8. Director of Public Works. The City Engineer/Utilities Administrator or their designee.
9. Mains. All pipes used for carrying water in the streets.
10. Municipal Water System. A community water system owned by a city, village, county, town,
town sanitary district, utility district, public inland lake and rehabilitation district, municipal water
district or a federal, state, county, or municipal owned institution for congregate care or correction,
or a privately owned water utility serving the foregoing.
11. Non-complying. A well or pump installation which does not comply with Sec. NR 812.42,
Wisconsin Administrative Code, Standards for Existing Installations, and which has not been
granted a variance pursuant to Sec. NR 812.43, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
12. Owner. Any person, firm, corporation or association owning property or premises which is or can
be supplied with water or their authorized agent.
13. Premises. A single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, an apartment house occupied by more
than one (1) family, a building occupied by business or other purpose, of any part of a building
with the land appurtenant thereto when sold as a separate unit.
14. Public Works Department. The organization and operation of each and every part of the water
works system.
15. Pump Installation. The pump and related equipment used for withdrawing water from a well,
including the discharge piping, the underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks,
pits, sampling faucets and well seals or caps.
16. Service lateral. The combined Utility and customer service which extends from the public water
main through the meter or to a point of two (2) feet outside the building if no meter exists.
17. Unsafe Well or Pump Installation. One which produces water which is bacteriologically
contaminated or contaminated with substances which exceeds the drinking water standards of
Ch. NR 140 or 809, Wisconsin Administrative Code, or for which a Health Advisory has been
issued by the Department of Natural Resources.
18. Unused Well or Pump Installation. One which is not used or does not have a functional
pumping system.
19. Utility Service. That portion of the service lateral from the public water main through the curb
box which is the property of the utility or to the property line if no curb box or shut off exists.
20. Well. A drill hole or other excavation or opening deeper than it is wide that extends more than ten
(10) feet below the ground surface constructed for the purpose of obtaining groundwater.
21. Well Abandonment. The proper filling and sealing of a well according to the provision of Sec.
NR 812.26, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Division 2 Connection and Installation
9.01.21 Operation of Valves and Hydrants and Unauthorized Use of Water
A. Any person who shall, without authority of the Utility, allow contractors, masons, or other
unauthorized persons to take water from their premises, operate any valve connected with the street
or supply mains, or open any fire hydrant connected with the distribution system, except for the
purpose of extinguishing fire, or who shall wantonly damage or impair the same shall be subject to a
fine as provided by municipal ordinances.
9.01.22 Service Connections (or Water Laterals)
A. No water service shall be laid through any trench having cinders, rubbish, rock or gravel fill, or any
other material which may cause injury to or disintegration of the service pipe, unless adequate means
of protection are provided by sand filling or such other insulation as may be approved by the Utility.
Service pipes passing through curb or retaining walls shall be adequately safeguarded by provision of
a channel space or pipe casing, not less than twice the diameter of the service connection. The space
between the service pipe and channel or pipe casing shall be filled and lightly caulked with a mastic
cement, or other resilient material, and made impervious to moisture.
B. In backfilling the pipe trench, the service pipe must be protected against injury by carefully hand
tamping the ground filling, free from hard lumps, rocks, stones, or other injurious material, around and
at least six (6) inches over the pipe.
C. All water supplies shall be of undiminished size from the street main in to the point of meter
placement. Beyond the meter outlet valve the piping shall be sized and proportioned to provide, on all
floors, at all times, an equitable distribution of water supply for the greatest probable number of
fixtures or appliances operating simultaneously. All such service shall comply with the provisions of
the State Plumbing Code and shall be inspected by the Inspection Department.
D. Water service from the main to the curb stop shall use type "K" copper for one (1) inch to two (2) inch
diameter pipe. The type of pipe for installations in excess of two (2) inches shall be determined by the
City of Onalaska. All water services from the main to the meter stops for new construction shall be a
minimum of one (1) inch. All water services from the curb stop to the meter, whether new or
replacement, shall be one (1) inch.
E. All water laterals installed within the City right of way or easement must be installed to current City of
Onalaska specifications.
F. If the property owner changes use of property currently receiving water service and such as a result
of such change water service will no longer be needed in the future, the City Engineer may require
abandonment of the water service at the main. Property owner shall be responsible for all costs for
removal.
9.01.23 Turning on Water
A. The water cannot be turned on for a consumer except by a duly authorized employee of the Utility or
a licensed plumber as listed on a Plumbing Permit for the property. When a plumber has completed a
job, they must leave the water turned off. This does not prevent the plumber from testing the work.
9.01.24 Connection Control
A. Regulation by Size. Any connections two (2) inches or greater shall be flushed by the installer and
tested by the Water Utility and be certified with one (1) bacteriologically safe sample prior to use for
any purpose. A water line pressure test shall also be made before or after the bacteriologically safe
sample (per the latest revision of AWWA Standard C-651) has been obtained, unless the line to be
pressure tested is not connected to the Water Utility system.
B. Flushing. Preparation for flushing and testing shall consist of providing a flushing assembly at the
end of the installed line before any other piping is connected. The flushing assembly is to consist of a
two inch (2) inch minimum connection to the end of the line, a three-quarter (3/4) inch female pipe tee
for a test faucet, a test faucet, and necessary hose to discharge the flushing water into a drain. The
size of the hose shall be one and one-half inches (1 1/2) inch for water main sizes smaller than eight
(8) inches and hose lengths two hundred (200) feet or less. All others require hoses two and one-half
(2 1/2) inches in diameter. Flushing shall proceed only upon approval and under the supervision of
the Water Utility. Flushing shall only occur to the storm sewer. All samples for newly constructed
services or water mains shall be taken by Water Utility personnel. Metering of flushing water is
required. Flushing water may only be turned off upon notification by the Water Utility that the
installation has been determined to be bacteriologically safe.
9.01.25 Repairs to Mains
A. The Utility reserves the right to shut off the water in the mains temporarily, to make repairs,
alterations or additions to the plant or system. When the circumstances will permit notice of sufficient
delay, the company will give notification, by newspaper publication or otherwise, of the
discontinuance of the supply. No rebate will be allowed to consumers for such temporary suspension
of supply.
9.01.26 Handling Water Mains and Service Pipes in Sewer or Other Trenches
A. Where excavating machines are used in digging sewers, all water mains shall be maintained at the
expense of the contractor.
B. Contractors must ascertain for themselves the existence and location of all service pipes. Where they
are removed, cut or damaged in the construction of a sewer, the contractor must at their own
expense cause them to be replaced or repaired at once. They must not shut off the water service
pipes from any consumer for a period exceeding six (6) hours.
9.01.27 Settling Main or Service Trenches
A. Trenches shall be backfilled per current City of Onalaska water main specifications.
9.01.28 Repairs – Leaks, Deteriorated Connections and Service Pipes
A. Failure to Repair. If a customer fails to repair a leaking, damaged, deteriorated or broken service
pipe from the curb stop or if no curb stop is present from the property line to the point of metering or
use within five (5) days after receiving notification from the Water Utility that their service requires
repair, the water may be shut off and will not be turned on again until the repairs have been
completed. The Water Utility may disconnect without notice where a dangerous condition exists for
as long as the condition exists.
Division 3 Meters
9.01.31 Installation of Meters
A. Meters will be furnished and placed by the Utility in replacement applications, meters will be furnished
to a licensed plumber for installation in new locations. Meters are not to be disconnected or tampered
with by the consumer or property owner. All meters shall be so located that they shall be protected
from obstructions and permit ready access, defined as a three (3) foot by three (3) foot clear area, six
(6) feet in height, thereto for reading, inspection and servicing, such location to be designated or
approved by the Utility. MXU shall have wires to meter securely fastened and MXU shall be installed
at highest vertical elevation available. All piping within the building must be supplied by the consumer.
(See Section 9.01.36).
9.01.32 Repairs to Meters
A. Meters will be repaired by the water department and the cost of such repairs caused by ordinary wear
and tear will be borne by the Utility.
B. Repair of any damage to a meter resulting from the carelessness of the owner of the premises, their
agent, or tenant, or from the negligence of any one (1) of them to properly secure and protect same,
including any damage that may result from allowing a water meter to become frozen or to be injured
from the presence of hot water or steam in the meter, shall be paid for by the consumer or the owner
of the premises.
9.01.33 Stop Boxes
A. The property owner shall protect the stop box in the terrace and shall keep the same free from dirt
and other obstructions. The Utility shall not be liable for failure to locate the stop box and shut off the
water in case of a leak on the consumer’s premises.
B. Stop box shall be set to flush grade with finished elevations and be operable prior to occupancy of
any new structure. If installation falls within concrete or asphalt, stop box must be protected by a
Utility provided sleeve.
9.01.34 Compliant Meter Tests
A. See Wis. Adm. Code, Ch. PSC 185.77.
9.01.35 Failure to Read Meters
A. Where the Utility is unable to read a meter after two (2) successive attempts, the fact will be plainly
indicated on the bill, and either an estimated bill will be computed, or the minimum charge applied.
The difference shall be adjusted when the meter is again read, that is, the bill for the succeeding
quarter will be computed with the gallons or cubic feet in each block of the rate schedule doubled and
credit will be given on that bill for the amount of the minimum bill paid the preceding month.
B. If the meter is damaged (see Section 9.01.37.) or fails to operate, the bill will be based on the
average use during the past year unless there is some reason why the use is not normal. If the
average use cannot be properly employed, the bill will be estimated by some equitable method.
9.01.36 Service Piping for Meter Settings
A. In cases where a new customer whose service is to be metered installs the original service piping or
where an existing metered customer changes their service piping for their own convenience, or where
an existing flat rate customer requests to be metered, the customer shall, at their expense, provide a
suitable location and the proper connections for the meter. The Water Utility should be consulted as
to the type and size of meter setting. Where it is possible to set meters in the basement, or other
suitable place within the building, a short nipple shall be inserted after the stop and waste cock, then
a union, and then another nipple and coupling of the proper length. The nipple attached to the union
and coupling shall be cut to a standard length provided by the plans of the Utility (it may require a
horizontal run of eighteen (18) inches in such pipe line) which may later be removed for the insertion
of the meter into the supply line.
B. No permit will be given to change from metered to flat rate service.
9.01.37 Surreptitious Use of Water
A. When the Utility has reasonable evidence that a consumer is obtaining their supply of water, in whole
or in part, by means of devices or methods used to stop or interfere with the proper metering of the
utility service being delivered to their equipment, the Utility reserves the right to estimate and present
immediately a bill for service unmetered as a result of such interference and such bill shall be payable
subject to a twenty-four (24) hours disconnection of service. When the Utility shall have disconnected
the consumer for any such reason, the Utility will reconnect the consumer upon the following
conditions:
1. The consumer will be required to deposit with the Utility an amount sufficient to guarantee the
payment of the consumer's bills for utility service to the Utility.
2. The consumer will be required to pay the Utility for any and all damages to its equipment on the
consumer's premises due to such stoppage or interference with its metering.
3. The consumer must further agree to comply with reasonable requirements to protect the Utility
against further losses.
4. Sec. 98.26 and 943.20, Wis. Stats., as relating to water service, are hereby adopted and made a
part of these rules.
9.01.38 Duty of Utility with Respect to Safety of the Public
A. It shall be the duty of the Utility to see that all open ditches for water mains, hydrants, and service
pipes are properly guarded to prevent accident to any person or vehicle and at night there shall be
displayed amber signal light in such manner as will, so far as possible, insure the safety of the public.
Division 4 Special Services
9.01.41 Thawing Frozen Services
A. See Wis. Adm. Code, Ch. PSC 185.89.
9.01.42 Locating of Sanitary Lateral/Water Service Stub or Curb Boxes for Water
Shutoff (Utility Responsibility)
A. When requested to locate a sanitary sewer lateral, water service stub, or curb box for water shutoff,
the Water Utility will often try and mark with a stake or paint the location per the latest records
available. The Water Utility shall be not be responsible for any costs to the owner, developer or other
persons for an inaccuracy or incompleteness of the records or any misinterpretation of the records.
9.01.43 Use of Hydrants for Construction; Temporary Supply
A. In cases where no other supply is available, permission may be granted by the Utility to use a
hydrant. No hydrant shall be used until it is equipped with a Reduced Pressure Zone (“RPZ”). In no
case shall any RPZ be moved except by a member of the Utility.
B. Before a RPZ is set, payment must be made for its setting and for the water to be used at the
scheduled rates. See City Fee Schedule for applicable deposits and charges. Upon completing use of
the hydrant, the customer must notify the Utility to that effect.
C. In the use of a hydrant supply, the hydrant valve will be set at the proper opening by the Utility when
the RPZ is set, and the flow of water must be regulated by means of the ball valve.
9.01.44 Vacation of Premises
A. When premises are to be vacated, the Utility shall be notified in writing at once, so that it may remove
the meter and shut off the supply at the curb stop. The owner of the premises shall be liable to
prosecution for any damage to the property of the water department by reason of failure to notify the
Utility of vacancy.
Division 5 Rates and Billing
9.01.51 City of Onalaska Water Rate Structure
A. The City of Onalaska Water Utility provides water as a public utility under Ch. 196, Wis. Stats., and
the rates of the utility are developed and ordered by the Wisconsin Public Service Commission as
authorized under Secs. 196.03, 196.20, and 196.37, Wis. Stats., and any amendments or
modifications thereto. The rates of the Onalaska Water Utility in effect at any time are the authorized
rates on file with the Public Service Commission and copies of these rates are available in the Office
of the Clerk of the City of Onalaska. Customers of the Onalaska Water Utility shall be informed of
new rates as they become effective as required by the Public Service Commission.
9.01.52 Service Contract
A. The minimum service contract period shall be one (1) year unless otherwise specified by special
contract or in the applicable rate schedule. Where the Utility service has been disconnected at the
customer's request prior to expiration of their minimum contract period, a reconnection charge shall
be made, payable in advance, when the customer requests reconnection of service. (See Wisconsin
Public Service Commission Tariffs.) The minimum contract period is renewed with each reconnection.
B. A reconnection charge shall also be required from consumers whose services are disconnected (shut
off at curb stop) because of non-payment of bills when due. (See Wisconsin Public Service
Commission.)
C. A consumer shall be considered as the same consumer provided the reconnection is requested for
the same location by any member of the same family, or if a place of business, by any partner or
employee of the same business.
9.01.53 Temporary Metered Supply, Meter and Deposits
A. An applicant for temporary water supply on a metered basis shall make and maintain a monetary
deposit for each meter installed as security for payment for use of water and for such other charges
which may arise from the use of the supply. A charge shall be made for setting the valve and
furnishing and setting the meter as set forth in the City Fee Schedule.
9.01.54 Water for Construction
A. When water is requested for construction purposes, or for filling tanks or other such uses, an
application therefor shall be made to the Utility, in writing, upon application provided for that purpose
in the Public Works Department. Payment for the water for construction shall be as billed at the
scheduled rates. The service pipe must be installed inside the building from where the water must be
drawn. No connection with the service pipe at the curb shall be made without special permission from
the Utility.
B. In no case will any employee of the Utility turn on water for construction work unless the contractor
first presents a permit. Upon completion of the construction work, the contractor must return the
original permit to the Utility, together with a statement of the actual amount of construction work
performed.
C. Property owners shall not allow contractors, masons or other persons to take water from their
premises prior to installation of a utility meter. Any consumer failing to comply with this provision will
have water service discontinued.
9.01.55 Customer’s Deposits
A. New Residential Service. The Utility may require a cash deposit or other guarantee as a condition of
new residential service if, and only if, the customer has an outstanding account balance with the
Utility which accrued within the last six (6) years, and which at the time of the request for new service
remains outstanding and not in dispute.
B. Existing Residential Service. The Utility may require a cash deposit or other guarantee as a
condition of continued service if, and only if, either or both of the following circumstances apply:
1. Service has been shut off or discontinued within the last twelve (12) months for violation of these
rules and regulations or for nonpayment of a delinquent bill for service which is not in dispute.
2. Credit information obtained by the company subsequent to the initial application indicates that the
initial application for service was falsified or incomplete to the extent that a deposit would be
required under these rules and regulations.
C. Commercial and Industrial Service. If the credit for an applicant for commercial or industrial service
has not been established to the satisfaction of the Utility, they may be required to make a deposit or
otherwise guarantee to the Utility payment of bills for service.
D. Conditions of Deposit. See Wis. Adm. Code, Ch. PSC 185.36(4).
E. Refund of Deposits. The Utility shall review the payment record of each residential customer with a
deposit on file at not less than twelve (12) month intervals and shall not require or continue to require
a deposit unless a deposit could be required under the conditions stated above. In the case of a
commercial or industrial customer the Utility shall refund the deposit after twenty-four (24)
consecutive months of prompt payment if the customer's credit standing is satisfactory to the
company. Payment shall be considered "prompt" if it is made prior to notice of disconnection for
nonpayment of a bill not in dispute. Any deposit or portion thereof refunded to a customer shall be
refunded by check unless both the customer and the company agree to credit the regular bill or
unless service is terminated, in which case the deposit with accrued interest shall be applied to the
final bill and any balance returned to the customer promptly.
F. Other Conditions. A new or additional deposit may be required upon reasonable written notice of the
need therefor if such new or additional deposit could have been required under the circumstances
when the initial deposit was made. Service may be refused or disconnected for failure to pay a
deposit request as provided in the rules. When service has been disconnected for failure to make a
deposit, or for failure to pay a delinquent bill, or for failure to comply with the terms of a Deferred
Payment Agreement, and satisfactory arrangements have been made to have service restored, a
reconnection charge as specified elsewhere in these rules, shall be paid by the customer as a
condition to restoration of service.
G. Guarantee Contracts.
1. The Utility may accept, in lieu of a cash deposit, a contract signed by a guarantor satisfactory to
the company, whereby payment of a specified sum not exceeding the cash deposit requirement is
guaranteed. The term of a guarantee contract shall be two (2) years, but shall automatically
terminate after the customer has closed their account, or at the guarantor's request upon thirty
(30) days' written notice to the Utility.
2. Upon termination of a guarantee contract or whenever the company deems same insufficient as
to amount or surety, a cash deposit or a new or additional guarantee may be required upon
reasonable written notice to the customer. Service to any customer who fails to comply with these
requirements may be refused, or upon ten (10) days' written notice, disconnected.
3. The Utility shall mail the guarantor copies of all disconnect notices sent to the customer whose
account he has guaranteed unless the guarantor waives such notice in writing.
4. In lieu of a cash deposit or guarantee, an applicant for new service who has an outstanding
account accrued within the last six (6) years with the Utility shall have the right to receive service
from the company under a Deferred Payment Agreement as provided in these Rules and
Regulations for the outstanding account balance.
9.01.56 Refunds of Monetary Deposits
A. All moneys deposited as security for payment of charges arising from the use of temporary water
supply on a metered basis, or for the return of a RPZ, if the water is used on an unmetered basis, will
be refunded to the depositor on the termination of the use of water, the payment of all charges levied
against the depositor, and the return of the wheel and reducer.
9.01.57 Disconnection and Refusal of Service
A. Reasons for Disconnection. Service may be disconnected or refused for any of the following
reasons:
1. Failure to pay a delinquent account or failure to comply with the terms of a deferred payment
agreement (see Sec. PSC 185.38);
2. Delinquency in payment for service received by a previous account holder or customer at the
premises to be served, if an account is transferred to a new account holder or customer and the
previous account holder or customer continues to be an occupant of the dwelling unit to be
served;
3. Failure to pay for an outstanding account balance with the City Water Utility owing at a previous
address and for which there is no agreement or arrangement for payment and it is not in dispute
but remains outstanding;
4. Failure to comply with deposit or guarantee arrangements as specified in Sec. PSC 185.36 or
185.361;
5. Diversion of service around the meter;
6. Refusal or failure to permit authorized City Water Utility personnel to read the meter at least once
every four (4) months where the utility bills monthly or bimonthly, or at least once every nine (9)
months where the utility bills quarterly or less frequently than quarterly. The four (4) or nine (9)
month period begins with the date of the last meter reading;
7. Refusal or failure to permit authorized City Water Utility personnel access to the base meter;
8. Violation of the City Water Utility’s rules pertaining to the use of service in a manner which
interferes with the service of others or to the operation of equipment, if the customer has first
been notified and provided with reasonable opportunity to remedy the situation;
9. Failure to comply with Wisconsin Statutes and Public Service Commission rules or orders
pertaining to water utility service;
10. Failure to pay costs or fees incurred by and awarded to the City Water Utility by a court of law, for
pursuit of collection of bills, or failure to pay extraordinary collection charges as allowed and
specified in the Utility's tariffs filed with the Public Service Commission;
11. Failure to comply with the City Water Utility's rules or if the customer uses a device that
unreasonably interferes with communications or signal services used for reading meters;
12. Failure of an applicant for City Water Utility service to provide adequate verification of identity and
residency;
13. Failure of an applicant for City Water Utility service to provide the information set forth in Sec.
PSC 185.33(18) (a), (b) and (c);
14. Refusal to permit the Utility Department entry to the premises for purposes of meter exchange,
replacement of parts, or installation of radio read devices as it relates to the water meter provided
by the City Water Utility and which needs to be maintained by the City Water Utility.
B. Disconnection for Delinquent Accounts.
1. A bill for service is delinquent if unpaid after the due date shown on the bill. The Utility may
disconnect service for a delinquent bill by giving the customer at least ten (10) calendar days prior
to disconnection a written disconnect notice. For purposes of this rule, the due date shall not be
less than twenty (20) days after issuance.
2. The Utility may disconnect without notice where a dangerous condition exists for as long as the
condition exists. Service may be denied to any customer for failure to comply with the applicable
requirements of the rules and regulations of the Public Service Commission or of these rules and
regulations, or if a dangerous or unsafe condition exists on the customer's premises.
C. Dispute Procedures.
1. Whenever the customer advises the Utility’s designated office prior to the disconnection of
service that all or part of any billing as rendered is in dispute, or that any matter related to the
disconnection is in dispute, the Utility shall investigate the dispute promptly and completely,
advise the customer of the results of the investigation, attempt to resolve the dispute, and provide
the opportunity for the customer to enter in to a Deferred Payment Agreement as approved by the
Board of Public Works when applicable in order to settle the dispute.
2. After the customer has pursued the available remedies with the Utility, they may request that the
Public Service Commission's staff informally review the disputed issue and recommend terms of
settlement.
3. Any party to the dispute after informal review may make a written request for a formal review by
the Commission. If the Commission decides to conduct a formal hearing on the dispute, the
customer must pay fifty percent (50%) of the bill in dispute or post a bond for that amount on or
before the hearing date. Failure to pay the amount or post the bond will constitute a waiver of the
right to a hearing. Service shall not be disconnected because of any disputed matter while the
disputed matter is being pursued under the disputes procedure. In no way does this relieve the
customer from the obligation of paying charges which are not disputed.
4. The form of disconnection notice to be used is as follows or another form containing the same
information:
DISCONNECTION NOTICE
Dear Customer:
The bill enclosed with this notice includes your current charge for utility service and your previous
unpaid balance.
You have ten (10) days to pay the utility service arrears or your service is subject to
disconnection.
If you fail to pay the service arrears, or fail to contact us within the ten (10) days allowed, we will
proceed with disconnection action.
To avoid the inconvenience of service interruption and an additional charge of (amount)
reconnection, we urge you to pay the full arrears IMMEDIATELY AT OUR OFFICE.
If you have a reason for delaying the payment, call us and explain the situation.
PLEASE CALL THIS TELEPHONE NUMBER () IMMEDIATELY IF:
1. You have a question about your utility service arrears.
2. You are unable to pay the full amount of the bill and are willing to enter into a time payment
agreement with us.
3. There are any circumstances you think should be taken into consideration before service is
discontinued.
4. Any resident is seriously ill.
Illness Provision
If there is an existing medical emergency in your home and you furnish the Utility with a
statement signed by either a licensed Wisconsin physician, or a public health official, we will
delay disconnection of service up to twenty-one (21) days. The statement must identify the
medical emergency and specify the period of time during which disconnection will aggravate the
existing emergency.
In any situation where you are unable to resolve billing disputes or disputes about the grounds for
proposed disconnection through contacts with our Utility, you may make an appeal to the
Wisconsin Public Service Commission, Madison, Wisconsin.
(CITY OF ONALASKA, WI)
5. In the event the Utility is not able to collect any bill for water service even though Deposit and
Guarantee Rules are on file, the bill may be put upon the tax roll as provided in Sec. 66.0809,
Wis. Stats.
9.01.58 Charges for Water Wasted Due to Leaks
A. At the discretion of the Water Utility Staff and the City Engineer, a one (1) time per property, per
owner, adjustment for verified leaking toilets, broken pipes, irrigation units and stuck valves on water
softeners may be made when the overage is at least two (2) times the homeowners’ average
seasonal usage for that billing period quarter. Verification of the reason for the excess usage of water
must be by Utility Personnel or by a Licensed Plumber. The adjusted billing will be based upon a
block rate as assigned in PSC table (MG-1). This number will be used with an estimate based on
seasonal quarter usage.
B. If the reason for excessive water use is not detected or determined to involve any plumbing fixtures or
appliances, then the homeowner shall be responsible, regardless of the water used, for the full
amount of water consumption listed on the quarterly bill.
C. No adjustment will be made or offered from the point the homeowner has been notified of the leak(s)
and had the opportunity to make repairs and/or corrections to remedy the condition. Water
adjustments will also only pertain to that quarterly billing period and the time of the homeowners’
complaint, and will not include prior billing quarters and possible higher consumption during those
periods.
D. Refer to Wis. Adm. Code, Ch. PSC 185.35(6).
9.01.59 Water Services in Unincorporated Areas
A. Section 66.069(2)(c), Wis. Stats., authorizes service by a City to an unincorporated area and,
therefore, this Section provides that water service be made available to portions of the Town of
Medary, La Crosse County, Wisconsin. The municipal utility shall have no obligation to serve beyond
the area so delineated. The service area is described as follows:
1. Water Service Area – Town of Medary. A parcel of land located in the NWI/4 - NW1/4,
NEl/4 - NW1/4, SW1/4 - NWI/4 and the SE1/4 - NWI/4 of Section 10, T16N, R7W, Town of
Medary, La Crosse County, Wisconsin, more fully described as follows:
a. Commencing at the northeast corner of the SWl/4 - NWI/4 of Section 10, T16N, R7W; thence
south along the east line of said SW 1/4 - NW 1/4 33 feet to the south right-of-way line of
CTH "OS"; this also being the point of beginning; thence west along said south right-of-way
line 60 feet; thence south parallel to said east line 257.4 feet; thence west 450 feet; thence
south 20 feet; thence west 150 feet to the east line of Leisso Addition; thence south along
said east line 349.6 feet; thence west 270 feet more or less to the east City of Onalaska
limits; thence N. 32° 00' W. to the east right-of-way line of STH "157"; thence north along said
east right-of-way line to the north line of the SWl/4 - NWI/4 Section 10, T16N, R7W; thence
east along said north line to a point being 300 feet west of the northeast corner of the SW
1/4 -NW 1/4; thence N.4° 09' W. 238.2 feet; thence east 224 feet; thence S. 8° 00' E. 207 feet
to the north right-of-way line of CTH "OS"; thence east along said north right-of-way line 60
feet; thence N. 8° 00' W. 207 feet; thence east 240 feet; thence S 8° 00' E 240 feet to the
north line of SE1/4 - NWI/4 Section 10, T16N, R7W; thence east along north line 428.3 feet;
thence south 290.4 feet; thence west 176.3 feet to the east right-of-way line of Pralle Road;
thence south along said right-of-way line 380 feet; thence east 360 feet to the east
right-of-way line of Germann Court; thence south along said east right-of-way line extended
to the south line of the SEl/4 - NWI/4 of said Section 10; thence west along said south line to
the west right-of-way line of Pralle Road; thence north along said right-of-way line 206 feet;
thence west 150 feet; thence north parallel to west right-of-way line of Pralle Road 600 feet;
thence east 150 feet to west right-of-way line of Pralle Road; thence north along said west
right-of-way line 230 feet; thence east parallel to north line of the SE1/4 - NWI/4 442 feet to
west line of said SE1/4 - NW1/4; thence north along said west line 257.4 feet to the point of
beginning.
b. Also, that portion of the present Town of Medary lying East of the present City of Onalaska
corporate limits West of the town line of the Town of Hamilton, North of the La Crosse River
and South of U.S.H. 16
Division 6 Charges for Service Areas
9.01.61 North Abbey Road Zone Charges
A. Water and Sewer Charges Necessary. It is hereby found and determined that a necessity exists for
determining an equitable method for apportioning the costs of the installation of a water main,
sanitary main and lateral within Abbey Road between Commerce Road (Northerly junction) and 2,000
feet Northwest of East Avenue for future hookups by parcels and which are not currently within the
corporate limits of the City, but may, in the future, become a part of the City.
B. North Abbey Road Zone Charges as a result, the City of Onalaska does hereby establish the
following North Abbey Road Zone Charges for all such lands:
1. Water and Sewer Hookup Charges: $7,663.00 per hookup.
2. Street Improvement Fee: $2,616.00 per hookup.
C. The charges shall be paid by the owner at the time said lands are annexed to the City. Provided,
however that the charges for all new parcels shall be paid at the time such parcel(s) is created.
D. The North Abbey Road Zone consists of those lands designated on the map that is designated as
Appendix B of this Section and which is incorporated herein and is on file in the office of the City
Engineer.
E. Hereafter, the charges shall increase on an annual basis by the amount of the increase in the
Consumer Price Index (CPI).
9.01.62 Crestwood Lane Zone Charges
A. Water and Sewer Charges Necessary. It is hereby found and determined that a necessity exists for
determining an equitable method for apportioning the costs of the installation of a water main,
sanitary main and lateral within Crestwood Lane for future hookups by parcels and which are not
currently within the corporate limits of the City, buy may, in the future, become a part of the City.
B. Crestwood Land Zone Charges as a result, the City of Onalaska does hereby establish the following
Crestwood Land Zone Charges for all such lands:
1. Water and Sewer Hookup Charges: $7,250.00 per hookup.
2. Street Improvement Fee: $2,176.00 per hookup.
C. The charges shall be paid by the owner at the time said lands are annexed to the City. Provided,
however that the charges for all new parcels shall be paid at the time such parcel(s) is created.
D. The Crestwood Land Zone consists of those lands designated on the map that is designated as
Appendix B of this Section and which is incorporated herein and is on file in the office of the City
Engineer.
E. Hereafter, the charges shall increase on an annual basis by the amount of the increase in the
Consumer Price Index (CPI).
9.01.63 French Road / Crestwood Lane Water System High Pressure Zone Charges
A. Water Charges Necessary. It is hereby found and determined that a necessity exists for
determining an equitable method for apportioning the costs of the installation of a booster station for
water in lands which may be developed in the French Road, Crestwood Lane and State Highway 16
areas, having an USGS elevation of 790-930 and some of which are not currently within the corporate
limits of the City, but may, in the future, become a part of the City. As a result, the City of Onalaska
does hereby establish the following booster station charges for all such lands:
1. French Road / Crestwood Lane / State Highway 16 Area Booster Station Charges:
Parcel Size Booster Station
New Parcels < 1 acre $2,266.00
New Parcels > 1 acre $2,266.00/acre
Existing Parcels < 5 acres $2,266.00
Existing Parcels > 5 acres *See Below
*If the parcel cannot be subdivided, the Booster Station Charge shall be Two Thousand Two
Hundred Sixty-Six Dollars ($2,266.00) for the entire parcel. If the parcel can be subdivided, the
Booster Station Charge shall be Two Thousand Two Hundred Sixty-Six Dollars ($2,266.00) for
each parcel resulting from such subdivision.
B. The charges shall be paid by the owner at the time said lands are annexed to the City. Provided,
however that the charges for all new parcels shall be paid at the time such parcel(s) is created.
C. The French Road / Crestwood Lane Water System High Pressure Zone consists of those lands
designated on the map that is designated as Appendix A of this Section and which is incorporated
herein and is on file in the office of the City Engineer.
D. As of January 1, 2021, the charges set forth herein shall increase. The amount of such increase shall
be the amount by which the Consumer Price Index (CPI) has increased since January 1, 2020.
Thereafter, the charges shall increase on an annual basis by the amount of the increase in the
Consumer Price Index (CPI).
9.01.64 Greens Coulee Water System High Pressure Zone Charges
A. Charges Necessary. It is hereby found and determined that a necessity exists for determining an
equitable method for apportioning the costs of the installation of a booster station and necessary
transmission lines for water in lands which may be developed in Greens Coulee having an USGS
elevation of 790-930 and which are not currently within the corporate limits of the City, but may, in the
future, become a part of the City. As a result, the City of Onalaska does hereby establish the following
booster station/transmission charges for all such lands:
Parcel Size Booster Station Transmission Charge
New Parcels < 1 acre $1,000.00 $500.00
New Parcels > 1 acre $1,000.00/acre $500.00/acre
Existing Parcels < 5 acres $1,000.00 $500.00
Existing Parcels > 5 acres *See Below *See Below
*If the parcel cannot be subdivided, the Booster Station Charge shall be One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) and the Transmission Charge shall be Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for the entire
parcel. If the parcel can be subdivided, the Booster Station Charge shall be One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) and the Transmission Charge shall be Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each parcel
resulting from such subdivision.
B. The charges shall be paid by the owner at the time said lands are annexed to the City. Provided,
however that the charges for all new parcels shall be paid at the time such parcel(s) is created.
C. The Greens Coulee Water System High Pressure Zone consists of those lands designated on the
map that is designated as Appendix A of this Section and which is incorporated herein and is on file in
the office of the City Engineer.
D. As of January 1, 2001, the charges set forth herein shall increase. The amount of such increase shall
be the amount by which the Consumer Price Index (CPI) has increased since January 1, 2000.
Thereafter, the charges shall increase on an annual basis by the amount of the increase in the
Consumer Price Index (CPI).
Division 7 Penalties and Legal Remedies
9.01.71 Penalties and Legal Remedies
A. General. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, or orders authorized by this Title,
will, unless otherwise indicated in this Title, upon first conviction, forfeit not less than Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00), together with the costs of prosecution for the first violation. For the second
violation of the same provision or order, the person shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) plus the costs of prosecution. A third offense for the same provision or
order under this Section, shall result, upon conviction, of a forfeit not less than One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00).
B. Legal Remedies. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section, shall, in addition to
the forfeiture stated above, be liable for any damage to the Water Utility, including loss of revenue
from the same of water or sewage service resulting from a violation of these rules and regulations.
Whether the Water Utility must take corrective action with respect to any parcel of property, such
parcel may be specifically assessed for such work. The payment of damages and correction of
violations may be a condition of providing future water or sewage service.
C. Other Remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the City or any authorized
officer from proceeding under any other ordinance of law or by any other enforcement method to
enforce any ordinance, regulation, or order.
Chapter 02 Sewers and Sewerage
Division 1 General Provisions
9.02.11 Wisconsin Administrative Code Requirements
A. No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
9.02.12 Special Agreements
A. No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern, provided the agreement is not in conflict with the intent or rates established by this
Section or with Wisconsin Administrative Code requirements.
9.02.13 Powers and Authority of Inspectors
A. The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Section. The City
Engineer or their representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other processes beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sanitary sewers or wastewater treatment
facilities.
B. The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties for the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
sewage collection system or treatment works. All entry and subsequent work, if any, shall be done in
full accordance with the terms of this Section.
C. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Subsection B. above, the
City Engineer or duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the owner, the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City
employees, and the City shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by City
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the owner and growing out of the inspection, gauging or sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions as required in this
Section.
9.02.14 Installation of Laterals and Provisions of Water and/or Sanitary Sewer Services
to Properties Outside the Corporate Limits of the City of Onalaska
A. No person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity owning property outside the corporate limits
of the City of Onalaska may connect said property to and/or obtain City water and/or sanitary sewer
services for said property from any City water or sanitary sewer main(s).
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A. above, any person, corporation, partnership or other
legal entity owning property outside the corporate limits of the City of Onalaska may install, at their
own expense, a lateral for water and/or sanitary sewer services from the City's main(s) to said
property, which lateral may, upon annexation of the property to the City and upon payment of all fees
or charges, be utilized for the purpose of obtaining water and/or sanitary sewer services for said
property.
C. This Section shall not affect the provisions of Section 9.01.59 regarding water services in
unincorporated areas.
9.02.15 Definitions
A. For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply. Words used in the singular shall
include the plural, and the plural, the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future
tense; the word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary; the word “may” is permissive.
1. Agency. The City of Onalaska Common Council, the Board of Public Works, City Engineer or
designee which is designated by it to administer and enforce the terms of this Section.
2. Agreement. The current agreement between the City of La Crosse and the City of Onalaska for
the transportation and treatment of wastewater emanating in the City of Onalaska.
3. Ammonia Nitrogen plus Organic Nitrogen. The quantity of soluble nitrogen in the oxidation
tri-negative state combined with hydrogen and hydroxyl ions as NH40H expressed in mg/1 of
nitrogen, plus the organically bound nitrogen in the oxidation trinegative state; also referred to as
Kjeldahl Nitrogen; the quantity being determined by Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, latest edition.
4. Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD5). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20)
degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter.
5. Building Drain. The lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge
from waste drainage pipes inside the building and conveys the same to the building sewer,
beginning five (5) feet (1.52 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
6. Building Sewer. The extension from the building drain beginning at five (5) feet (1.52 meters)
outside the inner face of the building wall to its connection with the sanitary sewer or other place
of disposal.
7. Commercial User. Any user engaged in a business enterprise, churches, schools, mobile home
courts, governmental and public facilities, multi-family units consisting of more than two (2)
families, elderly housing units, care centers and nonprofit organizations shall be considered
commercial users.
8. Compatible Pollutant. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, fecal coliform
bacteria, chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, nitrogen and nitrogen compounds.
9. DNR. The State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
10. Domestic Wastewater. Water-carried wastes containing approximately two hundred fifty (250)
mg/1 BOD5 and approximately two hundred fifty (250) mg/1 suspended solids, consistent with
that emanating from a typical household.
11. Garbage. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooling and dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
12. Grant. Federal and/or state financial assistance for the construction of improvements to the
public sanitary sewer collection system and/or sewage treatment plant.
13. Grantee. The local agency which receives a grant.
14. Incompatible Pollutant. Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant.
15. Industrial User. Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a sewage treatment plant which
discharges more than the equivalent of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of sanitary
wastes and which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under one (1) of the following
divisions: Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing; Division B, Mining; Division D,
Manufacturing; Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services;
Division I, Industrial Services.
16. Industrial Wastewater. The liquid processing wastes from an industrial manufacturing process,
trade or business including, but not limited to, all Standard Industrial Classification Manual D
manufacturers, as distinct from domestic wastewater.
17. Natural Outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
groundwater.
18. Non-contact Cooling Water. Wastewaters from a commercial or industrial user which have not
become exposed to contamination or pollution, the sole alteration of which is in temperature
increase and which do not contain any toxic or deleterious substances.
19. Person. Any individual, corporation, company, association, cooperative, trust, institution,
partnership, state, municipality or federal agency.
20. pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the
weight of the hydrogen-ions, in grams per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH of
seven (7) and hydrogen-ion concentration of ten (10)-'.
21. Properly Shredded Garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in
any dimension.
22. Public Sanitary Sewer Collection System. A system of sanitary sewers owned, maintained,
operated and controlled by the City.
23. Private Sewage System. A system comprised of a septic tank and effluent absorption area
designed for the purpose of processing and disposing of sewage.
24. Residential User. Single- and two-family homes which discharge domestic waste to the public
wastewater collection system, as distinct from commercial or industrial users.
25. Sanitary Interceptor Sewer. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewaters from
collection systems to a treatment facility.
26. Sanitary Sewer. A pipe or conduit owned and maintained by the City which carries sewage.
27. Sanitary Waste. The wastes discharged from the average residential user in the City; also
termed domestic wastewater.
28. Sewage. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings,
institutions and industrial establishments.
29. Shall. Is mandatory; May. Is permissive.
30. Slug. Any discharge of sewage or industrial wastewater, the concentration of any constituent of
which or the quantity of flow of which exceeds instantaneously more than five (5) times the
average twenty-four (24) hour concentration of flows of the user during normal operation.
31. Standard Industrial Classification Manual. The document so entitled, published by the Office
of Management and Budget, 1972.
32. Storm Sewer ("storm drain"). A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage,
but excludes sewage, garbage and domestic wastewater and wastewaters other than non-contact
cooling water from commercial and industrial users.
33. Director of Public Works/City Engineer. The Director of Public Works/City Engineer of the
Water and Sewer Commission of the City of Onalaska or their authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
34. Suspended Solids. Solids that are visible and in suspension in the liquid, the quantity being
determined by Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, latest edition.
35. Treatment Facilities. Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastes.
36. Users. Those residential, multi-family, commercial, governmental, institutional and industrial
establishments which are connected to the public sanitary sewer collection system.
37. User Charge System. A system based on estimated use of wastewater collection, transportation
and treatment services where each user pays its proportionate share or construction and
operation and maintenance cost of the collection, transportation and treatment facilities.
38. Unaltered Water. Waters which are not changed chemically or physically as a result of use.
39. Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
40. Wastewater. See Sewage.
Division 2 Sewer Regulations
9.02.21 Connection to Sanitary Sewers Required
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited any sewage, except
non-contact cooling waters, on the ground surface of any public or private property within the
jurisdiction of the City.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge any sewage except non-contact cooling waters to any natural outlet
within the jurisdiction of the City, except where authorized by the DNR.
C. Except as provided for in Section 9.02.22., it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
D. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation
or other purposes situated within the jurisdiction of the City and abutting on any street, alley or
right-of-way in which there is located a sanitary sewer is hereby required, at their expense, to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer collection
system in accordance with the provisions of this Section within a period determined by the City
Engineer but in no event more than one (1) year and to pay such connection charges as may be
established herein or by other ordinance.
9.02.22 Private Sewage Disposal
A. Where a sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private, individual
sewage system complying with the provisions of this Section.
B. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage system, the owner shall first obtain a
written permit signed by the City Engineer. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the City which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and/or other
information as is deemed necessary by the City Engineer. The application fee is located within the
City Fee Schedule and is due at the time the application is filed.
C. A permit for a private sewage system shall not become effective until the installation is completed and
approved by the City Engineer or designee. The City Engineer or designee shall be allowed to inspect
the work at any stage of construction; and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
City Engineer or designee when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of
notice by the City Engineer or designee.
D. The type, capacity, location and layout of a private, individual sewage disposal system shall comply
with NR 214.16, Wis. Adm. Code.
E. At such time as a sanitary sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage
system, as provided in Section 9.02.21.D., a direct connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer in
compliance with this Section and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private or individual sewage
facilities shall be abandoned in accordance with NR 214.16, Wis. Adm. Code.
9.02.23 Building Sewers and Connections
A. No authorized person shall alter, disturb or uncover any connections with or opening into any sanitary
sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining written permission from the City Engineer.
B. Permits and Charges:
A. Two (2) classes of Building Sewer Permits.
a. For establishments producing only domestic wastewaters, including residences, institutions,
public facilities and commercial establishments; and
b. For service to establishments producing industrial wastewater.
B. In either case, the owner or their representative shall make application on a special form
furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent.
C. For each sewer and water inspection, there shall be a permit fee as set forth in the City of
Onalaska Fee Schedule In addition, there shall be a charge pursuant to the project's value. This
fee is to be applicable for installation and inspection for connections to the main or end of the
lateral at the curb to the buildings, as well as for septic tank and dry well installations, also for
each tap and water service pipe connected to the City water main, including fire protection
services.
C. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne
by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one (1)
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no individual sewage system is available
or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The
building sewer from the front building may be extended in such cases to the rear building and the
whole considered as one (1) building sewer.
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the City Engineer or designee, to meet all requirements of this Section.
F. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used
in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of current State of Wisconsin Plumbing Code, except that bituminous fiber pipe shall not
be allowed.
G. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
sanitary sewer, sewage carried by such a building drain shall be lifted and discharged to the building
sewer by facilities conforming to current State of Wisconsin Plumbing Code, Wis. Adm. Code.
H. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains,
basement sump pumps or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to the building sewer or
building drain which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer. If such connections
are found during an inspection by the City Engineer or designee, the penalty provisions of Section
9.02.14. are applicable.
I. The connection of the building sewer into the sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of
Subsection 9.02.23.F. above.
J. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City Engineer or designee when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the sanitary sewer. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the City Engineer or designee.
A. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to minimize the hazard to public welfare and safety. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the City.
B. Where sanitary sewer construction requires excavation of streets or sidewalks, the applicant shall
be required to obtain a permit for excavation from the City Engineering Department.
K. All building sewers, both new and existing, shall be maintained in such condition as to prevent inflow
or infiltration of unpolluted waters from the groundwater table, storm runoff or other sources. If, during
an inspection defined in Section 9.02.13.B. of this Title, upon plugging the building sewer at or near
its point of entry into the sanitary sewer, unpolluted water should be observed by the City Engineer or
designee to back up into the building being served, the building sewer shall be declared defective and
correction shall be ordered under Section 9.02.14.
9.02.24 Records and Monitoring
A. All industrial users subject to categorical standards or required to pre-treat industrial waste who
discharge or propose to discharge wastewaters to the wastewater collection system shall maintain
such records of production and related factors, effluent flows and pollutant amounts or concentrations
as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this Section and any applicable
state or federal pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. The owner or operator of any premises or facility discharging industrial wastes subject to categorical
pretreatment standards or required to pre-treat industrial waste shall install, at their own cost and
expense, suitable monitoring equipment to facilitate the accurate observation, sampling and
measurement of wastes. Such equipment shall be maintained in proper working order and kept safe
and accessible at all times.
C. Industrial records relating to wastewater discharges shall be available upon request by the City. All
treatment standards shall be made available to officials of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
or the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources upon demand.
D. Monitoring equipment shall be located and maintained on the industrial user's premises outside of the
building. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the City
may allow modifications as necessary.
E. When more than one (1) user can discharge into a common sewer, the City may require the
installation of separate monitoring equipment for each user. Where there is a significant difference in
wastewater constituents or characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the City
may require that separate monitoring facilities be installed for each separate discharge.
F. Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities shall be constructed in
accordance with the City’s requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications.
9.02.25 City Inspection, Sampling and Analysis for Compliance
A. Compliance determinations with respect to Section 9.03.32.C. prohibitions and limitations may be
made on the basis of either instantaneous grab samples or composite samples of wastewater.
Composite samples may be taken over a twenty-four (24) hour period, or cover a longer or shorter
time span, as determined necessary by the City to meet the needs of specific circumstances.
B. Laboratory analysis of industrial wastewater samples shall be performed in accordance with the
current edition of "Standard Methods," "Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Waste"
published by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or the "Annual Book of Standards, Part 23,
Water, Atmospheric Analysis" published by the American Society for Testing and Materials.
C. Sampling of industrial wastewater for the purpose of compliance determination with respect to
Section 9.03.32.C. prohibitions and limitations will be done at intervals as the City may designate.
However, it is the intention of the City to conduct compliance sampling or to cause such sampling to
be conducted for all industrial users subject to categorical standards or required to pre-treat industrial
wastes at least once per year.
9.02.26 Regulation of Grease Interceptors, Installation and Disposal of Waste
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is the regulation of the collection and disposal of grease
interceptor waste for the protection of the City sanitary sewer system and the environment. The
objective of this Section is to reduce the operational and maintenance costs to the City of maintaining
the sanitary sewer system by preventing the accumulation of grease within the collection system
lines. This Section shall apply to the City of Onalaska and to persons outside the City who, by
contract, agreement or otherwise with the City, are users of the City’s sanitary sewer. This Section
shall be in addition to any restrictions, regulations or prohibitions set forth in Section 9.03.32..
B. Administration. The City of Onalaska shall administer, implement, and enforce the regulations of
this Section.
C. Applicability.
1. Waste that contains grease shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system only under the
conditions of this Ordinance. The following facilities shall discharge all waste from sinks,
dishwashers, drains, and any other fixtures through which grease may be discharged, into an
adequately sized, properly maintained and functioning grease interceptor before the discharge
enters the sanitary sewer. The following facilities shall also provide a grease-interceptor(s) inletflow
control-device inspection port and a grease-interceptor effluent monitoring port.
2. Every commercial food-preparation and food-service facility, including but not limited to bakeries,
cafes, commercial kitchens, delicatessens, ice-cream parlors, hospitals, restaurants, schools, and
similar facilities, especially where meat, poultry, seafood, dairy products or fried foods are
prepared or served:
a. All shopping centers that have food-processing facilities;
b. All food courts;
c. All other facilities discharging grease in amounts that, in the opinion of the City of Onalaska
will, alone or in combination with other substances from the discharges of the same or other
facilities, have a reasonable chance to inhibit the flow in the sanitary sewer;
d. All new areas of intensified use or dwelling, including, but not limited to adult day-care
facilities, assisted-living facilities, convalescent homes, day nursing and childcare facilities, in
which food preparation occurs, homes for the mentally challenged, hotels, maternity homes,
motels in which there is a commercial food-preparation service, nursing homes, retirement
and life-care communities and homes, and truck stops with commercial food service, shall be
required to have grease interceptors. Modifications to existing facilities that do not add new
buildings or new grease-generating activities are exempt from this requirement; and
e. Interceptors shall not be required for single-family residences, duplexes, triplexes,
quadplexes, or apartment complexes, unless the City first determines there are discharges
from the property that may create problems in the sanitary sewer system. The determination
shall be made based upon an investigation of the property and a comparison of the content
and amount of discharge from the property with the discharges of other properties similar in
size and use. Upon a determination that the discharges may create problems in the sanitary
sewer system, the City may require the installation of a sufficiently sized grease interceptor to
treat the discharges.
D. Compliance and Timeline.
1. On or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section, an existing facility shall be
required to install an approved, adequately sized, and properly operated and maintained grease
interceptor when any of the following conditions exist:
a. It is found by the City of Onalaska to be contributing grease in potential quantities sufficient to
inhibit sanitary sewer flow or necessitate increased maintenance on the sanitary sewer
collection system in order to keep impairments to the main line flow from occurring.
b. It is remodeling the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing facilities in such a manner to
be subject to a permit issued by the Inspection Department.
c. Its interceptor allows a discharge of oil or grease in excess of two hundred and fifty (250)
mg/l.
2. New facilities required by this or other applicable ordinances to maintain a grease interceptor
shall install such a unit prior to commencement of discharge to the sanitary sewer system.
3. Any requests for extensions to installation dates must be made in writing to the City of Onalaska
at least thirty (30) days in advance of the compliance date. The written request shall include the
reasons for the facility’s failure or inability to comply with the compliance date set forth, the
additional time needed to complete the remaining work, and the steps to be taken to avoid future
delays. The City of Onalaska shall determine the date for compliance.
4. Existing facilities required by this or other applicable ordinances to maintain a grease interceptor
that demonstrate that the installation of a grease trap is not feasible may use bioremediation as
an alternative. The City of Onalaska will determine whether a facility may exercise this option for
sanitary sewer maintenance. The bioremediation method and product must be approved by the
City of Onalaska in writing prior to use in the drainage system. In addition, the operator must
maintain written documentation of a current contract with a bioremediation supplier approved
through the City of Onalaska.
E. Discharge Criteria.
1. Where oil and grease are a byproduct of food preparation and/or cleanup, reasonable efforts shall
be made to separate waste oil and grease into a separate container for proper disposal. Except
as contained in byproducts of food preparation and/or clean up, waste oil and grease shall not be
discharged to any drains or grease interceptors. Such waste shall be placed in a container
designed to hold such waste and either utilized by industry or disposed of at suitable locations.
2. None of the following agents shall be placed directly into a grease interceptor, or into any drain
that leads to the interceptor:
a. Emulsifiers, de-emulsifiers, surface active agents, enzymes, degreasers, or any type of
product that will liquefy grease interceptor wastes;
b. Any substance that may cause excessive foaming in the sanitary sewer system; or
c. Any substance capable of passing the solid or semi-solid contents of the grease interceptor
to the sanitary sewer system.
3. The influent to interceptors shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) degrees F. The temperature
at the flow-control-device inspection port shall be considered equivalent to the temperature of the
influent.
4. Toilets, urinals, and other similar fixtures shall not discharge through a grease interceptor.
5. Waste shall only enter the grease interceptor through the inlet-flow-control device.
6. Where food-waste grinders are installed, the waste from such units shall discharge directly into
the building drainage system without passing through a grease interceptor. Living quarters are
exempted from this requirement.
F. Requirements for Grease Interceptors.
1. The operator must apply for all necessary permits prior to installation of any grease trap or
interceptor.
2. The plumbing inspector assigned by the City will oversee the installation of the trap or interceptor.
3. Grease traps shall be installed a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from sinks and dishwashers to
allow for adequate cooling of wastewater. Water temperatures must be less than one hundred
fifty (150) degrees F. prior to entering grease trap.
4. Sample port. A sample port shall be installed on the effluent line of each grease trap. The port
shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter and be connected to the sewer line at a ninety
degree (90°) angle to allow for sampling activities. The port shall be installed in such a manner
as to be protected from storm water contamination and maintained in a safe and proper operating
condition. The plug on the sample port must be easily removable.
G. Interceptor Maintenance.
1. It shall be unlawful for a grease or grit generator to allow grease or grit interceptor waste to be
removed from their premises by a transporter who does not have all applicable Federal, State, or
local permits or registrations, including any permit required by the City of Onalaska. If a vacuum
truck company is used to remove the grease from the interceptor or trap, the following information
must be kept on file with the operator and submitted to the City of Onalaska.
a. The vacuum truck company name, address, and telephone number;
b. The name of a primary and secondary contact person at the vacuum truck company;
c. The City of Onalaska/La Crosse County Health Department permit number;
d. Be signed and dated by an authorized representative of the vacuum truck company indicating
acceptance of the terms of the contract;
e. The name, address, and telephone number of the disposal site, and
f. The signature of the facility representative present when the grease trap was cleaned.
2. The vacuum truck company shall provide a Certificate of Insurance, Certificate of Assurance, and
Certificate of Indemnification to the City of Onalaska.
3. Facilities are responsible for maintaining grease traps in continuous proper working
condition. Further, facilities are responsible for inspecting, repairing, replacing, or installing
apparatus and equipment as necessary to ensure proper operation and function of grease traps
and compliance with discharge limitations at all times.
4. Records of maintenance are required to be maintained on site for three (3) years. (Ninety (90)
day maintenance frequency assumes proper sizing and installation consistent with this guidance).
5. The facility shall maintain adequate documentation that the grease interceptor is appropriately
cleaned and inspected.
H. Required Pumping Frequency.
1. Unless otherwise specified in writing by the City of Onalaska, each grease interceptor in active
use shall be cleaned at least once every calendar quarter or more frequently as needed to
prevent carry over of grease into the sanitary sewer system, unless it is demonstrated to the City,
that the pumping frequency can be performed at greater intervals without impairment of the
operation of the public sewer. The City of Onalaska may specify cleaning more frequently when
quarterly pumping is determined by the City, to be inadequate. Any grease generator desiring a
schedule less frequent than quarterly shall submit a request to the City of Onalaska.
2. The facility shall be responsible for providing such additional pumping as needed.
3. All grease interceptors shall be maintained by the facility at the facility’s expense.
I. Interceptor Maintenance Log. Every facility having a grease interceptor shall maintain an
Interceptor Maintenance Log indicating each pumping for the previous three (3) years. This log shall
include the date, time, amount pumped, hauler and disposal site, initials of individual recording the
information, and shall be kept in a conspicuous location on the premises of the facility for
inspection. Said log shall be made immediately available to any authorized inspector.
J. Fees.
1. The City, with the approval of the City Council, has the option to establish permit fees under this
Section in the City Fee Schedule.
2. The fees for such permits shall be for a permit issued for a period of one (1) year. The control
authority may prorate the amounts for permits with shorter durations. All permits will expire at
12:00 midnight on the date specified on the permit as determined by the City.
K. Violation.
1. It is unlawful for any person and/or facility to discharge into the sanitary sewer system in any
manner that is in violation of this Ordinance, or of any condition set forth in this Ordinance. No
person shall cause or permit the plugging or blocking of, or otherwise interfere with or permit the
interference of the operation of a grease interceptor or the sanitary sewer system, including
alteration or removal of any flow constricting devices so as to cause flow to rise above the design
capacity of the interceptor.
2. No person and/or facility shall discharge grease in excess of two hundred and fifty (250) mg/l to
the sanitary sewer system.
3. The City of Onalaska may suspend water or sewer service when such suspension is necessary,
in the opinion of the La Crosse Count Health Department and/or City, in order to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which:
a. Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or the environment;
b. Causes or may cause stoppages or excessive maintenance to be required to prevent
stoppages in the sanitary sewer collection system;
c. Causes interference to the sanitary sewer system; or
d. Causes the City to violate any condition of its NPDES community discharge permit.
4. Any person notified of a suspension of the water or sewer service shall immediately stop or
eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with a
suspension order, the City may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
termination of water or sewer service, to prevent or minimize actual or threatened damage to the
sanitary sewer system or sewer connection or endangerment to any individuals. The City shall
reinstate the water or sewer service upon receipt of proof that such conditions causing the
suspension have passed or been eliminated. A detailed written statement submitted by the facility
describing the cause(s) of the harmful discharge and the measure(s) taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the City within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence.
5. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance, or who shall fail to comply with any
provision hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine
of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each violation and each day a violation
continues, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly.
6. In addition to any applicable fines or penalties, a violator shall be liable to the City for any
expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the City for clean-up and proper disposal of said
materials. The violator shall be further required to pay an administrative fee equal to one-half
(1/2) of assessed clean-up costs.
7. The City has the option to take additional action against any facility that has caused three (3) or
more sanitary sewer blockages in one (1) calendar year due to excess grease accumulation.
Division 3 Rates and Billing
9.02.31 User Charge System
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish the basis for reasonable charges for the cost of
collection, transportation and treatment of wastewater.
B. Classes of Charges. Three (3) classes of wastewater charges shall be established as follows and
wastewater shall include wastewater from residential, multi-family, commercial, governmental and
industrial classes:
1. Treatment Rate;
2. Transmission and Maintenance Rate; and
3. Flat Rate and shall be based on the Effective Total Meter Water Consumption for the quarter.
C. Effective Total Metered Water Consumption. The term Effective Total Metered Water Consumption
shall mean:
1. For quarters 1, 3 and 4 (billed in April, October and January) the treatment charge and
transmission and maintenance charge shall be based on metered water volume for the three (3)
month period beginning December 5th and ending March 5th of each year which shall be reflected
in the April billing unless consumption in any given quarter is lower than the metered water
volume established on the April billing;
2. For the 2nd quarter (billed in July), the treatment charge and transmission and maintenance
charge shall be based on the actual metered water volume for that quarter (March 5 to June 5). In
the event that December 5th or March 5th falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the
following or preceding Business Day shall be used in lieu of the 5th. If consumption for quarters 3
or 4 is lower than the established metered water volume for the December 5th through March 5th
period, the metered water volume for that quarter will be used to establish the treatment charge
and transmission and maintenance charge for that specific quarter.
Wastewater charges for new residential and nonresidential class customers in the City of Onalaska
that do not have an established sewer value or where the public water supply is not available, and a
private water supply is used or where metered records are not available, water usage shall be
calculated based on the average sewer value of account classes within the City of Onalaska from the
April billing. New residential or nonresidential class customers who establish service mid quarter will
be charged the City average for first quarter or actual consumption, whichever is lower.
D. Wastewater Charges. The charges for wastewater shall include a quarterly charge consisting of a
treatment charge, transmission and maintenance charge and a flat rate charge. The treatment charge
and transmission and maintenance charge shall be based on the Effective Total Metered Water
Consumption.
E. Quarterly Treatment Rate Charge.
1. A quarterly treatment rate charge shall be assessed each residential and nonresidential class
customer. The quarterly treatment rate charge is intended to generate sufficient revenues to pay
the cost of wastewater treatment by the City of La Crosse and to pay the amortization cost of
improvements to the La Crosse Interceptor Sewer System.
2. The Treatment Rate shall be an amount established yearly by the Common Council of the City of
Onalaska based upon information provided by the City of La Crosse which shall be a sufficient
amount to cover the annual cost of wastewater treatment and the amortization cost of
improvements to the La Crosse Interceptor Sewer System.
3. The quarterly treatment rate charge shall be calculated as follows:
a. (Treatment Rate /100 Cubic Feet) x Effective Total Metered Water Consumption
F. Quarterly Transmission & Maintenance Charge and Flat Fee.
1. The quarterly transmission and maintenance and flat fee charge is intended to generate sufficient
revenues to pay for the cost of operation, maintenance and depreciation of the Onalaska Sanitary
Sewer Collection System. The annual operating budget will be estimated prior to each calendar
year's operation.
2. The Transmission Rate shall be an amount established yearly by the Common Council of the City
of Onalaska based upon the annual operating expense of Onalaska Sewer Utility.
3. The quarterly transmission and maintenance charge shall be calculated as follows:
a. (Transmission Rate/100 Cubic Feet) x Effective Total Metered Water Consumption
4. The quarterly sewer flat fee shall be determined as follows based upon the size of the meter as
established by the Common Council annually on file in the office of the City Engineer.
5. The City shall reserve the right to require a meter for any user.
6. Charges for a portion of a billing period shall be prorated by the City.
G. Payment of Quarterly Sewer Charges; Lien; Penalty.
1. Wastewater charges shall be payable upon receipt, subject to the provisions of this Section.
2. Wastewater charges shall not be payable in installments.
3. Charges remaining unpaid for a period of twenty (20) days or more from the date of the
wastewater utility bill shall be assessed a late payment penalty charge of three percent (3%) of
the amount billed, in addition to all other charges, penalties or interest, when the delinquent
charge is extended upon the tax roll.
4. If a charge and/or late penalty remains unpaid for a period of twenty (20) days after the date of
the utility bill, such charge and penalty shall become a lien upon the real property to which it
applies, as provided in Sec. 66.0809 Wis. Stats., and other applicable provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes, as from time to time amended or renumbered.
5. Delinquent charges and penalties shall be automatically extended upon the next available tax roll
as a delinquent tax against the real property, and all proceedings relating to the collection, return
and sale of property for delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such charges.
6. The City reserves the right to disconnect services pursuant to Wisconsin Administrative Code
PSC 185.37, Wis. Stats., as may be amended.
H. Billing Schedule. Billing intervals shall be established by the City. If it has been impossible to read
the water meter and as a result been over-estimated, there shall be no rebate on the sewer bill. No
credits shall be given on such estimated bills unless proof is submitted of correctable error and a
solution is possible.
I. Unknown Water Leaks. If a leak unknown to the user is found in an appliance or the plumbing, the
City use shall be adjusted based on the City’s current leak adjustment policy. No such adjustment
shall be made for sewer after the customer has been notified and has had an opportunity to correct
the condition.
J. Special Treatment Charges. Each user which discharges wastewater other than domestic or
discharges toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the collection or
treatment systems as determined by the City shall pay for such increased costs.
K. Distribution of Costs. The costs of operation and maintenance of all flow not directly attributable to
users, e.g., infiltration and inflow, shall be distributed among all users on the basis of the flow volume
of users.
L. Records. The City shall keep the records necessary to comply with applicable state or federal
requirements.
9.02.32 Use of the Sanitary Sewers
A. Prohibited Discharge. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or any
other unaltered water to any sanitary sewer.
B. Authority to Restrict Industrial Wastewaters. The City reserves the right to refuse or limit the
amount or character of any or all industrial wastewaters from an industry or combination of industries
as may be necessary to insure adequate treatment and proper operation of the public sewer
collection system. All users must meet City of La Crosse Sewerage rules, regulations, and
ordinances for discharge to the La Crosse Wastewater Treatment Plant. The City of La Crosse has
the authority to sample discharged sewerage.
C. Prohibited Substances. No person shall discharge or deposit or cause to allow to be discharged or
deposited into the wastewater collection system any wastewater or substances which contain the
following:
1. Liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, may be sufficient, either
alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious to the
wastewater collection system or personnel engaged in the operation, maintenance or repair or
monitoring of the same. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on the explosion meter, at
the point of discharge into the wastewater collection system, be more than five percent (5%) of
the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) of the meter nor shall any single reading exceed ten percent
(10%) of the LEL.
2. Solid or viscous wastes which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer require
excessive cleaning or maintenance or otherwise interfere with the proper operation of the
wastewater collection system.
3. Garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be
carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in the public sewers, with
no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
4. Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases which either singly, or by interaction with other
wastes, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are or may be sufficient to
prevent entry into the wastewater collection system for the purpose of monitoring, maintenance or
repair.
5. Any waste which will cause corrosion or deterioration of the collection system. All wastes
discharged into the wastewater collection system must have a pH value in the range of six (6) to
nine (9) standard units at the point of discharge into the wastewater collection system. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, compounds and substances which will react with water to
form acidic or alkaline products.
6. Wastewater or materials containing fat, wax, oil or grease of a concentration exceeding one
hundred (100) mg/l, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between zero (0) and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius [thirty-two
(32) degrees F. and one hundred fifty (150) degrees F.] at the point of discharge into the
wastewater collection system.
7. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that they do not comply with
regulations or orders issued by the appropriate authority having control over their use and which
will or may cause damage or hazards to the wastewater collection system or personnel engaged
in the operation, maintenance or monitoring of the same.
8. Any wastewater or materials not removable by the wastewater treatment process which will
cause discoloration of the wastewater treatment plant effluent or treatment residues.
9. Heated wastewater in amounts which will cause or is likely to cause deterioration or hazard to the
wastewater collection system, personnel engaged in monitoring, maintenance or repair, or inhibit
biological activity resulting in loss of treatment efficiency. In no case shall wastewater with a
temperature exceeding forty (40) degrees Celsius [one hundred four (104) degrees F.] be
introduced into the wastewater collection system.
10. Any unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, cooling water, rain water, storm water, river
water or ground water which will increase the hydraulic load on the wastewater collection system,
except in cases where no prudent and reasonable alternative exists as determined by the City.
11. Wastewater at a flow rate or containing such concentrations of pollutants released in a single
extraordinary discharge episode such that would cause a wastewater collection system upset and
subsequent loss of treatment efficiency or result in the accumulation or production of inert or
biological sludges in excess of normal operating removal capability or adversely affect treatment
residues, sludges or scums.
12. Wastewater discharges, except as authorized by the City, shall not contain in excess of the
following:
Parameter Limitation, Whichever is Greater
(Maximum for any operating day)
Biochemical Oxygen Demand 500 mg/l or 500 lbs/day
Suspended Solids, Total 500 mg/l or 250 lbs/day
The City, upon review, may approve discharges in excess of the limits set forth providing that
such discharge has little or no adverse impact on the wastewater treatment operation.
13. No holding tank wastes shall be discharged into the wastewater collection system unless a permit
has been secured from the City or its representative. Unless allowed by the City under the terms
and conditions of a permit, a separate permit must be secured for each separate discharge. This
permit will state the specific location of discharge, time of day discharge is to occur, the volume of
the discharge and the wastewater origin, constituents and characteristics.
14. Fluid or solid substances in quantities or of such size or nature as to cause obstruction to the flow
in sanitary sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment
plant such as, but not limited to, unground garbage, ashes, cinders, clay, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups or milk containers, either whole or ground by garbage
grinders, or any soluble substance that would create a viscosity of liquid greater than 1.1 in any
portion of the treatment works.
15. Any fluid or solid containing chromium, copper, zinc, cyanide and similar objectionable or toxic
substances which exceed the limits which are established for such materials. Unless more
restrictive limits are established by a state or federal regulatory agency having jurisdiction, the
following concentrations in milligrams per liter (mg/1) shall not be exceeded on a grab sample
basis:
Prohibited
Substances
Concentration
Limitations
Arsenic 0.50
Barium 4.00
Cadmium 0.01
Chromium 0.6
Copper 1.0
Cyanide 0.05
Lead 0.2
Mercury 0.002
Nickel 2.0
Selenium 0.004
Silver 0.1
Zinc 1.0
16. Any fluid of solid containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the City Engineer as necessary or
as are established by the state, federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction for such
discharge to the receiving waters. Unless other limits are established by a state or federal
regulatory agency having jurisdiction, the concentration of phenol shall not exceed 0.005 mg/1 on
an instantaneous basis.
17. Any waste containing more than one hundred (100) mg/1 of antiseptic substances.
18. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth,
clays, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids detrimental to the treatment
processes.
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions) or excessive odors.
c. Unusual chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in quantities in excess of that
found in domestic sewage.
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined in Section
9.02.16.
e. BODS in excess of five thousand (5,000) mg/1 on an instantaneous basis or five hundred
(500) mg/1 on an average daily (work day) basis.
f. Total solids in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) mg/1 on an instantaneous basis or two
thousand (2,000) mg/1 on an average daily (work day) basis.
g. Suspended solids in excess of ten thousand (10,000) mg/1 on an instantaneous basis or one
thousand (1,000) mg/1 on an average daily (work day) basis.
19. Fluids or solids containing substances which are not amenable to treatment by the sewage
treatment processes employed or are untreatable to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction.
20. “Disposable” wipes and/or rags.
D. Compliance Standards. No person shall discharge or cause or allow to be discharged or deposited
any waters or wastes that do not conform to the following:
1. Pretreatment standards established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act or standards established by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. No sewage, water or waste, including commercial
and industrial waste, shall contain any substance which is determined to be in violation of any
state or federal pretreatment standards, the WPDES permit requirements or which may be
determined by the City to be unduly harmful or deleterious to the wastewater collection system,
environment, public health and welfare, or interfere with the operation of the system.
E. Action Upon Prohibited Discharge. If wastewaters containing any substances described in
Subsection 9.02.32.C. are discharged or proposed to be discharged into the public sewer system of
the City of Onalaska or any sewer system tributary thereto, the City and City Attorney may take any
action necessary to:
1. Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater.
2. Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will reduce or eliminate the
discharge of such substances in conformity with this Section.
3. Require pretreatment, including storage facilities, or flow equalization necessary to reduce or
eliminate the objectionable characteristics or substances so that the discharge will not violate
these rules and regulations.
4. Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay any additional cost or
expense incurred by the City for handling and treating excess loads imposed on the treatment
system.
5. Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or necessary to achieve the
purpose of this Section.
F. Discharge Permit. New and existing industrial users subject to categorical standards or required to
pretreat industrial wastes wishing to connect or continue discharging into any part of the Onalaska
wastewater collection system must obtain a discharge permit therefor.
1. All of said industrial users connected to, proposing to connect to or discharging to any part of the
City wastewater collection system must obtain a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90)
days from and after the effective date of enactment of any pretreatment standard applicable to
the respective industrial category or subcategory under which said industrial user is classified.
2. Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the City an application
on the form prescribed by the City and accompanied by the applicable fee as established in the
City Fee Schedule. In support of this application, the user shall submit the following information:
a. Name, address and SIC number of applicant;
b. Volume of wastewater to be discharged;
c. Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those set forth in
Section 9.02.32.C. of this Title as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory;
d. Time and duration of discharge; and
e. Average and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if
any.
f. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers and
appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
g. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials
and types of materials which are, or could be, discharged.
h. Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production.
i. Number and type of employees and hours of work.
j. Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be necessary to evaluate the permit
application.
The City will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After
evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the City may issue a wastewater discharge
permit subject to terms and conditions provided therein.
G. Permit Conditions.
1. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Section and all
other regulations and fees established by the City. The conditions of the wastewater discharge
permits shall be uniformly enforced in accordance with this Section and applicable state and
federal regulations. Permit conditions will include the following:
a. The average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics.
b. Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
c. Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities and specifications for
monitoring programs.
d. Requirements for maintaining and submitting technical reports and plant records relating to
wastewater discharges.
e. Daily average and daily maximum discharge rates or other appropriate conditions when
pollutants subject to limitations and prohibitions are proposed or present in the user's
wastewater discharge.
f. Compliance schedules.
g. Other conditions to ensure compliance with this Section.
2. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three (3) years. A permit may be
issued for a period of less than one (1) year or stated to expire on a specific date. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the City during the life of
the permit, as limitations or requirements as identified in Subsection 9.02.32.C. are modified and
changed. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in their permit at least thirty (30)
days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions shall include
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
3. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for specific process or operation. A
wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new
user, different premises or a new or changed operation or process.
4. Any user who violates the following conditions of their permit or of this Section or of applicable
state and federal regulations is subject to having their permit revoked. Violations subjecting a
user to possible permit revocation include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Failure of a user to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of their
discharge;
b. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
c. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or
monitoring; or
d. Violation of conditions of the permit.
5. Permit fees shall be established by the City to provide revenues for the costs associated with the
administration and compliance monitoring of the industrial pretreatment program and are found in
the City Fee Schedule. The fees provide only for the direct cost of industrial monitoring and
administration and do not provide for the recovery of operations, maintenance and repairs or
replacement costs of the wastewater treatment system. Permit fees, at intervals of no less than
one (1) year, shall be evaluated and amended as necessary to reflect current costs. Permit fee
schedules shall be available from the City.
H. Preconstruction Approval. Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows prior to
discharge into any part of the wastewater collection system is required, plans, specifications and
other pertinent data or information relating to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall first be
submitted to the City for review and approval at least sixty (60) days prior to initiation of construction.
Such approval shall not exempt the applicant from compliance with any applicable code, ordinance,
rule, regulation or order from any governmental authority. Any subsequent alterations or additions to
such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall not be made without due notice to and prior to
approval of the City.
I. Proper Maintenance of Pretreatment Facilities. If pretreatment or control of waste flows is
required, such facilities shall be maintained in good working order and operated as efficiently as
possible by the owner or operator at their cost and expense, subject to the requirements of these
rules and regulations and all other applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
J. Inspections and Sampling. Whenever it shall be necessary for the purposes of these rules and
regulations, the City or duly appointed representatives, upon presentation of credentials, may enter
upon any property or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of:
1. Copying any records required to be kept under the provisions of this Section.
2. Inspecting any monitoring equipment or method.
3. Sampling any discharge of wastewater to the wastewater collection system.
The City, or said representatives, may enter upon the property at any hour under emergency
circumstances.
K. Accidental Discharge Protection. Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this Section. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or
operator's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the City for review at least sixty (60) days prior to the construction of
the facility. Review and approval of such plans shall not relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility to modify their facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this Section.
L. Notification of Accidental Discharge. If, for any reason, a facility does not comply with or will be
unable to comply with any prohibition or limitation in this Section, the facility responsible for such
discharge shall immediately notify the City so that corrective action may be taken to protect the
wastewater collection system. In addition, a written report addressed to the City detailing the date,
time and cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and characteristics of the discharge and
corrective action taken to prevent future discharges shall be filed by the responsible industrial facility
within five (5) days of the occurrence of the non-complying discharge.
M. Discharge Reports.
1. Every industrial user subject to categorical standards or required to pre-treat industrial waste shall
file periodic self-monitoring discharge reports at such intervals as are designated by the City. The
City may require any other industrial users discharging into the wastewater collection system to
file such periodic self-monitoring reports depending upon the volume and character of discharge.
The self-monitoring report shall include, but, in the discretion of the City, shall not be limited to:
a. Nature of process;
b. Volume and rates of flow;
c. Mass emission rate of pollutants;
d. Production quantities;
e. Hours of operation; and
f. Concentrations of controlled pollutants or other information which relate to the generation of
waste.
2. Such reports may also include the chemical constituents and quantity of liquid materials stored
onsite even though they are not normally discharged.
Division 4 Charges for Service Areas
9.02.41 Sewer Installation Charges in Greens Coulee Service Area
A. Install sanitary sewers of the diameter(s) set forth in Appendix A, on file with the City Engineer,
ranging from eight (8) inch diameter sewers to eighteen (18) inch diameter sewers; and
B. Pay to the City, prior to final ratification of the plat, the sum of Two Thousand Two Hundred and
Sixteen Dollars ($2,216.00) per acre
C. Assume the cost of installing all such sanitary sewers ten (10) inches in diameter in size. If greater
than ten (10) inch diameter sewers are required to handle the contemplated sewerage flows as set
forth in Appendix A, on file with the City Engineer, the City shall reimburse the developer for the cost
difference between ten (10) inch pipe material and the larger pipe materials required. No sums will be
reimbursed by the City for installation.
D. The Green Coulee service area consists of those lands designated on the map which is designated
as Appendix A of this Section and which is on file with the City Engineer and incorporated herein.
E. Hereafter, the charges shall increase on an annual basis by the amount of the increase in the
Consumer Price Index (CPI).
9.02.42 North Abbey Road Zone Charges
A. Refer to Section 9.01.61. for applicable charges.
9.02.43 Crestwood Lane Zone Charges
A. Refer to Section 9.01.62. for applicable charges.
9.02.44 Sewer Connection Charges for East Avenue Service Area
A. For connection of any lands within the East Avenue service area to the sewer mains of the City of
Onalaska, the owner(s) of such lands(s) shall pay to the City Clerk of the City of Onalaska a
connection charge.
B. The amount of the connection charge shall be One Thousand Two Hundred and Four Dollars
($1,204.00) per acre.
C. Owners of land(s) served with sanitary sewer laterals must pay the connection charges required
herein within one (1) year after installation of the laterals or upon issuance of a plumbing permit for
said land(s), lot(s) and/or parcel(s), whichever occurs first.
D. The East Avenue service area consists of those lands designated in the map which is marked as
Exhibit A and is attached and incorporated into Ordinance No. 596 87, on file with the City Clerk.
E. Hereafter, the charges shall increase on an annual basis by the amount of the increase in the
Consumer Price Index (CPI).
9.02.45 Sewer Connection for Pralle Annexation Service Area
A. Upon connection of any lands within the Pralle annexation service area to the sewer mains to the City
of Onalaska, the owner(s) of such land(s) shall pay to the Finance Director of the City of Onalaska a
connection charge.
B. The amount of the connection charge shall be Seven Hundred and Ninety-Five Dollars ($795.00) per
connection.
C. Owners of land(s) served with sanitary sewer laterals must pay the connection charge required herein
within one (1) year after installation of the laterals or upon issuance of a plumbing permit for said
land(s), lot(s) and/or parcel(s), whichever occurs first.
D. The Pralle annexation service area consists of those lands designated in the map which is
denominated as Exhibit A and is attached to and incorporated into this Section by Ordinance No. 943
97. A copy of such map is on file with the City Engineer.
E. Hereafter, the charges shall increase on an annual basis by the amount of the increase in the
Consumer Price Index (CPI).
9.02.46 Sewer Connection Charges for US Hwy 16 Service Area
A. For connection of any lands within the U.S. Hwy 16 service area to the sewer mains of the City of
Onalaska, the owner(s) of such land(s) shall pay to the City Clerk of the City of Onalaska a
connection charge.
B. The amount of the connection charge shall be Eight Hundred Eighty-Seven Dollars ($887.00) per
acre.
C. The connection charge shall be calculated by multiplying the total acres of land within the U.S. Hwy
16 service area owned by any person(s) or business (es) by Eight Hundred Eighty-Seven Dollars
($887.00) per acre. Provided, however, that if any portion of said acreage has been separated from
the total acreage by certified survey or plat, the connection charge shall be calculated by multiplying
the acreage of such survey of platted lot/parcel by Eight Hundred Eighty-Seven Dollars ($887.00) per
acre.
D. Owners of land(s) served with sanitary sewer laterals must pay the connection charges required
herein within one (1) year installation of the laterals or upon issuance of a plumbing permit for said
land(s), lots(s), and/or parcel(s), whichever occurs first.
E. The U.S. Hwy 16 service area consists of those lands designated in the map which is marked as
Exhibit A and is attached and incorporated into Ordinance No. 596 87, on file with the City Engineer.
F. Hereafter, the charges shall increase on an annual basis by the amount of the increase in the
Consumer Price Index (CPI).
9.02.47 Connection Charges
A. In addition to the foregoing, there shall be a connection charge of Twenty Dollars ($20.00) per
dwelling unit or commercial establishment for connection to the sanitary sewer system comprising
Area A on attached Exhibit A which is incorporated herein. There shall be a connection charge of
Thirty Eight Dollars ($38.00) per dwelling unit or commercial establishment for connection to the
sanitary sewer system comprising Area B on said attached Exhibit A. Each of said charges shall be
in addition to the various fixture charges and permit charges and shall be payable at the time
application for the permit is made, whether it be to the public sewer system or water system, when
applicable. Said connection charges shall be adjusted annually with the first adjustment being made
as of January 1, 2002. The adjustment will be calculated by multiplying the connection charge by the
percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for La Crosse County from January 1, 2001 to the
date of connection or payment of the connection charge whichever is later. Said resulting amount
shall be added to the connection charge to arrive at a total connection charge.
9.02.48 Sewer Connection Charges for New Connections
A. La Crosse Treatment Plant Charges shall be as set forth in the current (or where no current
agreement exists in the most recent) executed Sewer Agreement between the City of Onalaska and
City of La Crosse
Division 5 Penalties and Legal Remedies
9.02.51 Penalties and Legal Remedies
A. General. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, or orders authorized by this Title,
will, unless otherwise indicated in this Title, upon first conviction, forfeit not less than Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00), together with the costs of prosecution for the first violation. For the second
violation of the same provision or order, the person shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) plus the costs of prosecution. A third offense for the same provision or
order under this Section, shall result, upon conviction, of a forfeit not less than One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00).
B. Legal Remedies. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section, shall, in addition to
the forfeiture stated above, be liable for any damage to the Water Utility, including loss of revenue
from the same of water or sewage service resulting from a violation of these rules and regulations.
Whether the Water Utility must take corrective action with respect to any parcel of property, such
parcel may be specifically assessed for such work. The payment of damages and correction of
violations may be a condition of providing future water or sewage service.
C. Other Remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the City or any authorized
officer from proceeding under any other ordinance of law or by any other enforcement method to
enforce any ordinance, regulation, or order.
Chapter 03 Stormwater Utility
Division 1 Authority
9.03.11 Purpose and Necessity
A. The Common Council of the City of Onalaska hereby find that the management of stormwater and
other surface water discharges within and beyond La Crosse River, Mississippi River, Black River,
Half Way Creek, and other bodies of water within the City is a matter that affects the health, safety
and welfare of the City, its citizens and businesses and others in the surrounding area. All real
property in the City, including property owned by public and tax-exempt entities contributes runoff and
either uses or benefits from the stormwater system.
B. Failure to effectively manage stormwater affects the sanitary sewer utility operations of the City by,
among other things, increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system.
Surface water runoff may cause nonpoint source pollution, erosion of lands, threaten residences and
businesses with water damage, and create environmental damage to the rivers, streams and other
bodies of water within and adjacent to the City. A system for the collection and disposal of stormwater
provides services to all properties within the City of Onalaska and surrounding areas, including those
properties not currently served by the system. The cost of operating and maintaining the City
stormwater management system and financing necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and
extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services
received from the system. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the Common
Council hereby exercises its authority to establish a Stormwater Utility and establish the rates for
stormwater management services.
C. In promulgating the regulations contained in this Section, the City is acting pursuant to authority
granted by Ch. 62 and 66, including, but not limited to, Sec. 62.04, 62.11, 62.16, 62.18, 66.0101,
66.0621, 66.0801, 66.0811, 66.0813, 66.0703, and 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
9.03.12 Creation
A. There is hereby created and established a Stormwater Utility within the City of Onalaska, effective
January 1, 2010. The entire operation, charge and management of the Stormwater Utility is vested in
the City Engineer, subject, however, to the general control and supervision of the Common Council,
pursuant to applicable State law.
9.03.13 Authority
A. The City, acting through the Stormwater Utility, may, without limitation due to enumeration, acquire by
gift, purchase, eminent domain, condemnation or otherwise, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain,
improve, update, modify, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage, finance,
borrow monies, assess and/or levy fees for such facilities, operations, maintenance and activities as
are deemed, from time to time, by the City to be proper and reasonably necessary for a system of
storm and surface water management. These facilities may include, without limitation due to
enumeration, surface and underground drainage facilities, inlets, manholes, sewers, channels,
ditches, retention and detention basins, infiltration facilities, retaining walls, streets, roads, natural
drainageways, and such other facilities as will support a stormwater management system.
Division 2 Billing and Rates
9.03.21 Income and Revenue
A. The Stormwater Utility finances shall be accounted for in a separate Stormwater Utility Enterprise
Fund by the City. All income and revenues shall be retained by the Stormwater Utility Enterprise
Fund. The Stormwater Utility shall prepare an annual budget, which is to include all operation and
maintenance costs, debt service and other costs related to the operation of the Stormwater Utility.
The annual budget is subject to approval by the Common Council.
9.03.22 Rates and Charges
A. Every person shall pay the applicable Onalaska stormwater service charge when due for each
property by that person.
B. The basis for computations of the charge for stormwater services to lots and parcels of land within the
City is established under this section. The amount of charge to be imposed, the establishment of
formulas for the calculation of charges, the creation of customer classifications for the imposition of
charges, and changes in such charges, formulas and customer classifications shall be consistent with
this Section. Each year the Common Council shall determine the value of one (1) ERU based upon
the applicable year’s adopted City Budget and this Section, and shall certify such value to the City
Clerk/Treasurer and Common Council. All charges established pursuant to this Section shall be fair
and reasonable. A schedule of current charges shall be maintained and on file in the Department of
Public Works.
C. Charges shall be imposed to recover all or a portion of the costs of the Stormwater Utility. Such
charges may include, but are not limited to, the following components:
1. Base Component. The Base Component shall include the Stormwater Utility’s estimated annual
administrative and management costs, water quality costs, and other costs not in the components
described below. The Base Rate shall be calculated by taking the sum of all Base Component
costs and dividing that by the estimated number of billable ERUs.
2. Operations and Maintenance Component. Operation and Maintenance Component shall
include the Stormwater Utility’s estimated annual operation and maintenance costs for the City’s
stormwater management system. The Operation and Maintenance Rate shall be determined by:
a. Taking the sum of all Operation and Maintenance Component costs,
b. Dividing that amount by the ERUs remaining after the ERUs that the City, upon user
application, has determined need not pay Operation and Maintenance Component costs; and
c. Making appropriate adjustments to the Rate to account for factors such as changes in
stormwater reserves.
3. Capital and Debt Service Component. Capital and Debt Service Component cost shall include
the capital costs and debt service payments for the City’s stormwater conveyance system,
including retention and detention facilities. The Capital and Debt Service Rate shall be
determined by:
a. Taking the sum of all Capital and Debt Service Component costs,
b. Dividing that amount by the ERUs remaining after the ERUs which the City, upon user
application, has determined need not pay Capital and Debt Service Component costs, and
c. Making appropriate adjustments to the Rate to account for factors such as changes in
stormwater reserves.
D. Credits or adjustments may be available to individual property owners in the nonresidential and
multifamily customer classes. It shall be the burden of the property owner to request such a credit and
to demonstrate that the property owner has met the requirements as listed in the Stormwater Utility
Credit Policy to a reasonable degree of certainty with evidence that a fee adjustment is warranted.
The credits or adjustments shall be applied to the Operation and Maintenance Component Costs and
the Capital and Debt Service Component Costs. The Base Component shall be charged to all
properties regardless of credits unless the property is regulated by a separate municipal Stormwater
Discharge Permit (WPDES). The Stormwater Utility Credit Policy, as issued by the City of Onalaska
Common Council, shall be applied to all credit applications. All applications for credit or adjustments
shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and the City Engineer may reduce the measured impervious
area after taking into consideration the demonstrated reduction in stormwater volume. Credits or
adjustments may be applied to applicable properties based upon the following criteria:
1. An adjustment may be applicable if some or all of a customer’s property provided:
a. Stormwater runoff from the property does not discharge directly or indirectly to or through any
form of conveyance system owned or operated by the Stormwater Utility; and
b. The drainage from the property is not in violation of any environmental code or Federal, State
or local surface water drainage requirements.
2. Credits may be granted to owners of properties who have significantly reduced the impacts of
stormwater discharge or stormwater quality to the stormwater utility system. Owners of property
which discharge all or a portion of their stormwater into privately owned and maintained retention
and detention ponds shall receive a prorated credit to the number of ERUs assigned to their
property as outlined in the Stormwater Utility Credit Policy. No owner may be given a credit in
excess of fifty percent (50%) of their total number of ERUs for the operation and maintenance
component and capital and debt service component.
3. Prior to receiving a credit or adjustment, the City Engineer or designee shall be allowed access to
the property to determine the amount of credit or exemption to be granted.
9.03.23 New Construction
A. A property owner shall be responsible for timely submitting a fully completed and accurate stormwater
utility service application at the time a building permit is issued or a site plan review is conducted. The
application shall be made on a form prescribed by the City and provided with each application for a
building permit or application for site plan review. Failure to submit such stormwater utility service
application or providing false information on such form shall constitute a violation of this Section. The
implementation of stormwater charges shall commence as set forth in this Section.
9.03.24 Billing
A. The Stormwater Utility billing schedule shall be set by the Utility Committee and approved by the
Common Council.
9.03.25 Payment of Charge; Lien; Penalty
A. Stormwater Utility charges shall be payable upon receipt, subject to the provisions of this Section.
B. Stormwater Utility charges shall not be payable in installments.
C. Charges remaining unpaid for a period of twenty (20) days or more from the date of the utility bill shall
be assessed a late payment penalty charge of three percent (3%) of the amount billed, in addition to
all other charges, penalties or interest, when the delinquent charge is extended upon the tax roll.
D. If a charge and/or late penalty remains unpaid for a period of twenty (20) days after the date of the
utility bill, such charge and penalty shall become a lien upon the real property to which it applies, as
provided in Sec. 66.0821 and 66.0809, Wis. Stats., and other applicable provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes, as from time to time amended or renumbered.
E. Delinquent charges and penalties shall be automatically extended upon the next available tax roll as
a delinquent tax against the real property, and all proceedings relating to the collection, return and
sale of property for delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such charges.
9.03.26 Assets and Outstanding Debt
A. The land rights and improvements of the City, or such rights determined to exist, for the following
components of the public stormwater system are hereby transferred to the land assets of the
Onalaska Stormwater Utility.
1. Stormwater sewers;
2. Inlets, catch basins, retention ponds and related stormwater control features;
3. Access structures;
4. Drainageways;
5. Greeways; and
6. Fees collected for stormwater management and fees collected in lieu of land dedication.
B. Upon adoption of this ordinance codified in this chapter, the Stormwater Utility shall assume any
future debt obligation for stormwater drainage and quality control purposes.
Division 3 Customer Classifications
9.03.31 Customer Classes
A. For the purposes of imposing the Stormwater Utility charge, all lots and parcels within the City are
classified into the following customer classes:
1. Residential-single family;
2. Residential-duplex;
3. Multi-family: (including apartments greater than or equal to three (3) Units, Condominiums, and
Mobile Homes)
4. Commercial;
5. Industrial;
6. Governmental; and
7. Undeveloped and Agricultural.
B. The City Engineer shall prepare and maintain an updated current list of all lots and parcels of real
property (land) within the City of Onalaska and assign the appropriate customer classification to each
customer account. This list shall include the number of ERUs assigned to each customer account.
C. The average square footage of impervious area of the ERU as of the date of adoption of this Section
is hereby established to be equivalent to three thousand eight hundred eighty-eight (3,888) square
feet.
D. The ERU charges for the foregoing customer classifications shall be established as follows:
1. Residential-single family: One (1.0) ERU;
2. Residential-duplex: One-half (0.5) ERU multiplied by each dwelling unit;
3. Multi-family: (including apartments greater than or equal to three (3) Units, Condominiums, and
Mobile Homes). The charge per unit shall be calculated by dividing the number of ERUs
calculated for the entire property by the number of units existing on the property.
4. Commercial: One (1) ERU times a factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of the
property by the square footage equivalent for one (1) ERU. Such impervious area shall be
determined based upon the best information reasonably available. The result shall be rounded
down to the nearest one-tenth (0.1);
5. Industrial: One (1) ERU times a factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of the
property by the square footage equivalent for one (1) ERU. Such impervious area shall be
determined based upon the best information reasonably available. The result shall be rounded
down to the nearest one-tenth (0.1);
6. Governmental: One (1) ERU times a factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of the
property by the square footage equivalent for one (1) ERU. Such impervious area shall be
determined based upon the best information reasonably available. The result shall be rounded
down to the nearest one-tenth (0.1); and
7. Undeveloped and Agricultural: No stormwater charge shall be assigned to undeveloped or
agricultural land.
E. The City Engineer shall be responsible for determining the impervious area based on the best
available information, including, but not limited to, data supplied by the City Assessor, aerial
photography, the property owner, tenant, or developer. The billing amount shall be updated by the
City Engineer based on any additions to the impervious area as approved through the building permit
or site plan process. Individual property owners may submit site and building surveys to the City
Engineer that help more accurately determine the total area and impervious area.
F. The minimum charges for any parcel shall be equal to the rate for four tenths (0.4) ERU, unless it
contains no impervious surface.
G. All unoccupied developed lots and parcels with impervious surfaces shall be subject to a stormwater
utility charge.
H. The Common Council, from time to time, by budget adoption may establish classifications other than
the customer classifications set forth in this Section, as may be likely to provide a reasonable and fair
distribution of the costs of the stormwater utility to all users.
Division 4 Administration
9.03.41 Appeals
A. The amount of a particular stormwater utility charge may be appealed to the City Engineer by filing a
written appeal with the City Clerk/Treasurer prior to the due date of the charge or within thirty (30)
days of payment. The written appeal shall specify all grounds for challenge to the amount of the
charge and shall state the amount of charge that the appellant considers to be inappropriate. Failure
to timely appeal waives all rights to later challenge the charge.
B. In considering an appeal, the City Engineer shall determine whether the stormwater utility charge is
fair and reasonable under the particular facts and circumstances pertaining to that specific property
and, in the event the appeal is granted, whether or not a refund is due the appellant and the amount
of the refund. The City Engineer shall notify the appellant in writing of their determination.
C. The customer has thirty (30) days from the date of the written decision of the City Engineer to file a
written appeal with the Board of Public Works.
D. If the Board of Public Works determines that a refund is due the customer, the refund will be applied
as a credit towards the customer’s next stormwater billing charge, if the refund will not exceed the
customer’s next stormwater billing charge, or it may be refunded at the discretion of the Board of
Public Works.
9.03.42 Alternative Method to Collect Stormwater Charges
A. The Common Council hereby find and determine that the stormwater utility charges established under
this Section reasonably reflect the services rendered to real property and may be, and are hereby
authorized to be, assessed, charged, levied, imposed and collected upon property as a special
charge in accord with all applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
B. The mailing of the bill for stormwater utility charges to a property owner shall serve as notice to the
property owner that failure to pay the charges when due may result in the charges being levied upon
the owner’s applicable real property.
C. In addition, the City may provide notice each October of any unpaid charges to the Stormwater Utility
and such charges, if not paid by November 15, may be placed upon the tax roll and collected in the
manner provided by this Section and/or the applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. The
collection method provided in this section is in addition to the collection method provided for in this
Section.
9.03.42 Conflict with Other Ordinances, Laws
A. In the event of any conflict between any provision set forth in this Section and any other City
ordinance, the competing provisions shall be harmonized to the fullest extent possible so as to
facilitate the intent and proper effect of the separate areas of regulation.
9.03.43 Definitions
A. For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply. Words used in the singular shall
include the plural, and the plural, the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future
tense; the word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary; the word “may” is permissive.
1. Charge. The periodic or other fee imposed under this Section for the rendering of stormwater
utility services by the City.
2. City Engineer. The City Engineer or designee.
3. Common Council. The Common Council of the City of Onalaska.
4. Equivalent Runoff Unit (ERU). The basic unit by which a storm sewer charge is calculated
under this Section and is based upon the impervious area reasonably determined by the City.
The term “ERU” means the statistical average of horizontal impervious area of single family
homes and duplexes within the City of Onalaska on the date of adoption of this Section.
5. Impervious area. A surface which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so
that it is highly resistant to infiltration by rain water. The term includes, without limitation due to
enumeration, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, loading
docks and sidewalks, and semi-impervious surfaces such as compacted gravel, all as measured
on a horizontal plane.
6. Duplex. Any residential property having two (2) dwelling units.
7. Dwelling unit. A room or group of rooms including cooking accommodations, occupied by one
(1) family, and in which not more than two (2) persons, other than members of the family, are
lodged or boarded for compensation at any one (1) time.
8. Multifamily Unit. Any residential property comprised of three (3) or more dwelling units, including
condominiums and manufactured homes.
9. Non-residential Property. A lot or parcel of land, with improvements such as a building,
structure, grading or substantial landscaping, which is not residential property, excluding publiclyowned
rights of way, recreational trails, and publicly-owned or privately-owned rail beds utilized
for railroad transportation.
10. Person. Each and every property owner and includes, but is not limited to, natural persons,
partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies, limited liability partnerships, joint ventures,
and all other legal entities of whatever kind or nature.
11. Residential Property. A lot or parcel of land developed exclusively for residential purposes,
including single-family units, duplexes, and multifamily units. The term includes condominiums
and manufactured homes.
12. Single Family Unit. Any residential property consisting of one (1) dwelling unit.
13. Stormwater Utility. The City owned and operated utility established under this Section for the
purpose of managing stormwater and imposing charges for the recovery of costs connected with
such stormwater management.
14. Undeveloped Property. Real property that is not developed by the addition of an improvement
such as a building, structure, grading or substantial landscaping. A property shall be considered
to be developed if:
a. A certificate of occupancy has been issued for a building or structure on the property or, if no
certificate of occupancy has been issued, upon substantial completion of construction or final
inspection; or
b. Construction of an improvement on the property is at least fifty percent (50%) completed and
such construction has ceased for a period of at least three (3) months, whether consecutive
or not.
9.03.44 Severability
A. Should any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or portion of this Section be declared to be
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of this
Section as a whole, but shall only affect the portion thereof declared to be invalid; and the City
Common Council hereby expressly states and declares that it would nonetheless have passed this
Section known that any such word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or portion of said Section
were invalid.
Division 5 Penalties and Legal Remedies
9.03.51 Penalties and Legal Remedies
A. General. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, or orders authorized by this Title,
will, unless otherwise indicated in this Title, upon first conviction, forfeit not less than Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00), together with the costs of prosecution for the first violation. For the second
violation of the same provision or order, the person shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) plus the costs of prosecution. A third offense for the same provision or
order under this Section, shall result, upon conviction, of a forfeit not less than One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00).
B. Legal Remedies. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section, shall, in addition to
the forfeiture stated above, be liable for any damage to the Water Utility, including loss of revenue
from the same of water or sewage service resulting from a violation of these rules and regulations.
Whether the Water Utility must take corrective action with respect to any parcel of property, such
parcel may be specifically assessed for such work. The payment of damages and correction of
violations may be a condition of providing future water or sewage service.
C. Other Remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the City or any authorized
officer from proceeding under any other ordinance of law or by any other enforcement method to
enforce any ordinance, regulation, or order.
Chapter 04 Private and Special Franchises
Division 1 Video and Cable Television Service Providers
9.04.11 General Provisions
A. The provisions of Sec. 66.0420, Wis. Stats. are hereby incorporated as though fully set forth herein.
The additional provisions of this Section supplement those provisions of the state statutes and
constitute and expression of the City’s home rule authority. Any person who owns, leases, operates,
controls, constructs or maintains a video service or cable television service shall comply at all times
with the provisions herein when constructing, operating or maintaining a video service or cable
television service in the City.
9.04.12 Definitions.
A. The terms used in this Section shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined in Sec.
66.0420(2) Wis. Stats. which is incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein.
9.04.13 Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Channel Monetary Support
A. Video Service Provider Fee. Vide Service Providers and Cable Operators shall pay, in addition to
the PEG Support Fee set forth in 9.04.14 below, a Video Service Provider Fee to the City in an
amount set forth in the City Fee Schedule.
B. Public Educational and Governmental (PEG) Channel Monetary Support. Video Service
Providers and Cable Operators may be required to pay, in addition to the Video Service Provider Fee
set forth in Subsection A. above, a monthly fee of Twenty-Five Cents ($ .25) per subscriber, which
payment shall be used to fund PEG access related external costs. The allocation of the PEG Channel
Monetary Support fee between public access and government access activities or channels shall be
at the sole discretion of the City and which allocation the City may alter at any time and without
notice. The City shall establish such fee by ordinance and shall provide no less than one-hundred
eighty (180) days written notice before such fee may be collected.
C. Supporting Documentation. Payment of the fees set forth in this Section shall be accompanied by
documentation verified by an agent or officer with the authority to legally bind the provider that is
sufficient for the City to verify the accuracy of the fees being paid by the provider. The failure to
provide such documentation shall subject the provider to a forfeiture of not less than One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) nor more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) per day until such time as
documentation is provided to the City.
9.04.14 PEG Channel Requirements
A. Number of PEG Channels. Video Service Providers and Cable Operators shall provide capacity for
up to three (3) PEG channels.
B. Location of PEG Channels. PEG channels must be carried on any service tier that is viewed by
more than fifty percent (50%) of the video service provider’s or cable operator’s customers. Video
service providers or cable operators may not charge an extra fee nor require the rental of special
equipment in order for their customers to view such PEG channels if such fees or equipment are not
required to view any of the non-PEG channels on such service tiers.
C. Quality of PEG Channels. Video Service Providers and Cable Operators shall not early a PEG
television signal in a lesser format or lower resolution than that afforded to a non-broadcast digital
programmer carried on the video or cable system. The signal quality of PEG channels shall be
indistinguishable or better than the signal of other non-PEG channels carried by the video service
provider or cable operator.
D. Origination Points. Video service providers and cable operators shall supply and maintain upstream
capacity from all origination points (a/k/a “live drops”) as the City may identify and shall provide
sufficient capacity for carriage of a television signal from each of these origination points at all times.
E. Substantial Utilization of PEG Channels and PEG Programming.
1. Procedures for Disconnection Due to Failure to Substantially Utilize PEG Channel.
a. Written Notice of Objection to Program as Not Locally Produced. A Video Service
Provider or Cable Operator must provide written notice to the PEG Channel Director within
ten days of the first or original airing of any program that the Video Service Provider or Cable
Operator is objecting to the program as having not been locally produced. Such notice shall
describe with particularity the program being objected to, the date and time the program was
first aired and the factual basis supporting the objection. Failure to timely provide this notice
waives the objection and therefore, such program will be counted towards the determination
of whether said PEG channel is being substantially utilized.
b. Written Notification of Failure to Substantially Utilize Channel. A Video Service Provider
or Cable Operator must provide written notification to any PEG channel Director within 10
days following any week in which the Video Service Provider or Cable Operator objects that
the PEG Channel has not been substantially utilized. Such notice shall describe with
particularity the time period being objected to, the dates and times during the week in which
qualifying programming was not aired and the factual basis supporting the objection. Failure
to timely provide this notice waives this objection and, therefore, such programming period
will be counted towards the determination of whether said PEG channel is being substantially
utilized.
c. Written Notification of Intention to Disconnect, Reprogram or Drop PEG Channel. A
Video Service Provider or Cable Operator must provide 120 Days advance written notification
to any PEG channel Director that the Video Service Provider or Cable Operator intends to
disconnect, reprogram or drop. A video Service Provider or Cable Operator may not
disconnect, reprogram or drop any PEG channel that it has not timely provided with such
written notice. Furthermore, should any PEG channel Director provide the Video Service
Provider or Cable Operator with a written response that the PEG channel was substantially
utilized during the time period in question or will be substantially utilized by the municipality,
the video service provider or cable operator shall not disconnect, reprogram or drop the PEG
channel.
d. Penalty for Failing to Provide Notice. If any Video Service Provider or Cable Operator
disconnects, reprograms or drops any PEG Channels without providing notice as required in
subs. a. through c. above, the video service provider or cable operator shall be subject to the
following:
i. Immediate reinstatement of the PEG channel to its location in the channel line-up prior to
the disconnection, reprogramming or dropping of the channel.
ii. A forfeiture of not less than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than Ten
Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) for each day that the PEG channel is disconnected,
reprogrammed or dropped.
2. Locally Produced Programming. “Locally produced programming” shall include all
programming produced by any PEG channel and shall include all programming that has not been
commercially aired as well as any program that was in part produced for original airing in the
broadcast market in which it was produced either in part or in whole. The term “locally produced”
shall not require that the programming was created, filmed or produced in the Onalaska or La
Crosse county area. PEG stations may share and exchange programming content in order to
meet the substantial utilization requirements of Wis. Stats. § 66.0420(5)(b).
F. Underwriting of Programming. PEG channels may transmit non-commercial programming to
subscribers generally or to specific recipients of video service providers or cable operators. Nothing
herein shall in anyway prohibit or prevent PEG channels from accepting grants or sponsorships in
support of such programming nor shall PEG channels be prohibited from acknowledging such grants
or sponsorships before, during or immediately after such PEG programming has been broadcast in
such a manner that is similar to the manner in which the Public Broadcasting System (PBS)
acknowledges the substantially similar support of its programming content. Such acknowledgements
shall comply with the requirements of 47 USC § 399b as though the PEG channel were a public
broadcast station.
G. Notice of Intention to Move PEG Channel Locations or Designation. Any Video Service Provider
or Cable Operator who intends to move any PEG Channel from the channel designations in effect at
the time this ordinance is enacted may only make such a change after providing 60 days’ advance
written notice to the affected PEG channel. Additionally, such Video Service Provider or Cable
Operator shall engage in a public education program of such intensity and duration as to reasonably
inform the general public of the proposed PEG channel designations.
9.04.15 Police Powers, Design and Construction Standards and Right of Ways
A. Subject to Police Powers. Video Service Providers and Cable Operators are subject to the police
power of the City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety, health and
welfare of the public. The grant of a statewide video or cable franchise, does not render or to any
extent lose, waive, impair or lessen the lawful powers and rights, now or hereafter vested in the City
under the Constitution and statutes of the State of Wisconsin to regulate the use of streets and public
ways or to regulate any matter affecting the safety, health and welfare of the public. The City shall
make the video service providers’ and cable operators’ history of compliance with such codes and
ordinances available to the Department of Financial Institutions so that the Department may
determine the provider or operators legal, financial and technical qualifications to provide video
services.
Division 2 Private and Special Franchise Ordinances
9.04.21 Ordinances
A. The following ordinances shall be known as private and special franchise ordinances and shall not be
printed in full in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Onalaska but shall be adopted by reference
and referred thereto as follows:
1. Franchise to Northern States Power Company under Section 182.017(7) of the Statutes for
Operation of Gas Utility Within the City. (Ord. 148.)
2. Franchise to Northern States Power Company under Section 182.017(7) of the Statutes for
Electrical Transmission Line. (Ord. 149.)
3. Franchise to La Crosse Water Power Company (now Mississippi Valley Public Service Company)
for Operation of Electrical Utilities and Construction and Maintenance of Electrical Lines.
(Ord. 41), (Res. No. 5), (Ord. 82), (Ord. 153).
4. Permission to the La Crosse Telephone Company to Erect and Maintain a Line of Telephone
Poles in the City of Onalaska. (Ord. 25.)
5. Permission Granted to the C B & Q Railroad Company the Right to Lay Track and Other Rights
and Privileges. (Ord. 34.)
6. Permission Granted to the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad Company the Right
to Lay Track and Other Rights and Privileges. (Ord. 39.)
Division 3 Penalties and Legal Remedies
9.04.31 Penalties and Legal Remedies
A. General. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, or orders authorized by this Title,
will, unless otherwise indicated in this Title, upon first conviction, forfeit not less than Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00), together with the costs of prosecution for the first violation. For the second
violation of the same provision or order, the person shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) plus the costs of prosecution. A third offense for the same provision or
order under this Section, shall result, upon conviction, of a forfeit not less than One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00).
B. Legal Remedies. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section, shall, in addition to
the forfeiture stated above, be liable for any damage to the Water Utility, including loss of revenue
from the same of water or sewage service resulting from a violation of these rules and regulations.
Whether the Water Utility must take corrective action with respect to any parcel of property, such
parcel may be specifically assessed for such work. The payment of damages and correction of
violations may be a condition of providing future water or sewage service.
C. Other Remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the City or any authorized
officer from proceeding under any other ordinance of law or by any other enforcement method to
enforce any ordinance, regulation, or order.
Title 10 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Code
Chapter 01 Traffic and Parking
Division 1 General Traffic Provisions
10.01.11 State Traffic Laws
A. Statutes Adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the statutory provisions in Chs.
340 to 349, Wis. Stats., describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, exclusive
of any regulations for which the statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment or exclusively state
charges, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this Chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any
act required to be performed or prohibited by any regulation incorporated herein by reference is required
or prohibited by this Chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutory
regulations in Chs. 340 to 349 incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this Chapter in order
to secure to the extent legally practicable uniform statewide regulation of vehicle traffic on the highways,
streets and alleys of the State of Wisconsin. Any person who shall, within the City of Onalaska,
Wisconsin, violate any provisions of any Statute incorporated herein by reference shall be deemed guilty
of an offense under this Section.
B. Other State Laws Adopted. There are also hereby adopted by reference the following sections of the
Wisconsin Statutes, but the prosecution of such offenses under this Chapter shall be as provided in Chs.
340 to 349, Wis. Stats., and the penalty for violation thereof shall be limited to a fine as hereinafter
provided in this Chapter:
1. Sec. 941.01, Wis. Stats., Negligent Operation of Vehicle off Highway.
2. Sec. 943.11, Wis. Stats., Entry into Locked Vehicle.
3. Sec. 943.23, Wis. Stats., Operating Motor Vehicle without Owner’s Consent.
C. Statutes Incorporated by Reference. Whenever this Chapter incorporates by reference sections of the
Wisconsin Statutes, such references shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes as from time to time amended,
repealed or modified by the Wisconsin Legislature.
10.01.12 State Administrative Code Provisions Adopted
A. Administrative Regulations Adopted. The following administrative rules and regulations adopted by the
Secretary of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and published in the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, exclusive of any provisions relating to the penalties to be imposed, and any future amendments,
modifications or revisions of said rules and regulations are hereby adopted by reference and made part of
this Chapter as if fully set forth herein:
1. Wis. Adm. Code - Trans 300 Transportation of School Children (Penalties of Sec. 341.01, Wis.
Stats. apply).
2. Wis. Adm. Code - Trans 304 Slow Moving Vehicle Emblem.
3. Wis. Adm. Code - Trans 305 Standards for Vehicle Equipment.
4. Wis. Adm. Code - Trans 325 Motor Carrier Safety Regulations.
5. Wis. Adm. Code - Trans 326 Motor Carrier Safety Requirements for Transportation of
Hazardous Materials.
B. Non-Compliance Prohibited. No person shall operate or allow to be operated on any
highway, street or alley within the City a vehicle that is not in conformity with the requirements of
Subsection A. above or the provisions of Sec.110.075 and Ch. 347, Wis. Stats.
C. Owner's Liability. Any owner of a vehicle not equipped as required by this Section who
knowingly causes or permits such vehicle to be operated on a highway in violation of this Section is guilty
of the violation the same as if they had operated the vehicle. The provisions of Sec. 347.04, Wis. Stats.,
relating to non-applicability of demerit points shall apply to owners convicted of a violation of this Section.
D. Safety Checks.
1. Operators to Submit to Inspection. When directed to do so by any law enforcement officer, the
operator of any motor vehicle shall stop and submit such vehicle to an inspection and such tests as
are necessary to determine whether the vehicle meets the requirements of this Section or that the
vehicle's equipment is in proper adjustment or repair. No person, when operating a motor vehicle,
shall fail to stop and submit such vehicle to inspection when directed to do so by any law enforcement
officer as herein provided.
2. Authority of Officer. Any law enforcement officer of the City is hereby empowered whenever they
shall have reason to believe that any provision of this Section is being violated to order the operator
of the vehicle to stop and to submit such vehicle to an inspection with respect to brakes, lights, turn
signals, steering, horns and warning devices, glass, mirrors, exhaust systems, windshield wipers,
tires and other items of equipment.
3. Vehicle to be Removed From Highway. Whenever, after inspection as provided by this Section, a
law enforcement officer determines that a vehicle is unsafe for operation, they may order it removed
from the highway and not operated, except for purposes of removal and repair until the vehicle has
been repaired as directed in a repair order. Repair orders may be in the form prescribed by the
Secretary of the Department of Transportation under Sec. 110.075(5), Wis. Stats., and shall require
the vehicle owner or operator to cause the repairs to be made and return evidence of compliance with
the repair order to the department of the issuing officer within the time specified in the order.
E. Penalty. Penalty for violation of any provision of this Section, including the provisions of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, incorporated herein by reference, shall be as provided in Division 5 Enforcement
and Penalties of this Chapter.
10.01.13 Office Traffic Signs and Control Devices; Prohibited Signs, Signals and Markers
A. Duty of City Engineer to Erect and Install Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Whenever traffic
regulations created by this Chapter, including a State of Wisconsin traffic regulation adopted by reference
in Section 10.01.11 above require the erection of traffic control devices for enforcement, the City
Engineer, with the cooperation of the Police Department, shall procure, erect and maintain uniform traffic
control devices conforming to the Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual promulgated by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation, giving notice of such traffic regulation to the users of the streets and
highways on which such regulations apply. Whenever State law grants discretion to local authorities in
erecting or placement of a uniform traffic control device, devices shall be erected in such locations and in
such a manner as, in the judgment of the City Engineer or their designee, will carry out the purposes of
this Chapter and give adequate warning to users of the streets and highways of the City of Onalaska.
B. Code Numbers to be Affixed to Official Traffic Control Devices. The City Engineer or their designee
shall cause to be placed on each official traffic control sign a guide board, mile post, signal or marker
erected under Subsection A., a code number assigned by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation,
and shall also place or direct the placing of code numbers on all existing official traffic control devices as
required by the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
C. Prohibited Signs and Markers in Highways. No person other than an officer authorized by this Chapter
to erect and maintain official traffic control devices or their designee shall place within the limits of any
street or highway maintained by the City any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument unless permission
is first obtained from the City Engineer or, where applicable, the State Highway Commission. Any sign,
signal, marker, mark or monument placed or maintained in violation of this Subsection shall be subject to
removal as provided in Subsection D. below.
D. Removal of Unofficial Signs, Markers, Signals and Traffic Control Devices. The City Engineer or
their designee may remove any sign, signal, marking or other device which is placed, maintained or
displayed in violation of this Chapter or state law. If the City official is refused entry to the property, they
may seek a warrant pursuant to Sec. 66.0119, Wis. Stats. Any charge imposed against premises for
removal of a prohibited or illegal sign, signal, marking or device shall be reported by the City Engineer or
their designee to the Common Council for review and certification at its next regular meeting following the
imposition of the charge. Any charge not paid on or before the next succeeding November 15 shall be
placed upon the tax roll for collection against the premises as other special municipal taxes.
10.01.14 Registration of Vehicle as Evidence
A. When any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this Chapter regulating
the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the
owner, as shown by the ownership registration of the vehicle supplied by the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation, or a comparable authority of any other state, shall be deemed to have committed the
violation for purposes of enforcement of this Chapter and specifically Section 10.01.11 and shall be
subject to the applicable penalty; provided the defenses defined and described in Sec. 346.485(5)(b),
Wis. Stats., shall be a defense for an owner charged with such violation under Sec. 346.485(5)(b), Wis.
Stats. as may be amended.
10.01.15 Warning Lights
A. School Bus Warning Lights. Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 346.48(2)(b)2., Wis. Stats., adopted
by reference in Section 10.01.11 to the contrary, school bus operators shall use flashing red warning
lights in residential and business districts when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or
unloaded at locations at which there are no crosswalk or traffic signals so that pupils must cross the street
or highway before being loaded or after being unloaded.
B. Blue Warning Lights on Police Vehicles.
1. Pursuant to Secs. 346.03(3), 346.94(14), 346.95(3) and 347.25(1), (lm)(a) and (b) and (4), Wis.
Stats., a marked police vehicle under Sec. 340.01(3)(a), Wis. Stats., may be equipped with a blue
light and a red light which flash, oscillate or rotate.
2. If the vehicle is so equipped, the lights shall be illuminated when the operator of the police vehicle is
exercising the privileges granted under Sec. 346.03, Wis. Stats. The blue light shall be mounted on
the passenger side of the vehicle and the red light shall be mounted on the driver side of the vehicle.
The lights shall be designed and mounted so as to be plainly visible and understandable from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet during normal sunlight and during hours of darkness. No operator
of a police vehicle may use the warning lights except when responding to an emergency call or when
in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, when responding to but not upon returning
from a fire alarm or when necessarily parked on a highway in a position which is likely to be
hazardous to traffic using the highway.
10.01.16 Accident Reports
A. The operator of every vehicle involved in an accident shall, immediately after such accident, file with the
Police Department a copy of the report required by Sec. 346.70, Wis. Stats., if any. If the operator is
unable to make such report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making
such report shall have the duty to comply with this Section. Such reports shall be subject to the provisions
and limitations of Secs. 346.70(4)(f) and 346.73, Wis. Stats., specifically that accident reports filed with
this Section shall be for the confidential use of the Department and shall not be open to public inspection
except as permitted by Sec. 346.70(4)(f), Wis. Stats.
10.01.17 Shortcuts
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle upon or across any street, highway,
sidewalk, driveway, filling station, business property or other commercial driveway or other similar surface
so as to cause such vehicle to cut the corners of such intersection by passing over the parking lot or
driveway used in the operation of such filling station, business property or residence, thereby avoiding
traveling through such intersection over the usual lanes of traffic. No person shall use a private or public
parking lot, filling station or other private property for purpose of gaining access from one street to another
or for purposes using it as an area in which to turn around upon entering from one street and returning to
the same street.
Division 2 Controlled Intersections; Street Traffic Regulations
10.01.21 Operators to Obey Traffic Control Devices
A. Every operator of a vehicle approaching an intersection at which an official traffic control device is erected
in accordance with this Chapter shall obey the direction of such official traffic control device as required
by the Wisconsin Statutes incorporated by reference in Section 10.01.11 of this Chapter. Operators of
vehicles approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering a highway as required by Sec. 346.46, Wis.
Stats. Operators approaching intersections at which a yield sign has been installed shall yield the right of
way to other vehicles as required by Sec. 346.18(6), Wis. Stats.
10.01.22 Speed Limits
A. State Speed Limits Adopted. The provisions of Secs. 346.57, 346.58 and 346.59, Wis. Stats., relating to
the maximum and minimum speed of vehicles are hereby adopted as part of this Section as if fully set
forth herein, except as specified by this Section pursuant to Sec. 349.11(3)(c), Wis. Stats., where the
Common Council has determined that the statutory speed limits are unreasonable, unsafe and imprudent
and has modified such limits.
B. Speed Limits Modified. The speed limits are modified as hereinafter set forth in this Subsection upon the
following streets or portions thereof between the limits designated:
1. The speed limit shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour where signed as school zones.
2. The speed limit shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour in all City parks unless otherwise posted.
C. Emergency Vehicles Exempted. The speed limit set forth in this Section shall not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles when operating in emergencies.
10.01.23 Through Streets and Stop Intersections
A. Designation. All enactments by the Common Council, pursuant to Secs. 349.07 and 349.08, Wis. Stats.,
designating and establishing arteries for through traffic or designating stop intersections or designating a
yield right of way intersection, or designating intersections controlled by traffic signals or designating
automobile stops for the protection of school children, are incorporated into this Chapter by reference,
and the City Clerk shall keep a record of all such enactments, including any amendments or additions
thereto.
1. Turns at Traffic Signals. All enactments by the Common Council, pursuant to Sec. 346.37(1)(c)1,
Wis. Stats., relating to the regulation of vehicular turning movements at red traffic control signal, are
incorporated into this Chapter by reference, and the City Clerk shall keep a record of all such
enactments, including any amendments or additions thereto.
2. Erection of Signs. A stop sign shall be placed on each street intersection, such street or portion
thereof, designated as an artery for through traffic. Every stop sign shall be located as close to
practicable to the nearest line of crosswalk on the approach side of the intersection, or if none, at the
nearest line of the intersecting roadway.
3. Vehicles to Stop. Every operator of a vehicle approaching an official sign shall cause such vehicle to
stop in the manner prescribed by Sec. 346.46, Wis. Stats.
10.01.24 Heavy Traffic Routes
A. Definitions. For purposes of this Section, heavy traffic shall be defined as:
1. All vehicles not operating completely on pneumatic tires; and
2. All vehicles or combination of vehicles, other than motor buses, designed or used for transporting
property of any nature and having a gross weight of more than twelve thousand (12,000) pounds.
B. Prohibited Routes.
1. Heavy traffic is prohibited from using any City street or highway not designated as a heavy traffic
route. This Section shall not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using a City street or highway for the
purpose of obtaining orders for supplies or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or from
any place of business or residence which has an entrance on such street or highway. Furthermore,
this Section will not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using any City streets over which are routed state
trunk highways. When being driven to the site of any construction, repair or maintenance of electric,
gas or water service, vehicles owned and operated by a public utility will be exempt from the
provisions of this Section.
2. Prohibited trucks which qualify for the exemptions shall use City streets only for the shortest distance
to or from the nearest point of said truck route.
3. No owner and/or operator shall use as a thoroughfare any alley, driveway, service drive, parking lot or
any private drive or any other area not designated as a public highway.
4. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section and in particular the definition set forth in Section
10.01.24.A., no person shall operate a vehicle in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or
eighteen (18) feet in length on CTH PH from the entrance to the “Crosseroads Center” to Braund
Street.
C. Administration. The City Engineer in cooperation with the Police Department shall administer this
Section. Administration shall include:
1. Posting of signs. Appropriate signs shall be posted giving notice of this Section and of the heavy
traffic routes established herein. Yellow sign posts may also be used to designate heavy traffic
routes.
2. Maps. Heavy traffic routes shall be shown on the Official Traffic Map.
3. Construction Equipment.
a. The City Engineer may grant temporary permits to allow heavy construction equipment to use
City streets or highways not designated as heavy traffic routes. These permits may be granted
only when use of a non-designated route is necessary for the equipment to reach a construction
site. No permit may be issued unless the person or corporation owning the equipment agrees to
reimburse and hold the City harmless for any damage done to the City street by the equipment
and/or any personal injury or property damage caused in part or in whole by the street damage.
b. City-owned or operated equipment is specifically excluded from the provisions of this Section.
4. Liability. Any operator, corporation, owner or agent whose heavy traffic vehicle damages any City
streets or highways in violating this Section shall be liable and required to pay the City the cost of
repair or replacement of the damaged street or highway.
5. Special and Seasonal Weight Limitations. The City Engineer shall have the authority to impose
special or seasonal weight limits on any highway, bridge or culvert maintained by the City to prevent
injury to the roadway or for the safety of the users of such bridge or culvert and shall be responsible
for erecting uniform traffic control devices giving notice thereof in accordance with the proving of
Section 10.01.13.
D. Streets Designated Class “B” Highways and Heavy Traffic Routes. All highways within the City of
Onalaska are hereby designated Class “B” highways subject to the weight limitations imposed on Class
“B” highways by the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference in Section 10.01.11, except the following
enumerated highways or parts of highways are designated heavy traffic routes:
1. Second (2nd) Avenue (south City limits to north City limits).
2. Main Street (2nd Avenue to Highway 53).
3. East Main Street (Highway 53 to east City limits or Highway 16).
4. Sand Lake Road.
5. Quincy Street (Highway 35 to Sand Lake Road).
6. 10th Avenue North (Quincy Street north to Vilas Street).
7. Redwood Street (Sand Lake Road to 10th Avenue North).
8. Troy Street (East Avenue north to Highway 35).
9. East Avenue North (Rider’s Club Road to north City limits).
10. Rider’s Club Road (East Avenue to Sand Lake Road).
11. 2nd Avenue SW (2nd Avenue to south City limits).
12. Oak Avenue South (Wilson Street to south City limits).
13. Oak Forest Drive (2nd Avenue SW to Main Street).
14. 12th Avenue South (Main Street to County Highway SS).
15. Wilson Street (3rd Avenue South to Oak Forest Drive).
16. Crossing Meadow Drive.
17. CTH SS (Schroeder Road to City limits).
18. CTH PH (Highway 157 to Crosseroads Center entrance).
19. CTH PH (Braund Street to Highway 16).
20. Braund Street (Highway 16 to CTH PH).
21. Theater Road (Highway 16 to CTH OS/East Main Street).
22. Mason Street (Highway 35 to East Avenue).
10.01.25 U-Turns Prohibited
A. Prohibited Where Posted. No person, while operating a vehicle, shall turn it so as to proceed in the
opposite direction at any intersection where there is posted a sign reading “No ‘U’ Turn” or words or
symbols to that effect.
B. Prohibited on Through Streets. No person, while operating a vehicle, shall turn it so as to proceed in
the opposite direction on any artery for through traffic.
10.01.26 Turn Only Lanes
A. Turn only lanes shall be marked appropriately by signage and lane markings.
10.01.27 One-Way Streets and Alleys and Restriction of Use of Alleys
A. Designation. All enactments by the Common Council, pursuant to Sec. 349.10, Wis. Stats., designating
one-way streets and alleys or restricting the use of alleys, are incorporated into this Chapter by reference;
and, the City Clerk shall keep a record of such enactments, including any amendments and additions
thereto.
B. Erection of Signs. Proper signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at
every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
C. Vehicular Traffic Regulated. On all one-way streets and alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the
indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic have been erected.
D. The alley immediately to the west of City Hall between Main Street and King Street shall be restricted to
use by emergency vehicles only.
Division 3 Parking Regulations
10.01.31 Restrictions on Parking; Posted Limits
A. Twenty-Four (24) Hour Limitation. No person, firm or corporation shall park or leave standing any
automobile, truck, tractor, trailer or vehicle of any description on any public street or public parking lot
owned by the City for a period of twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours in the same location at any
time, except that where more restrictive parking limits have been established the more restrictive limits
shall apply. Where a vehicle has a valid disabled parking identification permit on display, such vehicle
may remain parked on any public street or parking lot owned by the City for a period of up to seventy-two
(72) consecutive hours in the same location. When any law enforcement officer shall find a vehicle
standing upon a public street or parking lot in violation of the provisions of this Section, they are
authorized to move such a vehicle or to require the operator in charge thereof to move such vehicle to a
position permitted under this Chapter. The law enforcement officer may cause said vehicle to be removed
to a proper impoundment and storage area within the City where storage space is available and in such
case the owner shall pay the costs of removing said vehicle and the storage fees on said vehicle before
he may recover the possession thereof.
B. Posted Limitations.
1. The Common Council may designate certain streets or portions of streets as no parking or no
stopping or standing zones or as zones for parking by physically handicapped persons and may limit
the hours in which the restrictions apply. The City shall mark, by appropriate signs or yellow curbing,
each zone so designated in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 349.13, Wis. Stats.
2. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a law
enforcement officer or traffic control device, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in an established
no stopping or standing zone when stopping or standing is prohibited. No vehicle shall be parked in a
no parking zone during hours when parking is prohibited or where there is yellow curbing, except as
permitted by state law or elsewhere by this Code of Ordinances.
3. The Chief of Police and/or City Engineer shall have the authority to restrict the turning or movement
of heavy traffic and to impose special weight limitations on any highway or portions thereof which,
because of the weakness of the roadbed due to deterioration or climatic conditions or other special or
temporary conditions, would likely be seriously damaged or destroyed in the absence of any
restrictions on heavy traffic movement or special weight limitations.
4. No prohibition, restriction or limitation on parking or restriction on movement or turning of heavy traffic
and imposition of special weight limits is effective unless official traffic control devices or yellow
curbing have been placed or erected indicating the particular prohibition, restriction or limitation.
5. After the parking limitations on any given street have expired, any change of location of not more than
one (1) stall following expiration of the parking period allowed shall be and constitute a violation of
this Division.
C. Parking Restrictions Generally. All enactments of the Common Council prohibiting parking of vehicles
on designated streets, or parts thereof, or prescribing parking time limit or the manner of parking vehicles
thereon, are incorporated into this Chapter by reference thereto, and shall be as effective as if fully set
forth herein. The City Clerk shall keep a separate record of all such enactments, including any
amendments or additions thereto.
D. Parking Restrictions on School Grounds.
1. Pursuant to Sec. 118.105, Wis. Stats., the following regulations shall apply to the grounds of the
Onalaska School District located within the City of Onalaska:
a. Parking. All parking on any grounds of the Onalaska School District from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
shall be restricted to areas designated for parking by the School Board. When signs are erected
by the School Board giving notice of such restrictions, all persons shall park only in areas
designated and signed for visitor parking. All parking on grounds of the Onalaska School District
from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. shall be by permit only and shall be restricted to areas designated for
parking by the District Board. When signs are erected by the School Board giving notice of such
restrictions, no person shall park a motor vehicle in an area other than one for which they shall
have been issued a permit for without displaying a valid permit. There shall be no parking on said
grounds between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except when school functions extend past 11:00
p.m.; on such nights there shall be no parking one (1) hour after the function has concluded.
b. Vehicles Prohibited at Specified Times. No person shall at any time operate a motor vehicle,
other than a school bus or emergency vehicle, in or upon any drive designed for buses only by
sign during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and during the hours of 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on
any weekday during the months school is in session.
E. Alternate Side Parking Restrictions.
1. A system of alternate-side parking is hereby established for the City of Onalaska between 1:00 a.m.
and 8:00 a.m., vehicles shall be parked only on even-numbered sides of the streets on those nights
with an even calendar date and on odd-numbered sides of the streets on those nights with an odd
calendar date, except where parking is prohibited on one side of the street for the entire block
immediately across from a residence or building. Where parking is prohibited on one side of the street
for an entire block or more directly across from a residence or building, vehicles may be parked on
that permitted side nightly excluding corner properties.
2. Any vehicle which receives more than nine (9) citations for alternate side parking violations in any
alternate side parking season (November 15 - April 1) shall be towed for each violation after the ninth
(9th) violation that season.
3. This section shall not apply to any federal or state highway system within the City of Onalaska.
4. Signs shall be erected on all highways and town roads leading into the City, at the boundaries of the
City, stating “Alternate parking required and enforced from November 15 through April 1.
5. “Nights” as used in this section, shall mean the period between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
F. Parking Reserved for Vehicles with Disabled Parking Permits. When official traffic signs indicating
such restriction have been erected in accordance with Section 10.01.13 of this Chapter, no person shall
park, stop or leave standing any vehicle upon any portion of a street, highway or public or private parking
facility reserved for vehicles displaying special registration plates or identification cards or emblems
issued by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation or, for vehicles registered in another jurisdiction,
by such other jurisdiction designating the vehicle as one used by a physically disabled person.
G. Unlawful Removal of Parking Citations. No person other than the owner or operator thereof shall
remove a City parking ticket from a motor vehicle.
10.01.32 Temporary Parking Restrictions
A. Temporary Parking Restrictions. The City Engineer, by written order, may establish temporary no
parking regulations on any street or municipal parking lot within the City, when road construction, water
main break, snow or other similar condition requires such regulations for the safe movement of vehicular
traffic. Any such regulation shall not be effective unless official traffic signs or markers have been placed
stating the particular prohibition. The City Engineer shall, as soon as practicable, notify the Chief of
Police, or their designee, of any such regulation. Temporary parking regulations, established pursuant to
this subsection, shall supersede any other parking restriction which may be in conflict.
B. Temporary Parking Restrictions for Special Events. Pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 349.13, Wis.
Stats., the Chief of Police is authorized to direct that temporary "No Parking" signs be erected by the City
Engineer during parades, festivals and other authorized events that require the regulating of vehicle
stopping, standing or parking on City roadways. The temporary regulation shall be limited to the time the
event exists or is likely to exist.
10.01.33 Stopping or Parking Prohibited in Certain Specified Places
A. Parking Prohibited. No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended and whether temporarily or otherwise, in any of the following places:
1. Within an intersection;
2. On a crosswalk;
3. On a sidewalk or boulevard area at any time, except when parking in such place is clearly indicated
by official traffic signs or markers or parking meters. "Boulevard or Sidewalk Area" describes the area
between the sidewalk and the nearest curb line running parallel or generally parallel thereto or in the
absence of a sidewalk approximately ten (10) feet beyond the curb line;
4. Alongside or opposite any highway excavation or obstruction when such stopping or standing would
obstruct traffic or when pedestrian traffic would be required to travel in the roadway;
5. On the roadway side of any parked vehicle unless double parking is clearly indicated by official traffic
signs or markers;
6. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station;
7. Upon any portion of a highway where and at the time when stopping or standing is prohibited by
official traffic signs or yellow curbing indicating the prohibition of any stopping or standing;
8. In any place or manner so as to obstruct, block or impede traffic;
9. Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant, unless a greater distance is indicated by an official traffic sign;
10. Upon any portion of a highway where and at the time when parking is prohibited, limited or restricted
by official traffic signs;
11. Upon any bridge;
12. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail or a railroad crossing.
B. Parking in Driveways. No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle in any private driveway
without the permission of the owner or lessee of the property which such driveway is located, whether or
not such driveway is posted to limit or restrict parking.
C. Vehicles Not to Block Private Drive, Alley or Fire Lane. No vehicle shall, at any time, be parked so as
to unreasonably restrict the normal access to any private drive, alley or fire lane. Said access shall be
deemed to be unreasonably restricted if any vehicle is parked within four (4) feet of either side of said
access. Upon discovery by a law enforcement officer or upon complaint by the owner of any such blocked
drive, alley or fire lane, the Chief of Police may order said vehicle towed from such position at the risk and
expense of the owner of said vehicle.
D. Parking Vehicle for Repair Prohibited. No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any street, alley,
public right-of-way or municipal parking lot in the City for the purpose of repairing said vehicle.
E. Angle Parking. Angle parking diagonally is prohibited on all the streets, alleys and highways of the City
except in the places where vehicle parking markers indicate that the same is permissible. All vehicles
shall park parallel to and within one (1) foot of the curb except where streets and parking lots are so
marked for angle parking.
10.03.34 Unattended and Motorized Vehicles and Machinery; Parked Running Vehicles
A. Leaving Keys in Vehicle. No person shall permit any motor vehicle to stand or remain unattended on
any street, alley or other public area, except an attended parking area, unless either the starting lever,
throttle, steering apparatus, gear shift or ignition of the vehicle is locked and the key for such lock is
removed from the vehicle. Whenever any law enforcement officer shall find any vehicle standing with the
key in the ignition in violation of this Section, such officer is authorized to remove such key from the
vehicle and deliver the key to the Police Department for safe custody.
B. Parking Vehicles with Motor Running. No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle with
the motor or refrigerator unit running for more than thirty (30) minutes within three hundred (300) feet of
any residence within the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
C. Unattended Motorized Machinery. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit any
construction, compaction, earth grading or farm machinery which is self-propelled and moves upon the
surface of the earth and which is owned or controlled by them to stand for any period of time unattended
without locking the ignition system or otherwise rendering said machinery inoperable so as to prevent any
person unauthorized by the owner or individual in control thereof from starting said machinery.
10.03.35 Tow Away Zones
A. Tow Away Zone Policy.
1. Certain portions of the public highways and streets within the City of Onalaska shall be designated as
tow away zones. These tow away zones shall encompass areas of no stopping, no standing, no
parking, loading zones, bus stops, cab stands, one-way street parking limitation, alley parking
limitations, parking reserved for handicapped persons and parking with definite time limits of all types.
The Common Council shall designate tow away zones. The City Engineer shall arrange for the
erection of the official signs, markers and/or pavement painting. The placing of such signs, markers
and/or painting of the pavement shall be evidence of the existence of the regulation, and it shall be
unlawful to fail to comply with said signs or pavement markings.
2. Whenever any law enforcement officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway, alley or public
ground in violation of a prohibition, limitation or restriction on stopping, standing or parking provisions
of this Chapter, said officer is authorized to move said vehicle or to require the operator in charge
thereof to move such vehicle to a position where parking is not prohibited.
3. The Police Department may remove such vehicles either with its own facilities or by the employment
of towing cars from private garages, and such vehicles may be ordered stored by the Police
Department in any storage garage or rental parking ground.
4. Whenever any law enforcement officer shall find a vehicle stopped upon the highways listed and
designed as tow away zones, during such time as said tow away provision is in effect, and thereby in
violation of this Chapter, the officer is authorized and directed to cause the same to be removed by
said towing company as may be designated by the Police Department and stored by the Police
Department in any storage garage or rental parking ground until the owner shall represent to the
towing company a release from the Police Department authorizing the towing company to turn the
vehicle over to the operator or owner thereof.
5. The provisions of this Section shall apply to such streets and at such times as tow-away zones are
established.
6. Whenever any vehicle has been towed away under this Section and has not been redeemed by the
owner thereof for a period of ten (10) days from the day of the violation, it will be deemed an
abandoned vehicle and disposed of as provided for.
10.03.36 Parking of Vehicles over 12,000 Pounds or 18 Feet Restricted
A. No person owning or having control of any truck, trailer, truck power unit, motor home, camper,
commercial vehicles for hire, tractor, school bus, motor bus or recreation vehicle in excess of twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds gross weight, or over eighteen (18) feet in length, or having an enclosed area
of a height of more than eight (8) feet from the roadway, shall drive or park the same on any City street or
highway for more than a total of two (2) hours, whether consecutive or not, in any twenty-four (24) hour
period. The provisions of this Subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the lawful parking of such
equipment upon any street, avenue or public way in the City for the actual loading or unloading of goods,
ware or merchandise, providing, however, the "loading" and "unloading," as used in this Section, shall be
limited to the actual time consumed in such operation. The Common Council may designate specific truck
parking zones.
B. No person owning or having control of any boat, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, camper, or a trailer for
any of these recreational units, or a utility trailer, shall park such unit on any public street.
C. Any vehicle unlawfully parked under Subsection A. above may be removed from the street by order of the
Chief of Police, and the expense of so moving and storing such vehicle shall be paid by the operator or
owner of said vehicle as a fine in addition to the penalties hereafter prescribed.
10.01.37 Operation of Motor Vehicles in Public Parking Lots and Ramps
A. Unlicensed Operators Prohibited. No person who does not hold a valid operator's license shall operate
a vehicle in any public parking lot or ramp or in any private parking lot or ramp held out for the use of
parking for the general public.
B. Traffic Regulations Applicable. All provisions of Division 1 of this Chapter and of the Wisconsin
Statutes and laws incorporated herein by reference shall be applicable on any public parking lot or ramp
and on any private parking lot, road or ramp held out for use for the general public for parking or vehicular
traffic.
10.01.38 Removal of Illegally Parked Vehicles
A. Hazard to Public Safety. Any vehicle parked, stopped or standing upon a highway or public parking lot
or ramp in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is declared to be a hazard to traffic and public
safety.
B. Removal by Operator. Such vehicle shall be removed by the operator in charge, upon request of any
law enforcement officer, to a position where parking is permitted or to a private or public parking or
storage premises.
C. Removal by Law Enforcement Officer. Any law enforcement officer after issuing a citation for illegal
parking, stopping or standing of an unattended vehicle in violation of this Chapter, is authorized to remove
such vehicle to a position where parking is permitted.
D. Removal by Private Towing Service.
1. Removal from Public Property. The officer may order a motor carrier holding a permit to perform
vehicle towing services, a licensed motor vehicle salvage dealer or a licensed motor vehicle dealer
who performs vehicle towing services (“Towing Service”) to remove and store such vehicle in any
public storage garage or rental parking grounds or any facility of the person providing the towing
services.
2. Removal from Posted Private Property. A Towing Service may, at the request of a private property
owner who has posted private no parking signs in compliance with Sec. 349.13, Wis. Stats. as may
be amended, remove and store such vehicle at the facility of the Towing Service.
3. Removal from Non-Posted Private Property. A Towing Service may, at the request of a private
property owner who has not posted private no parking signs in compliance with Wisconsin Statutes
on their property, remove and store such vehicle only after a citation for illegal parking has been
issued by a law enforcement officer.
4. Notification to the Police Department. Prior to removal of a vehicle from private property in the City
the Towing Service shall provide the City of Onalaska Police Department with notice by electronic
mail, the following information:
a. Name and telephone number of the towing service.
b. Make and model of the vehicle being removed.
c. The license plate number of the vehicle being removed, unless license plates are not attached to
the vehicle.
d. The vehicle identification number of the vehicle being removed, unless the vehicle identification
number is not visible through the vehicle windshield adjacent to the left windshield pillar.
5. Towing and Storage Charges. In addition to other penalties provided in this Chapter, the owner or
operator of a vehicle so removed shall pay the actual cost of moving, towing and storage. If the
vehicle is towed or stored by a Towing Service, actual charges regularly paid for such services shall
be paid including a municipal services fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule which
shall be paid to the Towing Service and remitted by the Towing Service to the City of Onalaska. If the
vehicle is stored in a public storage garage or rental facility, customary charges for such storage shall
be paid. Upon payment, a receipt shall be issued to the owner of the vehicle for the towing or storage
charge.
10.01.38 Inoperable, Wrecked or Discarded Vehicles
A. Storage Prohibited. No person owning or having custody of any partially dismantled, non-operable,
wrecked, junked or discarded motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to remain on any public highway,
parking lot or ramp longer than twenty-four (24) hours after notification thereof by the Police Department.
Notification shall be accomplished by placing in a conspicuous place on the vehicle and by mailing or
serving upon the owner or occupant in charge of the premises a written notice setting forth briefly the
applicable provisions of this Section and the date of the notice. Any vehicle so tagged which is not
removed within twenty-four (24) hours after notice is declared to be a public nuisance and may be
removed as provided in Title 16.
B. Exemptions. This Section shall not apply to a motor vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner authorized by the City.
Division 4 Miscellaneous Provisions
10.01.41 Disorderly Conduct with a Motor Vehicle
A. Definition. Disorderly Conduct with a Motor Vehicle shall mean the deliberate operation of a motor
vehicle in a manner that is unnecessarily and unreasonably violent, abusive, loud, maneuvered or
accelerated in such a manner so as to disturb, annoy or endanger any person or property in any public or
private area. It includes, but is not limited to the unnecessary and unreasonable spinning of wheels,
squealing of tires, accelerating the engine or vehicle or both, raising one or more vehicles off the surface,
use of the horn, loud playing of radios or audio entertainment, emission of smoke, gases or other foul
orders that are disagreeable, leaving the highway to travel across property to avoid an intersection,
official traffic control sign, signal or other device and deliberately causing the engine to backfire. The
motor vehicle is not required to be moving at the time of commission of the disorderly conduct.
B. Conduct Prohibited. No person shall by or through the use of any motor vehicle, including but not limited
to an automobile, truck, motorcycle, minibike, moped or snowmobile, cause or carry out Disorderly
Conduct with a Motor Vehicle.
10.01.42 Railroad Regulations
A. Obstruction of Railroad Crossings. No person shall leave standing or stop or permit or allow to stand
or stop any railroad train, engine or car upon any street, alley or highway crossing within the City so as to
obstruct public travel for a period of time greater than ten (10) minutes without opening said street, alley
or crossing for at least five (5) minutes. Any railroad company that shall violate this Section shall be
subject to a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per Sec. 192.292, Wis. Stats.
10.01.43 Pedestrian Regulations
A. Pedestrian Obedience to Traffic Control Devices and Regulations.
1. Obedience to Traffic Control Devices. No person shall fail to obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device when traveling as a pedestrian on any highway within the City of Onalaska
unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer.
2. Crossing of Crosswalks. No pedestrian shall cross at a crosswalk except on the right half thereof
whenever practicable. Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon an
adjacent roadway except when the sidewalk is visibly unsafe, obstructed or closed to public travel.
B. Prohibited Pedestrian Crossings. No pedestrian shall cross between adjacent intersections, unless
such crossing is permitted by official traffic control devices.
10.01.44 Motor Vehicles on Pedestrian Ways and Overpasses
A. No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle on any pedestrian way or pedestrian overpass within
the City of Onalaska except law enforcement or municipal or county maintenance vehicles.
10.01.45 School Crossing Guards
A. Authority. Adult persons hired by the Police Department to act as "School Crossing Guards" shall have
the authority to stop vehicular traffic and to keep it stopped as long as necessary at their respective
school crossings for the purpose of permitting school children to cross the street. Sec. 349.215, Wis.
Stats.
10.01.46 Driving over Curbing or Safety Islands Prohibited; Boulevard Parking.
A. Driving Over Curbing Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be driven or backed over
any curbing in the City of Onalaska.
B. Parking Prohibited on Boulevard. No vehicles shall stand, stop or park on the boulevard/terrace portion
of a public right-of-way. This Section is to limit the standing, stopping or parking on the right of way as
opposed to roadway, meaning to limit all standing, stopping or parking on the boulevard/terrace or
sidewalks with the exception of vehicles with permits, utility vehicles and municipal vehicles.
C. Driving Over Safety Zones or Islands Prohibited. Whenever safety zones or safety islands are marked
in accordance with the Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual, no operator of a vehicle shall at
any time drive through or over a safety zone or safety island.
10.01.47 Miscellaneous Lane and turn Controls
A. The City Engineer, in cooperation with the Chief of Police, is authorized, when in their judgment the safety
of the situation requires, to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections directing
that a different course from that specified in Sec. 346.31, Wis. Stats., be traveled by vehicles turning at
the intersection and to mark lanes for traffic designating separate lanes for slow moving traffic or for traffic
moving in a particular direction.
10.01.48 Use of Compression Braking “Jake Brakes” in the City
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to employ any engine braking system which utilizes engine exhaust to
slow the vehicle within the corporate limits of the City of Onalaska except in cases of emergency. Such
braking system is commonly referred to as compression braking or a “jake brake”.
Division 5 Enforcement and Penalties
10.01.51 Penalties
A. Penalty. The penalty for violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be a fine as hereafter provided,
together with court costs and fees prescribed by Secs. 814.63(1) and (2) or 814.65(1), Wis. Stats., the
penalty assessment for moving traffic violations and the driver improvement surcharge imposed by Sec.
346.655, Wis. Stats., where applicable. Payment of the judgment and applicable court costs, fees,
assessments and surcharges may be suspended by the sentencing court for not more than sixty (60)
days. Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older who shall fail to pay the amount of the fine, court
costs, any penalty assessment or driver surcharge or other penalty imposed for violation of any provision
of this Chapter may, upon order of the court entering judgment therefore and having jurisdiction of the
case, be imprisoned until such fine, costs and assessment are paid, but not exceeding ninety (90) days.
B. Other Sanctions.
1. By Court. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing court to exercise
additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin Statutes to suspend or revoke the operating privileges
of the defendant, order the defendant to submit to assessment and rehabilitation programs or to
attend traffic safety school in addition to payment of a monetary penalty or in lieu or imprisonment.
2. By Municipality. No person who has been convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter
shall be issued a license or permit by the City Clerk, except dog and cat licenses, until the fine
imposed for such violation and any penalty assessment, court costs and fees or surcharge is paid.
C. Fines for Violation of Uniform Moving Traffic Regulations. Fines for violations of any moving traffic
regulation set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference in Section 10.01.11 shall conform to
the penalty or fine permitted to be imposed for violations of the comparable Wisconsin Statute, including
any variations or increases for subsequent offenses; provided, however, that this Subsection shall not be
construed to permit prosecution under this Chapter for any offense described in Chs. 341 to 348, Wis.
Stats., for which an imprisonment penalty or fine may be imposed upon the defendant.
D. Fines for Parking Violations.
1. Fines for Uniform Statewide Parking, Stopping and Standing Offenses. Minimum and maximum
fines for violation of non-moving traffic violations adopted by reference in Section 10.01.11. as
described in Ch. 341 to 348, Wis. Stats., shall be as found in the current edition of the Revised
Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule and also set forth on the City’s Parking Violation Penalty
Chart available on the City of Onalaska website, and at the City Clerk’s office and Joint Municipal
Court’s office.
2. Penalty for Other Parking Violations. Shall be as set forth on the City’s Parking Violation Penalty
Chart available on the City of Onalaska website, and at the City Clerk’s office and Joint Municipal
Clerk’s Office.
3. Winter Alternate Parking. The fine for violation of the provisions of Section 10.01.31.E. of this
Chapter relating to overnight parking from November 15 through April 1 and snow removal from
public parking lots shall be as set forth on the City’s Parking Violation Penalty Chart available on the
City of Onalaska website and at the City Clerk’s office and Joint Municipal Clerk’s office. In the event
the fine is not paid within forty-five (45) days of the date of violation, the City reserves the right to
suspend the operating privileges of the owner and/or the registration of the vehicle involved in such
violation until the penalty is paid in full. If the vehicle is towed it will be at the owner’s expense. If a
vehicle is determined by the City Engineer or their designee to be a hindrance to the snow
plowing/removal, they can order the tow of the vehicle. If a vehicle has received more than nine (9)
parking tickets in a season, that vehicle will be towed at the direction of the police each time it is in
violation during the remainder of the season.
E. Other Violations. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter for which a penalty is not
otherwise established by this Section shall be subject to a fine of not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor
more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
10.01.52 Enforcement
A. Enforcement Procedures.
1. How Enforced. This Chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Wisconsin Statutes and this Section.
2. Applicable Court Procedures. Except where otherwise specifically provided by the laws of the State
of Wisconsin or this Code, the traffic regulations in this Chapter shall be enforced in the Circuit Court
for La Crosse County or in Joint Municipal Court.
B. Citations Enforced.
1. Uniform Citation and Complaint. The Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Citation and Complaint described
and defined in the Wisconsin Statutes shall be used for enforcement of all provisions of this Chapter
except those provisions which describe or define non-moving traffic violations and violations of Secs.
346.71 through 346.73, Wis. Stats. Violations of Secs. 346.71 through 346.73, Wis. Stats., shall be
reported to the District Attorney and the Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Citation shall not be used in such
cases except upon written request of the District Attorney.
2. Parking Citations. The Chief of Police shall select a citation for use in enforcing the non-moving
traffic offenses in this Chapter. Such citation shall be used for enforcement of non-moving traffic
regulations created or adopted by this Chapter, including violations of non-moving traffic regulations
defined and described in the Wisconsin Statutes, adopted by reference in Section 10.01.11, and all
provisions regarding non-moving traffic violations in this Chapter. The citation for non-moving traffic
violations shall contain a notice that the person cited may pay the fine for violation of a non-moving
traffic regulation and penalty thereof by complying with Subsection C.2. of this Section. Non-moving
traffic citations may be issued by law enforcement officers or by civilian employees of the Police
Department.
C. Payments.
1. Uniform Traffic Offenses.
a. Who May Make. Persons arrested or cited for violation of moving traffic offenses created by this
Chapter and allowed to dispense of their citation by a payment under Sec. 345.26(1)(a), Wis.
Stats., shall be permitted to make payments and pay their fine with a plea of no contest or
released by the arresting officer in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made by persons arrested for violations of this
Chapter in accordance with Secs. 66.0111 and 345.26, Wis. Stats., whenever the provisions of
Sec. 345.27, Wis. Stats., are inapplicable to such violations. Fines may be paid by making
payment online or as set forth in Subsection b. below.
b. Delivery or Mailing of Payment. Any person stipulating guilt or no contest under the preceding
subsection may make the payment required under Sec. 345.26, Wis. Stats. or, if the payment is
not established under such Statute, shall pay a fine penalty as provided in the Deposit Schedule
approved by the Common Council. Payments may be paid online, brought or mailed to the City
Finance Department before the scheduled court appearance in lieu of court appearance.
c. Receipt Required. Except where payment is made online or in person, the official or person
receiving the payment on behalf of the Municipal Court shall furnish and deliver or mail an original
receipt for such payment to the alleged violator within two (2) business days of receipt.
2. Non-moving Traffic Offenses.
a. Direct Payment of Penalty Permitted. Persons cited (summons not issued) for violation of
non-moving traffic offenses described and defined in this Chapter may pay the penalty thereof
and avoid court prosecution by paying online, mailing or bringing the applicable fine to the City of
Onalaska Finance Department on or before their scheduled initial appearance date or within the
applicable time frame as set forth on their parking citation.
b. Registration Suspension. If the alleged violator does not pay the fine or appear in court in
response to the citation for a non-moving traffic violation on the date specified in the citation or, if
no date is specified on the citation, within twenty-eight (28) days after the citation is issued, the
City may ask the Wisconsin Department of Transportation to suspend the registration of the
vehicle involved or refuse registration of any vehicle owned by the person pursuant to the
provisions of Sec. 345.28(4), Wis. Stats., and the City’s Registration Suspension Program
outlined in Section 3 below.
3. Registration Suspension Program.
a. The City shall participate in the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic Violation and
Registration Program as set forth in Sec. 345.28, Wis. Stats., and Wis. Adm. Code Trans. 128
and all amendments or changes thereto.
b. The City of Onalaska Treasurer is hereby designated as a delegated authority for purposes of
Secs. 85.13 and 345.28, Wis. Stats., and Wis. Adm. Code Trans. 128. The City’s Treasurer
Department is authorized to perform, on behalf of the City, all functions required of a local
authority under said Statutes and Code including, but not limited to:
i. Preparing and completing all forms and notices, notifying the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation of unpaid citations for non-moving traffic violations;
ii. Specifying whether the registration of vehicles involved in unpaid citations for non-moving
traffic violations should be suspended and/or whether registration should be refused for any
vehicle owned by persons with unpaid citations for non-moving traffic violations;
iii. Determining the method by which the City will pay the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation for administration of the program; establishing the effective date for
participation;
iv. And taking such other action as is necessary to institute and continue participation in the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic Violation and Registration Program.
c. The City Treasurer is hereby authorized to assign designee(s) to perform such acts as are
necessary to effectuate this Subsection.
d. In addition to all applicable fines and court costs, the cost of using the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation Traffic Violation and Registration Program shall be assessed as permitted by Sec.
345.28(4)(d), Wis. Stats. The City of Onalaska may refuse to notify the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation of payment on a citation until all applicable fines and costs, including costs
assessed under the preceding sentence, are paid.
e. This Subsection shall not be interpreted as requiring that all unpaid citations for non-moving traffic
violations be processed through the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic Violation and
Registration Program. The City's participation in such program shall be in addition to any and all
other means legally available to enforce such citations.
Chapter 02 Bicycles, Skateboards, In-Line Skates & E-Bikes
Division 1 Bicycle Regulations
10.02.11 Definitions
A. The following definitions shall be applicable to this Chapter:
1. Bicycle. Every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals and having wheels, any two (2) of
which are not less than fourteen (14) inches in diameter.
2. Bicycles' Lane. That portion of a roadway set aside for exclusive use of bicycles and so designated
by appropriate signs and markings by the responsible governing body.
3. Bike Route. Any bicycle lane, bicycle way or highway which has been duly designated by the
responsible governing body and identified by appropriate signs and markings.
4. Bicycle Way. Any path or sidewalk, or portion thereof, designated for the use of bicycles by the
responsible governing body.
5. Carrier. Any device attached to a bicycle designed for carrying articles.
6. Identification Tag. A metal plate or sticker indicating that a bicycle is registered.
7. Right-of-Way. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to
another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and
proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
10.02.12 Manner of Operation Restricted
A. No bicycle shall be allowed to proceed in any street in the City unless the rider maintains the bicycle
under control at all times.
10.02.13 Lighting and Other Equipment
A. No person may operate a bicycle during hours of darkness unless the bicycle is equipped with, or the
operator is wearing, a lamp emitting a white light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the
front of the bicycle. A bicycle shall also be equipped with a red reflector that has a diameter of at least two
(2) inches of surface area on the rear so mounted and maintained as to be visible from all distances fifty
(50) to five hundred (500) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500)
feet to the rear may be used in lieu of the red reflector.
B. All bicycles must be equipped with a brake in good working condition, adequate to control the movement
of and to stop the bicycle whenever necessary.
10.02.14 Rules of the Road
A. The provisions of Chs. 346 and 347, Wis. Stats., and applicable City Ordinances shall govern the
operation of bicycles where appropriate.
10.02.15 Bicycle Regulations
A. Rules for Turning.
1. Signal Required. No bicycle operator shall suddenly stop, slow down or turn without giving an arm
signal required by state law for the operation of motor vehicles.
2. Prohibited Turns. Whenever a uniform traffic control device is erected indicating that no right or left
turn or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of such device,
except after dismounting from the bicycle to make such turn, in which event said person shall then
obey the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable to pedestrians.
3. Right Turns. Every person operating a bicycle intending to turn to the right at an intersection, alley or
driveway shall approach the turning point in the line of traffic nearest the right-hand curb of the street.
4. Left Turns. Every person operating a bicycle intending to turn left at an intersection or to enter an
alley or driveway shall approach the point of turning in the line of traffic nearest to the center of the
roadway and shall pass to the left of the center of the intersection before turning unless otherwise
directed by official traffic control devices. At intersections where traffic is moving in the opposite
direction, if it is not safe for the operator to make a left turn as above described, they shall stay in the
right-hand lane and drive to the opposite corner, dismount and walk the bicycle to the left-hand corner
and proceed. A bicycle operator may also make a left turn by driving to the opposite corner and then
turning left and driving in a normal driving position.
a. Trick Riding. No person shall operate a bicycle upon the streets of said City in any other manner
which necessitates the element of unusual extraordinary skill and involves unnecessary risk.
b. Carrying Extra Passengers. No bicycle may be used to carry or transport more persons at one
(1) time than the number for which it was designed. Except that a bicycle otherwise designed to
carry only the operator may be used to carry or transport a child seated in an auxiliary child’s seat
or trailer designed for attachment to a bicycle seat or trailer securely attached to the bicycle
according to the manufacturer’s directions.
c. Emerging From Alley or Driveway. The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway
or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
d. Bicycles Not to be Pulled by Moving Vehicles. No person riding upon a bicycle shall cling or
attach themselves or their bicycle to any other moving vehicle upon a street or highway, nor shall
the operator of any such bicycle tow or draw any coaster wagon, sled, person on roller skates, toy
vehicles or any other similar vehicle on such highway.
e. Speed. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent
under existing conditions or in excess of any posted speed limit.
f. Sidewalk Operation. The operation of bicycles on the public sidewalks is permitted provided that
every person operating a bicycle on a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and
shall exercise due care and give an audible signal when passing a bicycle rider or pedestrian
proceeding in the same direction.
B. Bicycle Parking. No person shall park any bicycle against windows or in the main traveled portion of any
sidewalk or highway nor in such manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrians, traffic or property. If
there is no bicycle rack or other facility for the parking of bicycles in the vicinity, the operator may park a
bicycle on the sidewalk in an upright position parallel to and within twenty-four (24) inches of the curb. No
person shall chain a bicycle to any post, pole, tree or other structure located upon the right-of-way of any
highway except to a rack expressly provided therefor.
10.02.16 Applicability of Regulations
A. Regulations and restrictions contained in this Chapter are applicable to persons operating bicycles upon
any street, highway, bicycle way or bicycle path or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles, except as expressly stated herein.
10.02.17 Parental Responsibility
A. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or permit any child or ward to
violate any of the provisions of this Chapter.
Division 2 Bicycle Registration
10.02.21 Inspection and Registration of Bicycles
A. Registration Required. No person shall operate a bicycle upon any street, sidewalk, public property,
bicycle pathway or public highway within the City of Onalaska unless said bicycle shall first have been
properly registered and an identification sticker attached as hereinafter provided.
1. Form of Registration.
a. How Made. Registration shall be made by filing with the Onalaska Police Department on forms
provided by the City of Onalaska giving the name, address and age of the owner and a complete
description of the bicycle, including the name of the manufacturer, style, model, serial number
and color.
b. Registration Fee. There shall be no fee for registering a bicycle.
c. Identification Sticker. The registering employee or officer shall issue to the registrant a
registration slip and an identification sticker. The identification sticker shall be immediately affixed
to the registered bicycle, be serially numbered to correspond with the registration number and
shall be firmly attached to the bicycle for which issued and kept visible and clean at all times.
d. Unsafe Bicycles Not to Be Registered. No bicycle shall be registered which is in an unsafe
mechanical condition.
e. Record of Registration. A duplicate registration slip shall be filed with the Police Department as
a public record.
f. Period of Registration. All bicycle registrations shall be effective and valid as long as the owner
retains title and possession of the bicycle.
g. Owner to Register. The licensing authority shall not register any bicycle which it knows or has
reasonable grounds to believe is not owned by or lawfully in the possession of the applicant.
h. Change of Ownership. All bicycles must be registered within ten (10) days of purchase. Within
ten (10) days after any bicycle registered as provided herein is sold or transferred to a new owner
or dismantled and taken out of operation, the person in whose name the bicycle is registered
shall report such information to the Police Department. The Police Department shall thereupon
cancel the registration of the bicycle and the new owner, if any, shall be responsible for obtaining
a new registration. In the case of dismantling or taking out of operation, the owner shall notify the
Police Department.
B. Bicycles to be Kept in Safe Condition. No bicycle shall be registered which is in an unsafe mechanical
condition. The Chief of Police shall have authority to suspend the registration of and remove the
identification tag from any bicycle or to impound any bicycle operated contrary to any State law or City
Ordinance, or which is being operated in an unsafe mechanical condition. Such suspension and removal
or impounding shall continue for a period not to exceed ten (10) days, but the registration shall not be
reinstated or such identification tag replaced while such bicycle is in unsafe condition. Such suspension
and removal shall be in addition to other penalties provided for herein.
C. Change of Ownership. Within ten (10) days after any bicycle registered hereunder shall have changed
ownership or been dismantled and taken out of operation, such information shall be reported to the Police
Department by the person in whose name the bicycle has been registered.
D. Registration to be Displayed. The identification tag issued under this Section shall be affixed to the
registered bicycle so as to be plainly seen and read and shall remain so affixed until ordered removed by
the Police Department for cause, or until expiration of the registration.
E. Exemption from Registration. Any non-resident may operate a bicycle in the City of Onalaska without
registration.
F. Removal and Alteration of Identification Stickers.
1. Removal Prohibited. No person shall remove an identification sticker from a bicycle during the
period for which issued except upon a transfer of ownership or when the bicycle is dismantled and no
longer operated upon any highway within the City.
2. Alteration Prohibited. No person shall alter or counterfeit any identification sticker.
G. Unclaimed or Unidentified Bicycles. All abandoned or unidentified bicycles shall be delivered to the
Police Department for storage, and all such bicycles remaining in the hands of the Police Department at
the end of thirty (30) days may be sold at auction.
Division 3 Skateboards & In-Line Skates
10.02.31 Skateboard Regulations
A. State Laws Applicable. Every person using a skateboard upon a public roadway shall be subject to the
provisions of all ordinances and state laws applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those
provisions with reference to equipment of vehicle and those provisions which by their nature would have
no application.
B. Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a skateboard in any of the following
places:
1. On any sidewalk in any business district. For purposes of this Section, business district shall be
defined as any area primarily commercial in nature;
2. In any public parking ramp or parking lot;
3. On any public property where signs prohibit it;
4. On private property, unless permission has been received from the owner, lessee, or person in
charge of that property.
C. Skateboarders to Stay on Right Side of Road. Every person using skateboards on a public roadway
shall keep as close to the right-hand curb as possible.
D. Clinging to Moving Vehicles Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person using a skateboard to cling
to or attach to any bicycle or other moving vehicle upon a public roadway.
E. Observance of Traffic Regulations. Every person using a skateboard upon a public roadway shall stop
for all arterial and automatic traffic signals.
F. Yield Right-of-Way. Operators or riders of skateboards shall yield the right-of-way to other pedestrians
using City sidewalks, and shall not otherwise endanger or interfere with the pedestrian traffic on those
sidewalks.
G. Operating Two (2) Abreast Prohibited. Every person when using a skateboard upon a public roadway
shall proceed in single file only.
H. Night Skateboarding. No person shall use skateboards upon a public right-of-way thirty (30) minutes
after sunset and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise unless that person is wearing a lamp emitting a white
light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and red reflective material or red
light visible at least five hundred (500) feet when illuminated by the beams of motor vehicle headlamps.
10.02.32 In-Line Skate Regulations
A. State Laws Applicable. Every person using in-line skates upon a public roadway shall be subject to the
provisions of all ordinances and state laws applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those
provisions with reference to equipment of vehicle and those provisions which by their nature would have
no application.
B. Sidewalks or Walkways. Every person using in-line skates upon a sidewalk or walkway shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall exercise due care when passing any other persons proceeding in
the same direction.
C. In-line skaters to Stay on Right Side of Road. Every person using in-line skates on a public roadway
shall keep as close to the right-hand curb as possible.
D. Clinging to Moving Vehicles Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person using in-line skates to cling
to or attach to any bicycle or other moving vehicle upon a public roadway.
E. Observance of Traffic Regulations. Every person using in-line skates upon a public roadway shall stop
for all arterial and automatic traffic signals.
F. Operating Two (2) Abreast Prohibited. Every person when using in-line skates upon a public roadway
shall proceed in single file only.
G. Yielding to Traffic. The operator of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a user on in-line skates in the
same manner as for bicyclists and pedestrians under Secs. 346.23, 346.24, 346.37 and 346.38, Wis.
Stats. Every person when using in-line skates shall, upon entering a public roadway, yield the right-of-way
to motor vehicles, except that a person using in-line skates shall be subject to the same regulations as
bicyclists and pedestrians under Sec. 346.23, 346.24, 346.37 and 346.38, Wis. Stats.
E. Night skating. No person shall use in-line skates upon a public right-of-way thirty (30) minutes after
sunset and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise unless that person is wearing a lamp emitting a white light
visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and red reflective material or red light
visible at least five hundred (500) feet when illuminated by the beams of motor vehicle headlamps.
Division 4 Electric Bikes
10.02.41 Definition
A. Electric Bicycle. Shall mean a bicycle that is equipped with fully operative pedals for propulsion by
human power and an electric motor of seven hundred and fifty (750) watts or less and that meets the
requirements of any of the following classifications:
1. Class 1 Electric Bicycle. An electric bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only
when the rider is pedaling and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed
of twenty (20) miles per hour.
2. Class 2 Electric Bicycle. An electric bicycle that may be powered solely by the motor and is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of twenty (20) miles per hour.
3. Class 3 Electric Bicycle. An electric bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only
when the rider is pedaling and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed
of twenty-eight (28) miles per hour.
10.02.42 Permitted Users of Electric Bicycles
A. Operators of an electric bicycle must possess a valid driver’s license, a special restricted operator’s
license or an instruction permit.
10.02.43 Registration Required
A. Owners of Electric Bicycles shall register their electric bicycles under the same regulations for bicycles as
set forth in Division 2 Section 10.01.21.
10.02.44 Rules of the Road
A. The provisions of Chs. 346 and 347, Wis. Stats., and applicable City Ordinances shall govern the
operation of electric bicycles where appropriate.
10.02.45 Use of Electric Bicycles on Sidewalks, City Paths and Crosswalks Prohibited
A. Electric Bicycles are prohibited on City sidewalks, paths and crosswalks. Electric Bicycles operated
without the motor on and using only human power may be used on any pathways allowing bicycles.
Division 5 Enforcement and Penalties
10.02.51 Enforcement
A. Enforcement. Any offender who shall disregard the rules and regulations governing the operation of
bicycles in this Chapter may be directed to appear before the Coulee Region Joint Municipal Court who
shall dispose of such person's case in the manner prescribed by the Court. Bicycle riders under the age
of fourteen (14) years shall be issued a special bicycle violation ticket for violation of any of the provisions
of this Chapter.
B. Offenders Age Twelve (12) and Older. Any person having attained the age of twelve (12) years may, in
the discretion of the Police Department, be dealt with by the Coulee Region Joint Municipal Court.
10.02.52 Penalties
A. For violations of Rules of the Road, those fines shall be as set forth in the State of Wisconsin Revised
Traffic Deposit Schedule.
B. For all other violations the fine shall be the lowest possible fine amount on the City of Onalaska Deposit
Schedule.
Chapter 03 Snowmobiles
Division 1 Regulations
10.03.11 State Snowmobile Laws Adopted
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter, the statutory provisions describing and defining
regulations with respect to snowmobiles in the following enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes
are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Chapter as if fully set forth herein. Acts required
to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or prohibited by this Chapter. Any future
amendments, revisions or modifications of the Statutes incorporated herein by reference are intended to
be made part of this Chapter.
350.01 Definitions.
350.02 Operation of snowmobiles on or in the vicinity of highways.
350.03 Right-of-Way.
350.035 Meeting of snowmobiles.
350.04 Snowmobile races, derbies and routes.
350.045 Public utility exemption.
350.047 Local ordinances to be filed.
350.05 Operation by youthful operators restricted.
350.07 Driving animals.
350.08 Owner permitting operation.
350.09 Head lamps, tail lamps and brakes, etc.
350.095 Noise Level Requirements.
350.10 Miscellaneous provisions for snowmobile operation.
350.101 Intoxicated snowmobiling.
350.102 Preliminary breath screening test.
350.1025 Application of intoxicated snowmobiling law.
350.103 Implied consent.
350.104 Chemical tests.
350.106 Report arrest to department.
350.107 Officer’s action after arrest for operating a snowmobile while under the influence of intoxicant.
350.11 Penalties.
350.12 Registration of snowmobiles.
350.125 Completion of application for registration by snowmobile dealers.
350.13 Uniform Trail Signs and Standards.
350.135 Interferences with uniform trail signs and standards prohibited.
350.15 Accidents and accident reports.
350.155 Coroners and medical examiners to report; require blood specimen.
350.017 Enforcement.
350.19 Liability of landowners.
350.99 Parties to a violation.
10.03.12 Applicability of Traffic Regulations to Snowmobiles
A. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any street, highway or alley within the City of Onalaska in
violation of the traffic regulation provisions of Secs. 346.04, 346.06, 346.11, 346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19,
346.20, 346.21, 346.26, 346.27, 346.33, 346.35, 346.37, 346.39, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46, 346.47, 346.48,
346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54, 346.55, 346.63, 346.87, 346.88, 346.89, 346.90, 346.91,
346.92(1) and 346.94(1), and (9), Wis. Stats.
10.03.13 Standards for Operation
A. Operation Restrictions. Operation of snowmobiles on the designated snowmobile route shall be subject
to the following restrictions:
1. Stop/Yield. Each snowmobile shall stop at each street or highway to be crossed and yield the rightof-
way to all motor vehicles approaching on each such street or highway.
2. Yielding right-of-way. Travel on rights-of-way of City streets and highways shall be limited to those
which are posted, and snowmobiles, at all times, yield the right-of-way when crossing streets and
highways to all vehicular traffic.
3. Street Operating Rules. When traveling on the roadways of streets and highways, operators shall
obey the following requirements:
a. Snowmobiles are to be operated on the extreme right side of the roadway.
b. Left turns shall be made as safely as possible from any position depending on snow cover and
other prevailing conditions.
c. Operators are to yield the right-of-way to other vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
4. Speed. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the City or on any designated snowmobile trail
at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour and shall yield the right-of-way when traveling
within one hundred (100) feet of a person who is not on a snowmobile.
5. Hours of Operation Restricted. No person shall operate a snowmobile anywhere within the City
between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
6. Restriction on Equipment. No snowmobile or other vehicle operating on the snowmobile route shall
be allowed if it has an expansion chamber or any muffler other than the type and size provided by the
manufacturer. Each snowmobile shall be equipped with proper operating headlamps, taillights and
brakes and other required equipment to conform to the requirements of Sec. 350.09, Wis. Stats.
7. Statutory Requirements. Operation of snowmobiles shall comply with such other and further
conditions as are opposed upon operators under Sec. 350.02, Wis. Stats.
B. Unattended Vehicles. No person shall leave or allow a snowmobile owned or operated by them to
remain unattended on any public highway or public property while the motor is running or with the starting
key left in the ignition.
C. Operation on Sidewalks Prohibited. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any sidewalk or
pedestrian way or upon the area between the sidewalk and the curb line of any street in the City of
Onalaska, except for the purpose of crossing to obtain immediate access to an authorized area of
operation or as permitted by this Chapter.
D. Operation on Private Property. Except as permitted by this Code, it shall be unlawful to operate any
snowmobile or any other motor-drive craft or vehicle principally manufactured for off-highway use on the
City street, alleys, parks, parking lots or on any public lands or private lands or parking lots held open to
the public. The operator shall at all times have the express consent of the owner before operation of such
craft or vehicle on private property not owned or controlled by them.
E. Permitting Operation by Improper Persons Prohibited. No owner or person having charge or control
of a snowmobile shall authorize or permit any person to operate such snowmobile who is not permitted
under state law to operate such snowmobile or who is under the influence of an intoxicant or a dangerous
narcotic drug.
F. Operation in Parks. No person shall drive a snowmobile in any park within the City except upon
snowmobile trails as may be designated by the Common Council.
G. Written Consent of Owner Required. The consent required under Sec. 350.10(f), Wis. Stats. and in
Subsection D. above shall be written consent dated and limited to the year in which the consent is given.
If the property is owned or leased by more than one (1) person, the consent of each owner must be
obtained.
H. Age of Operators.
1. No person under the age of twelve (12) years may operate a snowmobile. No person over the age of
twelve (12) years but under the age of sixteen (16) years may operate a snowmobile unless they hold
a valid snowmobile safety certificate or is accompanied by a person over eighteen (18) years of age
or by a person over fourteen (14) years of age having a snowmobile safety certificate issued by the
Department of Natural Resources.
2. No person shall operate any snowmobile upon any street, alley or other public right-of-way in the City
unless such person shall have a valid motor vehicle operator's license or unless such operator is
accompanied by a person who has a valid motor vehicle operator's license and who is occupying a
seat on the vehicle.
3. No owner or other person having charge or control of a snowmobile may knowingly authorize or
permit any person to operate the snowmobile if the person is prohibited from operating a snowmobile
under Wisconsin Statutes or this Chapter, or if the person is incapable of operating a snowmobile
because of physical or mental disability, or if the person is under the influence of alcohol beverages
or controlled substances or a combination thereof or under the influence of any other drug to a
degree which renders them incapable of safely operating a snowmobile.
4. No parent or guardian of any child shall authorize or knowingly permit such child to operate a
snowmobile if the child is prohibited from operating a snowmobile under Wisconsin Statutes or this
Chapter.
I. Pursuit of Animals. No operator shall violate Sec. 350.07, Wis. Stats. by driving or pursuing any animal
with a snowmobile.
J. Miscellaneous Regulations. No person shall operate a snowmobile in the following manner:
1. At a rate of speed that is unreasonable or improper under the circumstances.
2. In any careless way as to endanger the person or property of another.
3. In such a way that the exhaust of the motor makes an excessive or unusual noise.
4. Without a functioning muffler.
5. On the private property of another without the consent of the owner or lessee.
6. On the frozen surface of public waters within one hundred (100) feet of a person not upon a vehicle or
within one hundred (100) feet of a fishing shanty unless operated at a speed of ten (10) miles per
hour or less.
7. On a slide, ski or skating area except for the purposes of service the area, crossing at places where
marked or after stopping and yielding the right-of-way.
8. On or across a cemetery, school or church property without consent of the owner.
K. Non-assumption of Liability. By enacting this Chapter designating a snowmobile route through the City,
portions of which may cross private properties or frozen surfaces, the City is assuming no responsibility
for any property damage or personal injuries sustained by any persons as a result of operation of
snowmobiles across those properties.
10.03.14 Accidents and Accident Reports
A. If they can do so without serious danger to themselves or to persons on board, the operator of a
snowmobile involved in a snowmobile accident within the City shall stop their snowmobile and shall
render to other persons affected thereby such assistance as may be practicable and necessary to save
them from or minimize any danger caused by the accident and shall give their name and address and
identification of their snowmobile to any person injured and to the owner of any property damaged in the
accident.
B. If the snowmobile accident results in death or injury to any person or total property damage in excess of
Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00), every operator of a snowmobile involved in such accident shall, as soon
as possible, notify the Police Department of the accident and shall, within ten (10) days after the accident,
file a written report thereof with the department on forms prescribed by it.
C. If the operator of a snowmobile is physically incapable of making the report required by this Section and
there was another occupant on the snowmobile at the time of the accident capable of making the report,
they shall make such report.
D. “Snowmobile accident” means a collision, accident or other casualty involving a snowmobile.
10.03.15 Snowmobile Routes and Trails Designated
A. Routes Designated. Except as provided in Secs. 350.02 and 350.045, Wis. Stats., or for snowmobile
events authorized in accordance with Sec. 350.04, Wis. Stats., or as provided in Subsection B. no person
shall operate a snowmobile upon any public right-of-way, in any public park or on any other public
municipal property in the City except upon snowmobile routes and trails designated by the Common
Council. The designated routes to be used within the City limits shall be adopted by resolution by the
Common Council, a copy of which shall be on file with the City Clerk.
B. Trail Markers. The Chief of Police and/or City Engineer is directed and authorized to procure, erect and
maintain appropriate snowmobile route, trail and limit signs and markers as approved by the State
Department of Natural Resources under Sec. 350.13, Wis. Stats. The Chief of Police and/or City
Engineer shall have the power to declare the stated snowmobile routes and trails either open or closed.
C. Markers to be Obeyed. No person shall fail to obey any route or trail sign, marker or limit erected in
accordance with this Section.
Division 2 Enforcement and Penalties
10.03.21 Enforcement
A. Uniform Citation for Highway Violations. The uniform traffic citation promulgated under Sec. 345.11,
Wis. Stats., shall be used for violations of this Chapter relating to highway use except as herein provided.
B. Other Violations. All violations of this Chapter not described in Subsections A. or B. shall be enforced in
accordance with Secs. 66.0114 and 66.0111 and Ch. 800, Wis. Stats.
C. Police Department to Receive Stipulations and Penalties. Stipulations, fines, penalties and payments
for obtaining release from arrest authorized under this Chapter may be accepted at the Police
Department offices by the Chief of Police or their designee.
10.03.22 Penalties
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine not
more than Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00), together with the costs of prosecution, and, in default
of payment thereof, may be imprisoned in the county jail for not exceeding ten (10) days, provided no
person shall pay a fine in an amount in excess of the maximum fine allowed in the Wisconsin Statutes for
the same offense and further provided that the penalty and fine for parking violations on highways shall
be the amount applicable to such violations by owners or operators of motor vehicles under Title 10,
Chapter 1, of this Code of Ordinances.
Chapter 04 Other Vehicles
Division 1 ATV and UTV Regulations
10.04.11 Authority
A. Intent. The intent of this Chapter is to establish routes and provide for the safe operation of ATVs, UTVs
and other Off Road Vehicles upon designated roadways in the City of Onalaska.
B. Authority. The City of Onalaska has the specific authority to adopt this All-Terrain Vehicle and Off Road
Vehicle Chapter under Secs. 23.33(8)(b) and (11), Wis. Stats.
10.04.12 State All-Terrain and Utility-Terrain Vehicle Laws Adopted
A. The provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to all-terrain vehicles in the following
enumerated in Sec. 23.33, Wis. Stats., and Wis. Admin. Code NR 64 and any future amendments or
revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Section as if fully set forth herein.
10.04.13 Enforcement and Penalties
A. Enforcement. An officer of the state traffic patrol, inspector under Sec.110.07 (3) Wis. Stats.,
conservation warden, county sheriff or municipal peace officer has authority and jurisdiction to enforce
this Section and ordinances enacted in accordance with this Section. No operator of an ATV or UTV may
refuse to stop after being requested or signaled to do so by a law enforcement officer or commission
warden.
B. Penalties. Violation of this Chapter shall be punishable by fine and enforced as set forth in Sec.
23.33(13), Wis. Stats.
Division 2 Operation and Regulation of Off-Highway Motorcycles
10.04.21 Authority
A. Intent. The intent of this Chapter is to establish routes and provide for the safe operation of Off-Highway
Motorcycles upon designated roadways in the City of Onalaska.
B. Authority. The City of Onalaska has the specific authority to adopt this Off-Highway Motorcycles Section
under Sec. 23.335(21), Wis. Stats.
10.04.22 State Off-Highway Motorcycle Regulations Adopted
A. The provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to Off-Highway Motorcycles in the
following enumerated in Sec. 23.335, Wis. Stats., and Wis. Admin. Code NR 64 and any future
amendments or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Section as if fully set
forth herein.
10.04.23 Enforcement and Penalties
A. Enforcement. A law enforcement officer has authority and jurisdiction to enforce this Section and
Chapters enacted in accordance with this Section. No operator of an off-highway motorcycle may refuse
to stop after being requested or signaled to do so by a law enforcement officer.
B. Penalties. Violation of this Chapter shall be punishable by fine and enforced as set forth in Sec.
23.335(23), Wis. Stats.
Division 3 Neighborhood Electric Vehicles
10.04.31 Definitions
A. Neighborhood Electric Vehicles (NEV). A self-propelled motor vehicle that has successfully completed
the neighborhood electric vehicle America test program conducted by the Federal Government
Department of Energy and that conforms to the definition and requirements for low speed vehicles as
adopted in the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards for “low-speed vehicles” under 49 CRF 571.3(b)
and 571.500.
10.04.32 Equipment
B. NEVs shall be four (4) wheeled and have a speed range of at least twenty (20) miles per hour and not
more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour on a paved surface and have a gross vehicle weight at rest of
less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) pounds. NEV does not include an electric Golf Cart and
shall have the following specifications to be verified by the Police Department:
1. Headlamps;
2. Front and rear turn signals;
3. Stop lamps;
4. Reflex reflectors: one red on each side as far to the rear as practicable; and one red on the rear;
5. An exterior mirror mounted on the driver’s side and either an exterior mirror on the passenger side or
an interior review mirror;
6. Parking brake;
7. Horn;
8. A windshield that conforms to the requirements of the federal motor vehicle safety standard on
glazing materials (49 CFR 571.205);
9. A vehicle Identification Number (VIN) that complies with the federal law (949 CFR 565);
10. A Type 1 or Type 2 seatbelt assembly conforming to 49 CFR 571.209, and Federal Motor Safety
Standard No. 209, for each designated seating position; and
11. Meets the general test conditions under 49 CFR 571.50056.
10.06.02 Permitted Use of Neighborhood Electric Vehicles on City Streets
A. Any individual may operate a NEV on the streets of the City having a posted speed limit of thirty-five (35)
miles per hour or less.
B. No person shall operate a NEV unless it is equipped with a rear vision mirror and a reflective “Slow
Moving Sign” or “Flag”.
10.06.03 Permitted Users of Neighborhood Electric Vehicles
A. To use a NEV on streets as set forth above, the operator must have a valid driver’s license.
10.06.04 Operation of Neighborhood Electric Vehicles
A. The operation of NEVs as permitted herein shall comply in all respects with Division 1 of this Chapter
relating to ATV and UTVs.
10.06.05 Enforcement
A. Enforcement of this Chapter regulating the use of the Neighborhood Electric Vehicles within the City shall
be pursuant to Section 1.01.17 of the Code of Ordinances.
Chapter 05 Golf Carts
Division 1 Regulations
10.07.01 Statutory Authorization and Definitions
A. Statutory Authorization. This Chapter is adopted pursuant to authorization in Secs. 349.18(1)(b) and
349.18(1m)(a), Wis. Stats.
B. Definitions:
1. Golf Cart. A vehicle whose speed attainable in one (1) mile does not exceed twenty (20) miles per
hour on a paved, level surface, and that was designed and originally intended to convey one (1) or
more persons and equipment to play the game of golf in an area designated as a golf course. State
Law Reference Sec. 23.33(1)(fm), Wis. Stats.
2. Public Street. A public street, highway or alley located within the municipal boundaries of the City of
Onalaska.
10.07.02 Operation, Where Permitted
A. No person may operate a Golf Cart of any portion of, or cross, any state trunk highway or county
highway.
B. No person may operate a Golf Cart on any portion of, or cross, a public street having a posted speed limit
in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour except at a designated crossing point.
C. Exceptions. The operation of Golf Carts is not subject to the provisions of this Chapter under the
following circumstances:
1. The operation of Golf Carts at golf courses, private clubs or on private property, with the consent of
the owner; or
2. The use of a Golf Cart in connection with a parade, festival or other special event, in which the proper
City permitting has been issued for the event and the Golf Cart is only used during such event.
10.07.03 Operators Permitted
A. No person shall operate a Golf Cart upon a Public Street who is less than sixteen (16) years of age or
without a current, valid driver’s license issued for the operation of a motor vehicle. For purposes of this
Section, a learner’s permit shall not be considered as a valid driver’s license nor shall any license that has
been revoked, temporary or otherwise, or suspended for any reason, be considered as a valid driver’s
license during the period of suspension or revocation.
10.07.06 Operation Restrictions
A. No person shall operate a Golf Cart on a Public Street except in conformity with federal, state and local
laws regulating the operation of motor vehicles on public streets and highways, including Ch. 346, Wis.
Stats., as it relates to traffic regulations, which are adopted by reference in their entirety. All City
ordinances regarding the use of motor vehicles in the City of Onalaska, not inconsistent therewith shall be
observed, except that no Golf Cart may be operated at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour.
B. No person shall allow a Golf Cart in the person’s custody from standing or remaining unattended on any
Public Street or in any other public place, except an attended parking area, unless either the starting
lever, throttle, steering apparatus, gear shift or ignition of the Golf Cart is locked and the key for that lock
is removed from the Golf Cart.
C. No person shall operate a Golf Cart upon any sidewalk, pedestrian way, public park or upon the
boulevard area between the sidewalk and the curb line of any public street in the City, except as
specifically authorized for the purpose of legally crossing the street, or to obtain immediate access to an
authorized area of operation.
D. The operator of a Golf Cart shall yield the right-of-way to overtaking vehicles.
E. The seating capacity shall not be exceeded nor shall the operator or any passenger be permitted to stand
in the Golf Cart when it is in operation.
F. Golf Carts shall not be used as a taxicab or bus or for the commercial carrying of passengers or the
hauling of freight. Nor shall a Golf Cart be used for the purpose of towing another cart, trailer or vehicle of
any kind.
Division 2 Registration and Equipment
10.05.21 Annual Registration
A. A Golf Cart must be registered with the City of Onalaska prior to operating on a public street. The
registrant shall pay to the City of Onalaska an annual Golf Cart registration fee of One Hundred Dollars
($100.00), to the Police Department. The registration fee must be renewed each calendar year. This fee
is in addition to any other fees required by law.
B. No person shall operate a Golf Cart, not currently registered with the City, on a Public Street.
C. Prior to the initial registration the owner of the Golf Cart must have the cart inspected by the Police
Department to assure that it complies with the equipment restrictions.
D. The registration sticker must be affixed to the rear of the vehicle where it is readily visible.
10.05.22 Equipment Restrictions
A. No person shall operate a Golf Cart on a Public Street unless it conforms to all federal, state and local
laws and regulations regarding noise, emissions and equipment, and is maintained in proper adjustment
and repair.
B. No person shall operate a Golf Cart on a Public Street without displaying a lighted headlight and taillight
at all times and said lights must conform to the requirements of this ordinance. Headlights shall be of a
white or clear light and must be capable of illuminating the road ahead during hours of darkness and be
observed at a distance of five hundred (500) feet. Headlight must be properly adjusted, as not to interfere
with the operation of other vehicles on the roadway. Taillights shall be red in color and be observable to a
distance of five hundred (500) feet at night.
C. No person shall operate a Golf Cart on a Public Street without at least two (2) direction signal lamps
showing to the front and at least two (2) showing to the rear on the Golf Cart so as to indicate intention to
turn right or left.
D. No person shall operate a Golf Cart unless it is equipped with a rear vision mirror and a reflective “Slow
Moving Sign” or “Flag” on the rear of the Golf Cart. The brakes provided by the manufacturer of the Golf
Cart shall be in proper working order and it shall be equipped with all mechanical and standard safety
features provided by the manufacturer and shall not have been modified to exceed a speed of twenty (20)
miles per hour nor otherwise modified in any way that creates a hazard.
Division 3 Disclaimer, Enforcement and Penalties
10.05.31 Disclaimer and Liability
A. Disclaimer. Golf Carts are not designed for nor manufactured to be used on Public Streets and the City
of Onalaska neither advocates nor endorses the Golf Cart as a safe means of travel on public streets,
roads or highways. The City in no way shall be liable for accidents, injuries or death involving the
operation of a Golf Cart within the City limits.
B. Assumption of Risk. Any person who owns, operates or rides upon a Golf Cart on a Public Street, road,
or highway within the City of Onalaska limits does so at their own risk and peril and assumes all liability
resulting from the operation of the Golf Cart.
10.05.32 Enforcement and Penalties
A. Enforcement. A law enforcement officer has authority and jurisdiction to enforce this Section and
ordinances enacted in accordance with this Section. No operator of a Golf Cart may refuse to stop after
being requested or signaled to do so by a law enforcement officer.
B. Penalties.
1. For violations of Rules of the Road, those fines shall be as set forth in the State of Wisconsin Revised
Traffic Deposit Schedule.
2. For all other violations the fine shall be as set forth in Section 1.01.17 of the Code of Ordinances.
Title 11 Offenses
Chapter 01 Statutory Offenses
Division 1 State Statutes Adopted
11.01.11 Offenses Against State Laws Subject to Fines and Penalties
A. The following statutes defining offenses against the peace and good order of the State are adopted by
reference to define offenses against the peace and good order of the City of Onalaska. With the
exception of Sec. 938.342, Wis. Stats., the penalty for commission of such offenses hereunder shall be
limited to a fine imposed under the general penalty provisions of this Code of Ordinances. Any future
amendments, revisions or modifications of the Statutes incorporated herein by reference are intended to
be made part of this Code. The penalty for truancy and high school dropouts shall be governed by the
provisions of Sec. 938.342, Wis. Stats., as adopted herein.
118.07 Healthy & Safety Requirements
118.08 School Zones; Crossings
118.09 Safety Zones
118.10 School Safety Patrols
118.105 Control of Traffic on School Premises
118.11 School Fences
118.123 Reports and Records
118.163 Municipal Truancy and School Dropout Violations
125.07(4)(a) Underage Drinking-Procures or Attempts to Procure
125.07(4)(1b) Underage Drinking-Possess or Consume
125.085(3)(b) Identification Card Violations
125.09(2) School Related Possession of Alcohol
134.65 Cigarette and Tobacco Products Retailer License
134.66 Restrictions on Sale or Gift of Cigarettes or Tobacco Products
167.10 Fireworks Regulated
167.32 Safety at Sporting Events
173.10 Investigation of Animal Cruelty Complaints
173.24 Reimbursement for Expenses
175.25 Illegal Storage of Junked Vehicles
254.92 Purchase or Possession of Tobacco Products by Person under 18 Prohibited
256.35(10)(a) False 911 Calls
287.81 Littering
938.125 Jurisdiction- Juveniles Alleged to Have Violated Civil Laws or Ordinances
938.17 Jurisdiction- Juveniles Traffic, Boating, Snowmobile and All-Terrain Vehicle
Violations and Over Civil Law and Ordinance Violations
938.342 Disposition- Truancy and School Dropout Ordinance Violations
938.343 Disposition- Juvenile Adjudged to Have Violated a Civil Law or an Ordinance
938.344 Disposition- Certain Intoxicating Liquor, Beer and Drug Violations
938.345 Disposition- Juvenile Adjudged in Need of Protection or Services
939.05(2)(b) Aiding and Abetting
939.22 Words and Phrases Defined
940.19(1) Battery
940.291 Failure of a Police Officer to Render Aid
940.32 Stalking
940.34 Duty to Aid Victim or Report Crime
940.42 Misdemeanor Intimidation of Witnesses
940.44 Intimidation of Victims
941.01 Negligent Operation of a Vehicle
941.10 Negligent Handling of Burning Materials
941.12(2),(3) Interfering With or Failing to Assist in Firefighting
941.13 False Alarms and Interference with Firefighting
941.20(1) Reckless Use of Weapon
941.23 Carrying Concealed Weapon
941.231 Carrying a Concealed Knife
941.235 Carrying a Firearm in a Public Building
941.299 Restrictions on the Use of Laser Pointers
941.315(2) Possession of Nitrous Oxide
941.316 Possession and Abuse of Hazardous Substance
941.35 Emergency Telephone Calls
941.36 Fraudulent Tapping of Electric Wires or Gas or Water Meters or Pipes
941.37(1),(2) Obstructing Emergency or Rescue Personnel
942.01 Defamation
942.03 Giving False Information for Publication
942.05 Opening Letters
942.08 Invasion of Privacy
942.10 Use of a Drone
943.01(1) Criminal Damage to Property
943.11 Entry Into Locked Vehicle
943.125 Entry Into Locked Coin Box
943.13 Trespass to Land
943.14 Trespass to Dwellings
943.145 Criminal Trespass to a Medical Facility
943.15 Entry Into Locked Site
943.017(1) Graffiti
943.20(3)(a) Theft
943.21(3) Fraud on Innkeeper or Restaurant Keeper
943.22 Cheating Tokens
943.225 Refusal to Pay for a Motor Bus Ride
943.23(1)(4)(5) Operating Vehicle Without Owner's Consent
943.24 Issuance of Worthless Checks
943.34(1)(a) Receiving Stolen Property
943.37 Alteration of Property Identification Marks
943.38(3) Forgery
943.392 Fraudulent Data Alteration
943.41 Credit Card Crimes
943.45 Theft of Telecommunication Services
943.46 Theft of Video Services
943.47 Theft of Satellite Cable Programming
943.50(1) (3),(4)(a) Retail Theft
943.55 Removal of a Shopping Cart
943.61 Theft of Library Material
943.70 Computer Crimes
944.15 Public Fornication
944.17 Sexual Gratification
944.20 Lewd and Lascivious Behavior
944.21 Obscene Material or Performance
944.23 Making Lewd, Obscene or Indecent Drawings
944.25 Sending Obscene or Sexually Explicit Electronic Messages
944.30 Prostitution
944.31 Patronizing Prostitutes
944.33 Pandering
944.36 Solicitation of Drinks Prohibited
945.01 Definitions Relating to Gambling
945.02 Gambling
945.04 Permitting Premises to be Used for Commercial Gambling
946.40 Refusing to Aid Officer
946.41 Resisting or Obstructing Officer
946.42(2) Escape
946.46 Encouraging Violation of Probation or Parole
946.66 False Complaints of Police Misconduct
946.67 Compounding Crimes
946.69 Falsely Assuming to Act as Public Officer or Employee
946.70 Impersonating Peace Officer, Fire Fighters or other Emergency Personnel
946.71 Unlawful use of License for Carrying Concealed Weapon
946.72(2) Tampering with Public Records and Notices
947.01 Disorderly Conduct
947.011 Disrupting a Funeral or Memorial Service
947.012 Unlawful Use of Telephone
947.0125 Unlawful use of Computerized Communication System
947.013 Harassment
947.02 Vagrancy
947.06 Unlawful Assemblies
947.07 Drinking in Common Carriers
947.20 Right to Work
948.01 Definitions Relating to Crimes Against Children
948.09 Sexual Intercourse With a Child Age 16 or Older
948.10 Exposing Genitals, Pubic Area or Intimate Parts
948.11(1)(b),(2)(b) Exposing a Child to Harmful Material
948.21 Neglecting a Child
948.40 Contributing to the Delinquency of a Child
948.45 Contributing to Truancy
948.50 Strip Search by School Employee
948.51(1),(2),(3)(a) Hazing
948.60 Possession of a Dangerous Weapon by a Child
948.61(1),(2) Dangerous Weapons on School Premises
948.63 Receiving Property From a Child
948.70 Tattooing of Children
951.01 Definitions Relating to Crimes Against Animals
951.015 Construction and Application
951.02 Mistreating Animals
951.03 Dognapping or Catnapping
951.04 Leading Animal from Motor Vehicle
951.05 Transportation of Animals
951.06 Use of Poisonous and Controlled Substances
951.07 Use of Certain Devises Prohibited
951.08 Fights between Animals
951.09 Shooting at Caged or Staked Animals
951.095 Harassment of Police and Fire Animals
951.097 Harassment of Service Dogs
951.10 Sale of Baby Rabbits, Chicks and Other Fowl
951.11 Artificially Colored Animals; Sale
951.13 Providing Proper Food and Drink to Confined Animals
951.14 Providing Proper Shelter
951.15 Abandoning Animals
961 Uniform Controlled Substances Act
961.003 Uniformity of Interpretation
961.573(1)(2) Possession of drug paraphernalia.
961.574(1)(2) Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia.
961.575(1)(2) Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor.
11.01.02 Penalties; Attempt; Parties to Acts
A. Penalty. In addition to the general penalty provisions of this Code in Section 1.01.17 or any other penalty
imposed for violation of any Section of this Title, any person who shall cause physical damage to or
destroy any public property shall be liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or
destroyed property. The parent(s) of any unemancipated juvenile who violates those Sections related to
Destruction of Property may also be held liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or
destroyed property in accordance with the Wisconsin Statutes. Nothing in this Code of Ordinances shall
prevent the Police Department from referring violations of the provisions of this Title to the District
Attorney's office in the interest of justice.
B. Attempt.
1. Whoever attempts to commit an act prohibited by Title 11 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Onalaska may be charged with and convicted of the violation.
2. An attempt to commit a violation of this Title requires that the actor have an intent to perform acts and
attain a result which, if accomplished, would constitute a violation of these ordinances and that the
actor does acts towards the commission of the violation which demonstrate unequivocally, under all
the circumstances, that the actor formed that intent and would commit the violation except for the
intervention of another person or some other extraneous factor.
C. Parties to a Violation. Whoever is concerned in the commission of a violation of this Title may be
charged with and convicted of the violation although the person did not directly commit it and although the
person who directly committed it has not been convicted of the violation. A person is concerned in the
commission of the violation if the person directly commits the violation, intentionally aids or abets the
commission of it, is a party to a conspiracy with another to commit it, or advises, hires, counsels or
otherwise procures another to commit it.
Chapter 02 Offenses against Public Safety and Peace
Division 1 Weapons, Firearms and Similar Implements
11.02.11 Regulation of Firearms and Explosives
A. Discharge of Firearms and Guns Regulated. No person shall fire or discharge any shotgun, rifle, pistol,
air or spring gun or any firearm of any description which shot, ball or balls, bullets, missiles or rockets of
any kind is or are expelled therefrom by the force of gas, compressed air, spring loaded, powder or other
combustible matter within the City of Onalaska except this Section shall not be construed to prohibit the
discharge of firearms by the Sheriff or any of their deputies, the Chief of Police or any of their
subordinates or any public officer when required and made necessary in the performance of any duty
imposed by law.
B. Shooting Into City Limits. No person shall in the territory adjacent to the City discharge any firearm in
such manner that the discharge shall enter or fall within the City.
C. Shooting Ranges. This Section shall not prevent the maintenance and use of duly supervised rifle or
pistol ranges or shooting galleries approved by the Common Council, after an advisory recommendation
from the Chief of Police, where proper safety precautions are taken.
D. Explosive Devices. No person shall discharge or detonate any dynamite, nitroglycerin or other explosive
within the City without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Chief of Police.
E. Hunting Prohibited. Hunting with a firearm is prohibited within the corporate limits of the City of
Onalaska.
F. Penalty. Any person who violates this Section shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not
less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per
offense.
11.02.12 Carrying Concealed Weapons Prohibited
A. Definitions.
1. Conceal and Carry Weapon License. A license issued under Ch.175.60, Wis. Stats. or a permit
issued by another state designated by the Wisconsin Department of Justice authorized to carry
concealed weapons in Wisconsin.
2. Dangerous Weapon. Any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any device designated as a
weapon and capable of producing death or great bodily harm, or any other device or instrumentality
which, in the manner it is used or intended to be used, is calculated or likely to produce death or great
bodily harm.
3. Weapon. As defined under Sec. 175.60(1)(j), Wis. Stats., namely a handgun, not to include a
machine gun, short barreled rifle or short barreled shotgun electric weapon as defined in Sec.
941.295(1c)(a) Wis. Stats., or a billy club.
B. Concealed Weapons Prohibited. No person shall within the City wear or in any manner carry under their
clothes or conceal upon or about their person any dangerous weapon except that those individuals who
carry a current and valid Conceal and Carry Weapon License shall be allowed to wear or carry under their
clothes or conceal upon or about their person a weapon, in those areas of the City where allowed. A
person with a current and valid Conceal and Carry Weapon License may not carry a weapon, where it
has been posted by the business or property owner that weapons are prohibited pursuant to Sec. 943.13,
Wis. Stats. This Subsection shall not apply to a law enforcement officer or such persons as may be
authorized to carry such weapons.
C. Specific Concealed Weapons Prohibited. No person, except a sheriff, constable, police officer or other
law enforcement officer acting within the scope of their duties, shall carry or wear concealed about their
person any dangerous weapon, including but not limited to a pistol, revolver, firearm, sling shot, crossknuckle
of lead, brass or other materials or any other dangerous or deadly weapon within the City, except
that a person with a current and valid Conceal and Carry Weapon License or such persons as may be
authorized to carry such weapons may carry a weapon in those areas of the City where allowed. A
person with a current and valid Conceal and Carry Weapon License and such persons as may be
authorized to carry such weapons may not carry a weapon, where it has been posted by the business or
property owner that weapons are prohibited.
D. Carrying a Concealed Knife. Any person who is prohibited from possessing a firearm under Sec.
941.29, Wis. Stats. is prohibited from being armed with a concealed knife that is a dangerous weapon.
11.02.13 Dangerous Weapons Prohibited
A. Definitions.
1. Dangerous Weapon. Any firearm, loaded or unloaded; any electric weapon as defined in Sec.
941.295(1)(c)(a), Wis. Stats.; metallic knuckles or knuckles of any substance which could be put to
the same use with the same or similar effect as metallic knuckles; a nunchaku or any similar weapon
consisting of two (2) sticks of wood, plastic or metal connected at one end by a length of rope, chain,
wire or leather cestus or similar material weighted with metal or other substance and worn on hand; a
shuriken or any similar pointed star-like object intended to injure a person when thrown; or a
manrikigusari or similar length of chain having weighted ends.
B. Possession, Sale or Manufacture of a Dangerous Weapon by a Person under 18 Prohibited. No
person under the age of eighteen (18) shall sell, possess or manufacture those dangerous weapons as
outlined in Section A.1. above, except that this Section does not apply to those members of the US
Armed Forces or National Guard when such use is in the line of duty or to persons whose possession or
use is for target practice under the supervision of an adult or in a course of instruction in the traditional
and proper use of the dangerous weapon under the supervision of an adult.
11.02.14 Safe Use and Transportation of Firearms and Bows
A. Definitions.
1. Aircraft. As defined under Sec. 114.002(3), Wis. Stats.
2. Conceal and Carry Weapon License. A license issued under Sec. 175.60, Wis. Stats. or a permit
issued by another state designated by the Wisconsin Department of Justice authorized to carry
concealed weapons in Wisconsin.
3. Encased. Enclosed in a case that is expressly made for the purpose of containing a firearm and that
is completely zipped, snapped, buckled, tied or otherwise fastened with no part of the firearm
exposed.
4. Firearm. A weapon that acts by force of gunpowder.
5. Highway. As defined under Sec. 340.01(22), Wis. Stats.
6. Motorboat. As defined under Sec. 30.50(6), Wis. Stats.
7. Roadway. As defined under Sec. 340.01(54), Wis. Stats.
8. Unloaded. Any of the following:
a. Having no shell or cartridge in the chamber of a firearm or in the magazine attached to a firearm.
b. In the case of a cap lock muzzle-loading firearm, having the cap removed.
c. In the case of a flint lock muzzle-loading firearm, having the flash-pan cleaned of powder.
9. Vehicle. As defined under Sec. 340.01(74), Wis. Stats., and includes a snowmobile, as defined under
Sec. 340.01(58a), Wis. Stats.
10. Weapon. As defined under Sec. 175.60(1)(j), Wis. Stats., namely a handgun, not to include a
machine gun, short barreled rifle or short barreled shotgun; electric weapon as defined in Sec.
941.295, Wis. Stats.; knife, not including a switchblade knife; and a billy club.
B. Prohibitions; Motorboards and Vehicles; Highways and Roadways.
1. Except as provided in Section 2. below no person may:
a. Place, possess or transport a firearm, bow or crossbow in or on a motorboat with the motor
running, unless the firearm is unloaded or unless the bow or crossbow is unstrung or is enclosed
in a carrying case.
b. Place, possess or transport a firearm, bow or crossbow in or on a vehicle, unless the firearm is
unloaded or unless the bow or crossbow is unstrung or is enclosed in a carrying case.
c. Load or discharge a firearm or shoot a bolt or an arrow from a bow or crossbow in or from a
vehicle.
d. Load or discharge a firearm or shoot a bolt or an arrow from a bow or crossbow from or across a
highway or within fifty (50) feet from the center of a road.
2. Exceptions.
a. Section 1. does not apply to any of the following who, in the line of duty place, possess, transport,
load or discharge a firearm in, on or from a vehicle, motorboat or aircraft or discharge a firearm in,
on or from a vehicle, motorboat or aircraft or discharge a firearm from or across a highway or
within fifty (50) feet of the center of a roadway:
i. A peace officer, as defined in Sec. 939.22(22), Wis. Stats.
ii. A member of the U.S. Armed Forces.
iii. A member of the National Guard.
b. Section 1. does not apply to the holder of a current and valid Conceal and Carry Weapon License
from carrying a concealed weapon in a vehicle except where the vehicle owner has prohibited
weapons in the vehicle and it has been posted by the vehicle owner that weapons are prohibited
in a vehicle.
c. Section 1.a.-c. does not apply to the holder of a scientific collector permit under Sec. 29.614, Wis.
Stats., who is using a net gun or tranquilizer gun in an activity related to the purpose for which the
permit was issued.
d. Section 1.b-c. does not apply to the holder of a disabled permit under Ch. 29, Wis. Stats., who is
hunting from a stationary automobile in accordance with that Chapter.
11.02.15 Throwing or Shooting Arrows, Stones and Other Missiles Prohibited
A. Throwing or Shooting of Arrows, Stones and Other Missiles. It shall be unlawful for any person to
discharge or throw by any means any dangerous missile, object, arrow, stone, snowball or other missile
within the City of Onalaska for any purpose other than the hunting of wild animals as defined in Section B.
below, provided, however, upon written application to the Chief of Police and Common Council, a person
may be granted permission by the Common Council to construct and maintain supervised noncommercial
archery ranges if, in the opinion of the Common Council, the construction or maintenance of
such ranges will not endanger the public health and safety.
1. Exceptions. Friendly games of snowball fights, nerf battles and other similar games with non-lethal
missiles and where all individuals are willing participants and the missiles are launched at the willing
participants shall be exempt.
B. Hunting Wild Animals with Bow & Arrows and Crossbows. The owner of any lands within the City,
together with the invitees of such owner, may hunt wild animals with bow and arrows or crossbows or
practice target shooting subject to compliance with the following:
1. To preserve the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Onalaska, the use of bow and
arrow or crossbow for any purpose shall not be permitted in City parks or parkways, on any school
property, hospital or sanatorium as outlined in Sec. 29.301, Wis. Stats., and on any City or Federal
owned Property, except as set forth in the City’s Urban Deer Management Plan. For the purposes of
this ordinance, wild animal shall have the definition assigned in Sec. 29.001(90), Wis. Stats.
2. In any area within one hundred (100) yards from a building which is a permanent structure used for
human occupancy (including a manufactured home as defined in Sec. 101.91(2), Wis. Stats.,) unless
the person who owns the land on which such building is located allows the hunter to hunt within such
area. Persons hunting with a bow and arrow or crossbow must discharge the arrow or bolt from the
respective weapon into the ground.
3. Pursuant to Sec. 167.30(1), Wis. Stats., within forty (40) rods (or six hundred and sixty (660) feet) of
any public park, square or enclosure owned or controlled by the City of Onalaska and resorted to for
recreation or pleasure, when such park, square or enclosure is wholly situated without the limits of the
City.
4. Pursuant to Sec. 167.31(2)(d), Wis. Stats., and subject to the exceptions set forth therein, when and
where the person discharges a bolt or an arrow from a bow or crossbow from or across a highway or
within fifty (50) feet of the center of a roadway.
5. At any time and in any area when and where the person who hunts with a bow and arrow or
crossbow does not discharge the arrow or bolt from the respective weapon toward the ground.
11.02.16 Penalties
A. Penalty. Any person who violates any section of this Division, shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of
not less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per offense as
set forth on the City of Onalaska Deposit Schedule.
Division 2 Offenses against Peace and Quiet
11.02.21 Loud and Unnecessary Noise Prohibited
A. Declaration of Findings and Policy. Whereas excessive sound and vibration are a serious hazard to the
public health and welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and whereas the people have a right to and
should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize their
health or welfare or safety or degrade the quality of life; now, therefore, it is the policy of the City to
prevent excessive sound and vibration which may jeopardize the health and welfare or safety of its
citizens or degrade the quality of life.
B. General Prohibition of Noise Disturbances. No person or persons owning, leasing or controlling the
operation of any source or sources of noise shall willfully, negligently, or through failure to provide
necessary equipment or facilities or to take necessary precautions, permit the establishment or
continuation of a condition of noise disturbance.
C. Measured Noise Disturbance. This Section shall apply to the use or occupancy of any lot or structure
thereon and to the noise produced thereby, but shall not apply to the following:
1. To the intermittent or occasional use, during the daytime, of light homeowner's residential outdoor
equipment or commercial service equipment provided said equipment and its use complies with other
provisions of this Chapter;
2. To construction activities and the associated use of construction devices nor to the noise produced
thereby, provided such activities, and such equipment and its use, comply with provisions of this
Chapter;
3. To bell towers or clock towers with bells or chimes;
4. Any vehicle of the City while engaged in necessary public business;
5. Excavations or repairs of streets or any other public construction work by or on behalf of the City,
County, or State at any hour when the public entity determines that public welfare and convenience
renders it impossible to perform such work during the day;
6. The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are
noncommercial in nature; and
7. Operation of Emergency Equipment shall be exempt. Emergency equipment shall include ambulance,
police, fire, snow removal, civil defense sirens, etc., necessary for the health, safety, and protection of
the citizens of the City.
D. Noise in Residential Areas or Affecting Residential Property. No person shall create or cause to be
emitted from or by any source subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any noise which causes or results
in a noise level, measured at any lot line of any lot located in any residential area or in residential use
elsewhere in conformance with the Unified Development Code, in excess of any level of Section G. of this
Section, residential zone noise standard.
E. Noise in Commercial Areas. No person shall create or cause to be emitted from or by any source
subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any noise which causes or results in a noise level, measured at
any lot line of any lot in any commercial area other than a lot in residential use in conformance with the
Unified Development Code, in excess of any level of Section G. of this Section, commercial zone
standard.
F. Noise in Other Zones. No person shall create or cause to be emitted from or by any source subject to
the provisions of this Chapter, any noise which causes or results in a noise level, measured at any lot line
of any lot in any area not zoned residential or commercial in excess of any level of Section G.S of this
section, other zone standard.
G. Construction or Repair of Buildings. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair
of any building, as well as the operation of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick,
steam or electric hoist, or any other similar equipment attended by loud or unusual noise, other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays; provided, however, the Inspection
Department shall have the authority, upon determining that the loss of inconvenience which would result
to any party in interest would be extraordinary and of such nature as to warrant special consideration, to
permit by written authorization for a period necessary within which time such work and operation may
take place within the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
H. Stationary Noise Limits.
1. Maximum Permissible Sound Levels.
a. Noise from a stationary source shall not exceed the following standards for maximum sound
pressure levels measured at the property line:
Zone: Noise Rating (Daytime): Noise Rating (Nighttime) 10pm-8am:
Residential 75db 65db
Commercial 85db 75db
All Other Zones 75db 65db
2. Methods of Measuring Noise.
a. Equipment. Noise measurement shall be made with a sound level meter.
b. Location of Noise Meter. Noise measurement shall be made at the nearest lot line of the
premises from which a noise complaint is received. The noise meter shall be placed at a height of
at least three (3) feet above the ground and at least three (3) feet away from walls, barriers,
obstructions, and all other sound reflective surfaces.
3. Appeals. The Common Council may grant an exemption to individuals proving evidence of
substantial hardship. Evidence that reasonable technological attempts have been made to correct the
problem shall be considered grounds for granting an exemption to this Chapter for existing industries.
I. Permits for Amplifying Devices.
1. Permit Required. The use of loudspeakers or amplifying devices on the streets or in the parks of the
City of Onalaska is prohibited unless the party desiring to use such loudspeaker or amplifying device
first obtains a Special Event Permit under Title 7.
11.02.22 Public Urination/Defecation and Indecent Exposure
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate outside of designed sanitary facilities, upon any
public way, sidewalk, street, alley, public parking lot, park, playground, cemetery or other public area
within the City, or upon any private property without the owner’s consent or in open view of the public, or
in the halls, rooms without restroom facilities, stairways or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or
to indecently expose one’s person.
11.02.23 Loitering Prohibited
A. No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals
under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that
the person takes flight upon appearance of a law enforcement officer or peace officer, refuses to identify
themselves or manifestly endeavors to conceal themselves or any object. Unless flight by the person or
other circumstances makes it impracticable, a law enforcement officer or peace officer shall, prior to any
arrest for an offense under this Section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would
otherwise be warranted, by requesting them to identify themselves and explain their presence and
conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this Subsection if the law enforcement officer
or peace offer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation
given by the person was true and, if believed by the law enforcement officer or peace officer at the time,
would have dispelled the alarm.
11.02.24 Harassing or Obscene Telecommunications
A. Definitions.
1. Telecommunication Device. Any instrument, equipment, machine or other device that facilitates
telecommunication, including but not limited to, a computer, computer network, computer chip,
computer circuit, scanner, smart device, telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal
communications device, radio, transponder, receiver, modem or device that enables the use of a
modem.
2. Telecommunication Message. Any transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, data or
intelligence of any nature.
B. No one shall do any of the following by means of telecommunication device:
1. With intent to harass, annoy, or offend another, sends a telecommunication message to a
telecommunication device and uses any violent, abusive, indecent, or profane language or image,
or any other message which tends to cause or provoke a disturbance or annoyance;
2. Makes a phone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with the intent to abuse, threaten or harass
any person at the called number or numbers;
3. Makes or causes the phone or telecommunication device of another repeatedly or continuously to
ring or make noise with intent to harass any person at the receiving number or numbers;
4. Makes repeated calls, during which conversation ensures, solely to harass any person at the
receiving number or numbers;
5. Knowingly permits any telecommunication device under one’s control to be used for any purpose
prohibited by this Section;
6. In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, makes repeated calls, telecommunication
messages or simultaneous calls, or telecommunication messages solely to harass any person at the
called number or numbers.
11.02.25 Unauthorized Presence on School Property Prohibited
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, except as provided in Section B. hereof, to be present in, loiter or enter
into any public school building, school parking lot or on any public school grounds without the permission
of the school principal, custodian or other person in charge thereof between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on
official school days.
B. Exceptions. This Section shall not apply to:
1. Students regularly enrolled in public schools who have not been properly ordered by the school
principal, custodian or other person in charge thereof to leave the school building or school grounds;
2. Persons coming into the school building or school grounds for the purpose of attending scheduled
school or civic functions, or making use of the recreational facilities located upon or within school
premises, but as to such attendance or use, this exception shall apply only to the portion of the
premises on which facilities are located and during the hours such facilities are specifically open to
the general public or an invited portion thereof;
3. Parents or legal guardians of a regularly enrolled student. However, such parent or legal guardian
may be required to register at the school office.
C. The exceptions set forth in Section B. shall not apply to any person who, while in school buildings or on
school grounds, commits or attempts to commit any act prohibited by statute or ordinance.
D. All entrances to the school buildings shall be posted with a notice stating "Entry Into School Building by
Unauthorized Persons Prohibited." All school grounds shall be posted with a notice stating "Entry Upon
School Grounds by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited."
11.02.26 Penalties
A. Penalty. Any person who violates any section of this Division, shall upon conviction be subject to the
General Penalty as set forth in Section 1.01.17 of Title 1 of this Code of Ordinances.
Division 3 Offenses against Public Safety
11.02.31 Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed and Specified Places
A. The provisions of Sec.101.123, Wis. Stats., relating to the prohibition of smoking in various enclosed
spaces are hereby adopted and made part of this Code by reference, including any revisions or
amendments thereto. The prohibition of smoking in Sec.101.123, Wis. Stats., shall be extended to include
electronic cigarettes defined as any electronic smoking device that can be used to deliver nicotine or any
other substances to the person inhaling from the device, including vaping. A warning notice shall be
issued to the Person in Charge as defined in Sec. 101.123(1)(d), Wis. Stats. for the first offense.
B. Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this Section, including those provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes, which are incorporated herein by reference, shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of
not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) and the
costs of prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment of such fine and the costs of prosecution
may be imprisoned in the County Jail until payment of such fines and costs of prosecution, but not
exceeding ninety (90) days for violation, provided, however, that in no case shall the fine imposed for a
violation of any provisions of this Section exceed the maximum fine for the same offense under the laws
of the State of Wisconsin.
11.02.32 Possession of Controlled Substances
A. Controlled Substances. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a controlled substance contrary to
the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
B. Possession of Marijuana. No person shall possess any amount of marijuana,
tetra-hydrocannabinois or any derivative thereof, unless the substance was obtained directly from, or
pursuant to a valid prescription or order of, a licensed physician or pharmacist for a valid medical
purpose.
11.02.33 Possession, Manufacture and Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia
A. Definitions.
1. Drug Paraphernalia. As defined under Sec. 961.571(1)(a), Wis. Stats.
2. Marijuana. As defined under Sec. 961.01(14), Wis. Stats.
3. Practitioner. As defined under Sec. 961.01(19)(a), Wis. Stats.
B. No person may use, or possess with the primary intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance or controlled substance analog in violation of Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
C. No person may deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug
paraphernalia, knowing that it will be primarily used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance or
controlled substance analog in violation of Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
D. Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this Section may be fined not more than Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00). Any drug paraphernalia used or possessed in violation of this Chapter shall be seized
and given to the City.
11.02.34 Failure to Obey Lawful Order
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the direction or order of a law enforcement officer while
such law enforcement officer is acting in an official capacity in carrying out their duties.
Division 4 Offenses involving Alcoholic Beverages
11.02.41 Outside Consumption
A. Definitions.
1. Alcoholic Beverage. All ardent, spirituous, distilled or vinous liquors, liquids or compounds, whether
medicated, proprietary, patented, or not, and by whatever name called, as well as all liquors and
liquids made by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley malt and hops,
with or without unmalted grains or decorticated or degerminated grains or sugar, which contain onehalf
(1/2) of one percent (1 %) or more of alcohol by volume and which are fit for use for beverage
purposes.
2. Public Area. Any location within the City which is open to access to persons not requiring specific
permission of the owner to be at such location including all parking lots serving commercial
establishments.
3. Underage Person. Any person under the legal drinking age as defined by the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Alcoholic Beverages in Public Areas.
1. Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or give away, or offer to sell, serve or
give away, any alcoholic beverage upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, public parking lot, highway,
cemetery or drives or other public area within the City or on private property without the owner's
consent, except at licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or have in their
possession any open container containing alcohol beverage upon any public street, public sidewalk,
public way, public alley or public parking lot within the City, except at licensed premises.
2. Parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have in their possession any alcohol beverage in
any City park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except at licensed premises.
3. Private Property Held Open For Public Use. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any
alcohol beverages upon any private property held open for public use within the City unless the
property is specifically named as being part of a licensed premises.
4. Leaving Licensed Premises With Open Container.
a. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, permittee or operator to permit any patron to leave the
licensed premises with an open container containing any alcohol beverage.
b. It shall be unlawful for any patron to leave a licensed premise with an open container containing
any alcohol beverage.
c. It shall be unlawful for any patron to remove an original unopened package, container or bottle
containing any alcohol beverage from a Class A licensed premises between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
5. Exceptions.
a. The provisions of Subsection 1.-3. above may be waived by the Common Council for duly
authorized special events.
b. Any organization which has been issued a special Class "B" fermented malt beverage picnic
license pursuant to this Code of Ordinances for a specific area, provided that the provisions of
this Chapter and Title 7 are fully complied with.
11.02.42 Sale to Underage or Intoxicated Persons Restricted
A. Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Underage Persons.
1. No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away any fermented malt beverages to any
underage person not accompanied by their parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal
drinking age or procure for, sell, dispense or give away any intoxicating liquor to any underage
person.
2. No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in alcohol beverages to or with any underage
person not accompanied by their parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age
or sell, vend, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquor to or with any underage person.
B. Sale of Alcohol Beverages to Intoxicated Persons.
1. Restrictions.
a. No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away alcohol beverages to a person who is
intoxicated.
b. No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in alcohol beverages to or with a person
who is intoxicated.
C. Penalties.
1. A person who commits a violation of this Section shall be subject to the General Penalty as set forth
in Section 1.01.17 of this Code of Ordinances.
2. In addition to the fines provided in Subsections C.1. above, for any violation under Section A. above,
a court may suspend any license or permit issued under this Chapter to a person violating this
Subsection for:
a. Not more than three (3) days, if the court finds that the person committed a violation within twelve
(12) months after committing one (1) previous violation;
b. Not less than three (3) days nor more than ten (10) days, if the court finds that the person
committed a violation within twelve (12) months after committing two (2) other violations; or
c. Not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days, if the court finds that the person
committed the violation within twelve (12) months after committing three (3) other violations.
11.02.43 Underage Persons
A. Presence in Places of Sale Restrictions. An underage person not accompanied by their parent,
guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age may not enter, knowingly attempt to enter, or
be on any premises for which a license or permit for the retail sale of alcohol beverages has been issued
for any purpose except the transaction of business pertaining to the licensed premises with or for the
licensee or their employee. The business may not be amusement or the purchase, receiving or
consumption of edibles or beverages or similar activities which normally constitute activities of a customer
of the premises. This Subsection does not apply to:
1. An underage person who is a resident, employee, lodger or boarder on the premises controlled by the
proprietor, licensee or permittee of which the licensed premises consists or is a part.
2. An underage person who enters or is on a "Class A" retail intoxicating liquor premises for the purpose
of purchasing other than alcohol beverages. An underage person so entering the premises may not
remain on the premises after the purchase.
3. Hotels, drug stores, grocery stores, bowling alleys, indoor golf simulator facilities, service stations,
vessels, cars operated by any railroad, regularly established athletic fields, outdoor volleyball courts
that are contiguous to a licensed premises, stadiums or public facilities as defined in Sec.
125.51(5)(b)l.d, Wis. Stats., which are owned by a county or municipality, or centers for the visual or
performing arts.
4. Premises in the state fair park, concessions authorized on state-owned premises in the state parks
and state forests as defined or designated in Chs. 27 and 28, Wis. Stats., and parks owned or
operated by agricultural societies.
5. Ski chalets, golf courses and golf clubhouses, racetracks licensed under Ch. 562, Wis. Stats., curling
clubs, private soccer clubs and private tennis clubs.
6. Premises operated under both a "Class B" fermented malt beverage or Class "B” alcohol beverage
license or permit and a restaurant permit where the principal business conducted is that of a
restaurant. If the premises are operated under both a "Class B" or Class "B" license or permit and a
restaurant permit, the principal business conducted is presumed to be the sale of alcohol beverages,
but the presumption may be rebutted by competent evidence.
7. Premises operating under both a "Class C" license and a restaurant permit.
8. An underage person who enters or remains in a room on Class "B" or "Class B" licensed premises
separate from any room where alcohol beverages are sold or served, if no alcohol beverages are
furnished or consumed by any person in the room where the underage person is present and the
presence of underage persons is authorized under this Subsection. (An underage person may enter
and remain on Class "B" or "Class B" premises under this Subsection only if the City adopts an
ordinance permitting underage persons to enter and remain on the premises as provided in this
Subsection and the City Police Department issues to the Class "B" or "Class B" licensee a written
authorization permitting underage persons to be present under this Subsection on the date specified
in the authorization. Before issuing the authorization, the City Police Department shall make a
determination that the presence of underage persons on the licensed premises will not endanger their
health, welfare or safety or that of other members of the City. The licensee shall obtain a separate
authorization for each date on which underage persons will be present on the premises.)
9. An underage person who enters and remains on premises for which a temporary Class "B" license is
issued under Sec. 125.26, Wis. Stats., if the licensee is authorized by the official or body of the City
that issued the license to permit underage persons to be on the premises under Sec. 125.26(6), Wis.
Stats., and if the licensee permits underage persons to be on the premises.
B. Penalties. A licensee or permittee who directly or indirectly permits an underage person to enter or be on
a licensed premise in violation of Section A. above is upon conviction subject to a fine of not more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
C. Underage Persons Prohibitions. Any underage person who does any of the following is guilty of a
violation:
1. Procures or attempts to procure alcohol beverages from a licensee or permittee.
2. Unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age
possesses or consumes alcohol beverages on licensed premises.
3. Enters, knowingly attempts to enter or is on licensed premises in violation of Section A. above.
4. Falsely represents their age for the purpose of receiving alcohol beverages from a licensee or
permittee.
D. Adult to Accompany. Except as provided in Section E. below, any underage person not accompanied
by their parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age who knowingly possesses or
consumes alcohol beverages is guilty of a violation.
E. Exceptions. An underage person may possess alcohol beverages in the course of employment during
their working hours if employed by any of the following:
1. A brewer.
2. A fermented malt beverages wholesaler.
3. A permittee other than a Class "B" or "Class B" permittee.
4. A facility for the production of alcohol fuel.
5. A retail licensee or permittee under the conditions specified in Secs. 125.32(2) or 125.68(2), Wis.
Stats., or for delivery of unopened containers to the home or vehicle of a customer.
6. A campus, if the underage person is at least eighteen (18) years of age and is under the immediate
supervision of a person who has attained the legal drinking age.
F. Penalties for Section C. Violations. Any person violating Section C. is subject to the following
penalties:
1. For a first (1st) violation, subject to a fine of not more than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00),
suspension of the person's operating privilege as provided under Sec. 343.30(6)(b)1, Wis. Stats.,
participation in other community service work or any combination of these penalties.
2. For a violation committed within twelve (12) months of a previous violation, either subject to a fine of
not less than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00),
suspension of the person's operating privilege as provided under Sec. 343.30(6)(b)(1), Wis. Stats.,
participation in community service work or any combination of these penalties.
3. For a violation committed within twelve (12) months of two (2) previous violations, either subject to a
fine of not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) nor more than Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars
($750.00), revocation of the person's operating privilege under Sec. 343.30(6)(b)3, Wis. Stats.,
participation in community service work or any combination of these penalties.
4. For a violation committed within twelve (12) months of three (3) or more previous violations, either
subject to a fine of not less than Seven Hundred Dollars ($700.00) nor more than One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00), revocation of the person's operating privilege under Sec. 343.30(6)(b)3, Wis.
Stats., participation in community service work or any combination of these penalties.
G. Penalties for Section D. Violations. Any person violating Section D. above is subject to the following
penalties:
1. For a first (1st) violation, subject to a fine of less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than
Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00), suspension of the person's operating privilege as provided under
Sec. 343.30(6)(b)l, Wis. Stats., participation in community service work or any combination of these
penalties.
2. For a violation committed within twelve (12) months of a previous violation, either subject to a fine of
not less than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) nor more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00),
suspension of the person's operating privilege as provided under Sec. 343.30(6)(b)2, Wis. Stats.,
participation in community service work or any combination of these penalties.
3. For a violation committed within twelve (12) months of two (2) previous violations, either subject to a
fine of not less than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00),
revocation of the person's operating privilege under Sec. 343.30(6)(b)3, Wis. Stats., participation in
community service work or any combination of these penalties.
4. For a violation committed within twelve (12) months of three (3) or more previous violations, either
subject to a fine of not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) nor more than One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00), revocation of the person's operating privilege under Sec. 343.30(6)(b)3, Wis.
Stats., participation in community service work or any combination of these penalties.
H. Multiple Violations from an Incident. For purposes of Sections C. or D. above, all violations arising out
of the same incident or occurrence shall be counted as a single violation.
I. Disclosure of License Revocation Information. When a court revokes or suspends a person's
operating privilege under this Section, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation may not disclose
information concerning or relating to the revocation or suspension to any person other than a court,
district attorney, county corporation counsel, city, village or town attorney, law enforcement agency or the
person whose operating privilege is revoked or suspended. A person entitled to receive information under
this Subsection may not disclose the information to any other person or agency.
J. Applicability of Statutory Proceedings. A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age on the date
of disposition is subject to Sec. 938.344, Wis. Stats., unless proceedings have been instituted against the
person in a court of civil or criminal justice after dismissal of the citation under Sec. 938.344(3), Wis.
Stats.
K. Alcohol Abuse Programs.
1. In this Subsection, "defendant" means a person found guilty of violating Sections C. or D. who is
eighteen (18), nineteen (19), or twenty (20) years of age.
2. After ordering a penalty under Sections F. or G., the court, with the agreement of the defendant, may
enter an additional order staying the execution of the penalty order and suspending or modifying the
penalty imposed. The order under this Subsection shall require the defendant to do any of the
following:
a. Submit to an alcohol abuse assessment that conforms to the criteria specified under Sec.
938.547(4), Wis. Stats., and that is conducted by an approved treatment facility. The order shall
designate an approved treatment facility to conduct the alcohol abuse assessment and shall
specify the date by which the assessment must be completed.
b. Participate in an outpatient alcohol abuse treatment program at an approved treatment facility, if
an alcohol abuse assessment conducted under Subsection K.2.a. recommends treatment.
c. Participate in a court-approved alcohol abuse education program.
3. If the approved treatment facility, with the written informed consent of the defendant, notifies the
agency primarily responsible for providing services to the defendant that the defendant has submitted
to an assessment under Subsection K.2.a. and that the defendant does not need treatment or
education, the court shall notify the defendant of whether or not the penalty will be reinstated.
4. If the defendant completes the alcohol abuse treatment program or court-approved alcohol abuse
education program, the approved treatment facility or court-approved alcohol abuse education
program shall, with the written informed consent of the defendant, notify the agency primarily
responsible for providing services to the defendant that the defendant has complied with the order
and the court shall notify the defendant of whether or not the penalty will be reinstated. If the court
had ordered the suspension of the defendant's operating privilege under Section F. or G., the court
may order the secretary of transportation to reinstate the operating privilege of the defendant if they
complete the alcohol abuse treatment program or court-approved alcohol abuse education program.
5. If an approved treatment facility or court-approved alcohol abuse education program, with the written
informed consent of the defendant, notifies the agency primarily responsible for providing services to
the defendant that the defendant is not participating in the program or that the defendant has not
satisfactorily completed a recommended alcohol abuse treatment program or an education program,
the court shall hold a hearing to determine whether the penalties under Section F. or G. should be
imposed.
L. Defense of Sellers. In determining whether or not a licensee or permittee has violated Sections
11.02.42.A. or 11.02.43.A. all relevant circumstances surrounding the presence of the underage person
or the procuring, selling, dispensing or giving away of alcohol beverages may be considered, including
any circumstances listed below. In addition, proof of all of the following facts by a seller of alcohol
beverages to an underage person is a defense to any prosecution for a violation of this Section:
1. That the purchaser falsely represented that they had attained the legal drinking age.
2. That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and prudent person would believe
that the purchaser had attained the legal drinking age.
3. That the sale was made in good faith and in reliance on the written representation and appearance of
the purchaser in the belief that the purchaser had attained the legal drinking age.
4. That the underage person supported the representation under Subsection 1 above with
documentation that they had attained the legal drinking age.
M. Additional Prohibited Acts. In addition to any other provision of the City of Onalaska Code of
Ordinances, no juvenile shall own, possess, ingest, buy, sell, trade, use as a beverage, give away or
otherwise control any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in violation of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
N. Penalty for Violations of Section E. Any juveniles who shall violate the provisions of Section D. shall be
subject to the same penalties as are provided in the General Penalty provision of Section 1.01.17 of this
Code of Ordinances exclusive of the provisions therein relative to commitment in the County Jail.
11.02.44 False or Altered Identification Cards
A. Any underage person who does any of the following is subject to a fine of not less than Three Hundred
Dollars ($300.00) and not more than One Thousand Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($1,250.00),
suspension of the person’s operating privilege under Sec. 343.30(6)(bm), Wis. Stats., or other community
service work or any combination thereof:
1. Intentionally carries an official identification card not legally issued to them, an official identification
card obtained under false pretenses or an official identification card which has been altered or
duplicated to convey false information. A law enforcement officer shall confiscate any card that
violates this Subsection.
2. Makes, alters or duplicates an official identification card purporting to show that they have attained
the legal drinking age.
3. Presents false information to an issuing law enforcement officer in applying for an official identification
card.
4. Intentionally carries an official identification card or other documentation showing that the person has
attained the legal drinking age, with knowledge that the official identification card or documentation is
false.
11.02.45 Possession of Alcohol Beverages on School Grounds Prohibited
A. Definitions.
1. Motor Vehicle. A motor vehicle owned, rented or consigned to a school.
2. School. A public, parochial or private school which provides an educational program for one (1) or
more grades between grades one (1) and twelve (12) and which is commonly known as an
elementary school, middle school, junior high school, senior high school or high school.
3. School Administrator. The person designated by the governing body of a school as ultimately
responsible for the ordinary operations of a school.
4. School Premises. Premises owned, rented or under the control of a school.
B. Except as provided by Section C. no person may possess or consume alcohol beverages:
1. On school premises;
2. In a motor vehicle, if a pupil attending the school is in the motor vehicle; or
3. While participating in a school-sponsored activity.
C. Alcohol beverages may be possessed or consumed on school premises, in motor vehicles or by
participants in school-sponsored activities if specifically permitted in writing by the School Administrator
consistent with applicable laws, ordinances and School Board policies.
D. A person who violates this Section is subject to a fine of more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00),
except that Sec. 938.344, Wis. Stats., and Division 4 of Chapter 2 of this Title of Ordinances provide the
penalties applicable to underage persons.
11.02.46 Adult Permitting or Encouraging Underage Violation.
A. No adult may knowingly permit or fail to take action to prevent the illegal consumption of alcohol
beverages by an underage person on property, including premises owned and occupied by the adult or
occupied by the adult and under the adult’s control. This Section applies at a lodging establishment, as
defined under Sec. 106.52(1)(d), Wis. Stats., only if the adult has furnished payment or security for the
lodging. This Subsection does not apply to alcohol beverages used exclusively as part of a religious
service.
B. No adult may intentionally encourage or contribute to a violation of Section 11.02.43.A or B.
C. A person who violates this Section is subject to a fine and suspension as set forth in 11.02.42.C1 and C2.
11.02.47 Social Hosting
A. Purpose and Findings. The Common Council of the City of Onalaska intends to discourage underage
possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and
intends to hold persons civilly responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under twentyone
(21) years of age possess or consume alcohol. The Common Council of the City of Onalaska finds:
1. Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is possessed or consumed by
persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are harmful to those persons and constitute a potential
threat to public health requiring prevention or abatement.
2. Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as well as the general public,
from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic
collisions.
3. Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could have drastic effects on those who use
it as well as those who are affected by the actions of an irresponsible user.
4. Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption occur outside the
presence of parents. However, there are times when the parent(s) is/are present and condone the
activity, and in some circumstances, provide the alcohol.
5. A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person responsible for knowingly allowing underage
possession or consumption of alcohol.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
1. Alcohol. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin or any
other distilled spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever
process produced.
2. Alcohol or Alcoholic Beverage. Fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquor.
3. Event or Gathering. Any group of three or more persons who have assembled or gathered together
for a social occasion or other activity.
4. Host or Allow. To aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control or permit a gathering or event.
5. Parent. Shall means any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
a. As natural, adoptive parent or step-parent;
b. As a legal guardian; or
c. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the Court.
6. Residence, Premises or Public or Private Property. Shall mean any home, yard, farm, field, land,
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room or other dwelling unit, hall or meeting room, park or any
other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as
a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented or
used with or without permission or compensation.
7. Underage Person. Shall mean any individual under twenty-one (21) years of age.
8. Present. Being at hand or in attendance.
C. Prohibited Acts.
1. It is unlawful for any adult to knowingly permit or fail to take action to prevent the illegal consumption
of alcohol beverages by an underage person on premises owned by the adult or under the adult’s
control.
a. Additionally, an adult is responsible for violating this Section above if the adult intentionally
encourages or contributes to any underage person:
i. procuring or attempting to procure alcohol beverages from a licensee or permittee;
ii. possessing or consuming alcohol beverages on licensed premises;
iii. entering or knowingly attempting to enter or is on licensed premises in violation of Sec.
125.07(3)(a), Wis. Stats., or
iv. falsely represents their age for the purpose of receiving alcohol beverages from a licensee or
permittee.
b. It is unlawful for any person to procure for, sell, dispense or give away any alcohol beverages to
any underage person not accompanied by their parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the
legal drinking age.
D. Exceptions. This Chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and their
parents while the parent is present and in control of the underage person.
1. This Chapter does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
2. This Chapter does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of
alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of employment.
3. This Chapter does not apply to situations where a parent lawfully serves alcohol to their own child.
E. Penalties. A person who violates any provision of this Ordinance is subject to subject to a fine of not
more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) if the person has not committed a previous violation within
thirty (30) months of the violation, not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not
more than thirty (30) days or both if the person has committed a previous violation within thirty (30)
months of the violation, not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than
ninety (90) days or both if the person has committed two (2) previous violations within thirty (30) months
of the violation or not more than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than nine
(9) months or both if the person has committed three (3) or more previous violations within thirty (30)
months of the violation, together with the costs of prosecution. A person who is in default of payment is
subject to imprisonment in the county jail until the fines and costs are paid.
Chapter 03 Offenses against Property
Division 1 Property Damage
11.03.11 Destruction or Theft of Property Prohibited
A. Destruction of Property.
1. No person shall willfully injure or intentionally deface, destroy, damage or unlawfully remove, take or
interfere with any property of any kind or nature belonging to the City of Onalaska, Onalaska School
District or to any private person or business without the consent of the owner or property authority.
2. No person shall willfully, maliciously or wantonly and without cause with a motor vehicle deface,
destroy, take or meddle with or injure any tree, shrub, grass, turf, plants, crops or soil belonging to the
City if Onalaska, Onalaska School District or to any private person without the consent of the owner
or proper authority.
3. Damaging Fire Hydrants and Water Mains. No person shall, without the authority of City officials,
operate any valve connected with the street or water supply mains, or open any fire hydrant
connected with the water distribution system, except for the purpose of extinguishing a fire. No
person shall injure or impair the use of any water main or fire hydrant.
B. Parental Liability. Pursuant to Sec. 895.035, Wis. Stats., the parents of an emancipated minor shall be
liable for the damage of property caused by the willful, malicious or wanton action of such minor; such
liability shall not exceed the statutory amount for any one (1) act.
C. Graffiti Prohibited. No person may write, paint, or draw any inscription, figure, or mark of any type of any
public building, structure or property or other real or personal property owned by another person,
business or entity unless the express permission of the owner or proper authority has been obtained. The
existence of graffiti on any real property within the City is expressly declared a public nuisance affecting
the public health, safety and welfare.
1. Graffiti Definition. Marks, symbols, signs, letters, names, phrases, writings, drawings or sentences
which are inscribed or placed on real property without the consent of the owner or occupant that are
not otherwise permitted by law.
2. Abatement. Every owner of a structure or real property defaced by graffiti shall report the defacing to
the City of Onalaska Police Department upon discovery. The owner shall also comply with the terms
of a written notice to abate served on the property owner by the Police Department or
Planning/Inspection Department ordering the removal or covering of such graffiti. The notice to abate
shall be served personally or by certified mail. If a property owner fails to comply with the notice to
abate within seventy-two (72) hours, the City shall have the graffiti covered or removed and all costs,
fees, and expenses shall be entered into the tax roll as a special charge, pursuant to Sec. 66.0627,
Wis. Stats., against the parcel of land on which the property is defaced by the graffiti is located.
Extensions to the seventy-two (72) hour correction period may be granted by the Chief of Police or
their designee.
Division 2 Other Offenses against Property
11.03.21 Trespass
A. Definitions.
1. Property. Any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent
structure whether or not a person is living in such home.
2. Trespass. Trespass shall mean any of the following:
a. Entering Property Without Permission. Entering upon or in property without the express
permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a public
offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass or place thereon or therein anything
animate or inanimate.
b. Entering or Remaining on Property. Entering or remaining upon or in property without
justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or vacate
therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession or by any law enforcement officer
or public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use of or maintenance of the property.
c. Interfering with Lawful Use of Property. Entering upon or in private property for the purpose or
with the effect of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
d. Using Property Without Permission. Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing
therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing or placing thereon or therein anything animate or
inanimate without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee or person in lawful
possession.
B. Trespass Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass.
C. Exception. None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the land of another for the
sole purpose of retrieving personal property which as accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen,
strayed, or blown onto the property of others, provided the person(s) retrieving the property takes the
most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as
possible and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
11.03.23 Penalties
A. In addition to the General Penalty of this Code in Section 1.01.17 or any other fine or penalty imposed for
violation of any Section of this Chapter, any person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any
public property shall be liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property.
The parent or parents of any unemancipated minor child who violates Destruction of Property or Damage
to Public Property may also be held liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or
destroyed property in accordance with the Wisconsin Statutes. Nothing in this Code of Ordinances shall
prevent the Police Department from referring violations of the provisions of this Title to the District
Attorney's office in the interest of justice.
Chapter 04 Offenses by Juveniles
Division 1 Administration and General Offenses
11.04.11 City Jurisdiction over Juveniles
A. Adoption of State Statutes. Secs. 938.02 and 938.17(2), Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and by
reference made a part of this Section as if fully set forth herein.
B. Definitions.
1. Adult. A person who is eighteen (18) years of age or older, except that for purposes of prosecuting a
person who is alleged to have violated any civil law or municipal ordinance, "adult" means a person
who has attained seventeen (17) years of age.
2. Juvenile. A person who is less than eighteen (18) years of age, except that for purposes of
prosecuting a person who is alleged to have violated a civil law or municipal ordinance, "juvenile"
does not include a person who has attained seventeen (17) years of age.
C. Provisions of Ordinance Applicable to Juveniles. Subject to the provisions and limitations of Sec.
938.17(2), Wis. Stats., complaints alleging a violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances against
juveniles may be brought on behalf of the City of Onalaska and may be prosecuted utilizing the same
procedures in such cases as are charged with the same offense.
D. No Incarceration as Penalty. The Court shall not impose incarceration as a penalty for any person
convicted of an offense prosecuted under this Section.
11.04.12 Enforcement
A. Citation Process. For violations of this Chapter, juveniles may be cited by the citation process on a form
approved by the City Attorney and Chief of Police. A parent notification will be mailed to the parent or
legal guardian.
11.04.13 Curfew
A. Prohibited. No person who is seventeen (17) years of age or under shall be on foot, bicycle, or in any
type of vehicle on any public street, avenue, alley, park, school grounds or other public places in the City
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of
12:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday, unless accompanied by a parent of guardian or person
having lawful custody and control of their person or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor.
The fact that the child, unaccompanied by parent, guardian or other person having legal custody, is found
upon any street, alley or public place during the aforementioned hours shall be prima facie evidence that
the child is there unlawfully and that no reasonable excuse exists therefore.
B. Parental Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the lawful
care, custody and control of any person under eighteen (18) years of age to allow or permit such person
to violate the provisions of Section A. above. The fact that prior to the present offense a parent, guardian
or custodian was informed by any law enforcement officer of a separate violation of this Section occurring
within thirty (30) days of the present offense shall be prima facie evidence that such parent, guardian or
custodian allowed or permitted the present violation. Any parent, guardian or custodian herein who shall
have made a missing person notification to the Police Department shall not be considered to have
allowed or permitted any person under eighteen (18) years of age to violate this Section.
C. Responsibility of Places of Amusement. No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement,
entertainment, refreshment or other place of business shall permit any minor under eighteen (18) years of
age to loiter, loaf or idle in such place during the hours prohibited by this Section. Whenever the
entertainment, refreshment or other place of business during the hours prohibited by this Section, finds
person under eighteen (18) years of age loitering, loafing or idling in such place of business, they shall
immediately order such person to leave and if such person refuses to leave, the operator shall
immediately notify the Police Department and inform them of the violation.
D. Detaining a Minor. Every law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to detain any minor violating the
provisions above until such time as the parent, guardian or person having legal custody of the minor shall
be immediately notified and the person so notified shall as soon as reasonably possible thereafter report
to the Police Department for the purpose of taking the custody of the minor and shall sign a release for
the minor. If no response is received, the law enforcement officer shall take whatever action is deemed
necessary in the best interest of the minor. Provided, however, that no detention of a minor shall occur
unless the law enforcement officer has reason to believe that no defense or exception to the curfew
applies.
E. Exceptions. The provisions of Section A. shall not apply to:
1. Minors returning home from municipal, religious and school activities; or
2. Minors during or returning from employment.
11.04.14 Petty Theft and Receipt of Stolen Goods by Juveniles
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of seventeen (17) years of age, with intent, to steal or
take property from the person or presence of the owner without the owner's consent and with the intent to
deprive the owner of the use thereof and to intentionally receive or conceal property they know to be
stolen.
11.04.15 Sexting
A. Definitions.
1. Nudity. Showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully
opaque covering; or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple. Breastfeeding of a baby does not under any circumstance
constitute “nudity,” irrespective of whether or not the nipple is covered during or incidental to feeding.
2. Harmful to Minors. Any reproduction, imitation, characterization, description, exhibition, presentation
or representation, of whatever kind of form, depicting nudity, sexual conduct, or sexual excitement
when it:
a. Predominately appeals to indecent, shameful, or morbid interest;
b. Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to
what is suitable material or conduct for minors; and
c. Taken as a whole, is without serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value for minors.
3. Minor. Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Sexting Prohibited. A minor commits the offense of sexting if they knowingly:
1. Use any device capable of electronic data transmission or distribution, to transmit or distribute to
another person any image, recording, text, correspondence, message or substantially similar form of
communication, of any person which depicts nudity, as defined above, and is harmful to minors, as
defined above.
2. Possess any image, recording, text, correspondence, message or other substantially similar form of
communication that was transmitted or distributed by another person which depicts nudity, and is
harmful to minors. A minor does not violate this paragraph if all of the following apply:
a. The minor did not solicit the photograph, video or substantially similar communication;
b. The minor took reasonable steps to report the photograph, video or substantially similar
communication to a school or law enforcement officer; and
c. The minor did not transmit or distribute the photograph, video or substantially similar
communication to a third party other than a law enforcement officer.
11.04.16 Unlawful Sheltering of Minors
A. No person shall intentionally shelter or conceal a minor child who:
1. Is a “runaway child”, meaning a child who has run away from their parent, legal guardian or legal or
physical custodian; or
2. Is a child who may be taken into custody pursuant to Sec. 938.19, Wis. Stats.
B. Section A. applies when the following conditions are present:
1. The person knows or should have known that the child is a child described in Section A. above; and
2. The child has been reported to a law enforcement agency as a missing person or as a child described
in Section A above.
C. Section A. does not apply to any of the following:
1. A person operating a runaway home in compliance with Sec. 48.227, Wis. Stats.; or
2. A person who shelters or conceals a child at the request or with the consent of the child’s parent,
legal guardian or legal or physical custodian except if the sheltering or concealment violates Sec.
948.31, Wis. Stats.; or
3. A person who immediately notifies a law enforcement agency, county department of public welfare or
social services, or the intake worker of the court exercising jurisdiction under Ch. 48 or 938, Wis.
Stats., that they are sheltering or concealing such child and provides the person or agency notified
with all information requested.
11.04.17 Criminal Gang Activity Prohibited
A. Authority. This Section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Sec. 66.0107 and Ch. 948, Wis.
Stats.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following terms are defined:
1. Criminal Gang. An ongoing organization, association or group of three (3) or more persons, whether
formal or informal, that has as one of its primary activities, the commission of one (1) or more criminal
or unlawful acts, or acts that would be criminal or unlawful if the actor were an adult, specified in Sec.
939.22(21)(a)-(s), Wis. Stats., that has a common name or common identifying sign or symbol and
whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang
activity.
2. Pattern of Criminal Gang Activity. Shall have the same meaning as the definition in Sec.
939.22(21), Wis. Stats., the list of offenses in Subsections a.-s. of that Section to Title 11 of this Code
of Ordinances.
3. Unlawful Act. Includes any criminal act or act that would be criminal if the actor were an adult.
C. Unlawful Activity.
1. It is unlawful for any person to engage in criminal gang activity.
2. It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit a person who has not attained the age of
eighteen (18) years of age to:
a. Commit or attempt to commit any violation of the provisions of this Section;
b. Participate in criminal gang activity; or
c. Join a criminal gang.
11.04.18 Penalties
A. Penalty.
1. Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a minor in violation of this Section 11.04.13
who has been warned and who thereafter violates any of the provisions of that Section shall be
subject to the General Penalty as set forth in Section 1.01.17 of this Code.
2. Any minor violating the provisions of Section 11.04.13 may be referred to the proper authorities as
provided in Ch. 48, Wis. Stats.
3. Any person violating the provisions of Sections 11.04.16 and 11.04.17 shall be subject to a fine of not
more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
4. Penalties. Violations of this Chapter by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall be
punishable according to the General Penalty Section of 1.02.17 of this Code exclusive of the
provisions therein relative to commitment in the County Jail and Secs. 938.17(2), 938.343, 938.344
and 938.345, Wis. Stats. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the Police Department, in their
discretion, from referring cases directly to the District Attorney's office.
Division 2 Offenses related to Alcohol, Drugs and Tobacco Products
11.04.21 Purchase or Possession of Tobacco Products and Nicotine Products
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this Section:
1. Tobacco Products. Any tobacco related device and any substance containing tobacco leaf,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping
tobacco and shall include any nicotine product or electronic smoking device that can be used to
deliver nicotine or any other substances to the person inhaling from the device.
2. Nicotine Product. A product that contains nicotine including, but not limited to gum, beverages or
devices manufactured as electronic cigarettes, electronic cigars, electronic pipes or any other product
name.
3. Electronic Smoking Device. Any device that can be used to deliver nicotine or any other substances
to the person inhaling from the device.
B. Purchase by Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years
of age to purchase tobacco products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any false or
altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products or nicotine products.
C. Possession by Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years of age to possess any tobacco products; provided that the possession by a person under the age of
eighteen (18) years of age under the direct supervision of the parent or legal guardian of such person in
the privacy of the parent’s or legal guardian’s home shall not be prohibited.
D. Sale of Tobacco Products to Minors Prohibited. No person may purchase cigarettes, tobacco products
or nicotine product on behalf of or provide to any person who is under eighteen (18) years of age. A law
enforcement officer shall seize any cigarettes, tobacco products, electronic smoking device or nicotine
products.
E. Statutes Adopted. The provisions of Secs. 254.92, 134.66 and 778.25(1)(a), Wis. Stats., are adopted by
reference and incorporated herein.
F. Violations. For purposes of determining previous violations, the thirty (30) month period shall be
measured from the dates of violations that resulted in an imposition of a fine or a conviction. For the
purpose of determining whether or not a previous violation has occurred, if more than one (1) violation
occurs at the same time, all those violations shall be counted as one (1) violation. A person who commits
a violation of Sections B. or C. shall be subject to a fine according to the General Penalty Section of
1.02.17 of this Code exclusive of the provisions therein relative to commitment in the County Jail. A
person who commits a violation of Section D. may be:
1. Fined not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) if the person has not committed a previous
violation within thirty (30) months of the violation; or
2. Fined not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days
or both if the person has committed a previous violation within thirty (30) months of the violation.
3. Fined not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for nor more than ninety (90)
days or both if the person has committed two (2) previous violations within thirty (30) months of the
violation.
4. Fined not more than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than nine (9)
months or both if the person has committed three (3) or more previous violations within thirty (30)
months of the violation.
5. In addition to the fines provided in Subsections 1.-4. above, a court shall suspend any Cigarette
license issued under Title 7 of this Code of Ordinances to a person violating this Subsection for:
a. Not more than three (3) days, if the court finds that the person committed a violation within twelve
(12) months after committing one (1) previous violation;
b. Not less than three (3) days nor more than ten (10) days, if the court finds that the person
committed a violation within twelve (12) months after committing two (2) other violations; or
c. Not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days, if the court finds that the person
committed the violation within twelve (12) months after committing three (3) other violations.
11.04.22 Possession, Manufacture and Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia
A. Definition.
1. Drug Paraphernalia. All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for
use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
selling, distributing, delivering, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled substance, as defined in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.,
in violation of this Section. It includes but is not limited to:
a. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or
harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
b. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use, in manufacturing, selling, distributing, delivering,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances.
c. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use, in increasing the potency of
any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
d. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use, in identifying or in analyzing the
strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances.
e. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use, in weighing or measuring
controlled substances.
f. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and
lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances.
g. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use, in removing twigs and
seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana.
h. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for
use, in compounding controlled substances.
i. Capsules, balloons, envelopes, or other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use, in
packaging small quantities of controlled substances.
j. Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing
controlled substances.
k. Hypodermic syringes, needles, or other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use, in
parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body.
l. Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use, in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing
marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil, into the human body, including but not limited to:
i. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens,
permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
ii. Water pipes;
iii. Carburetion tubes and devices;
iv. Smoking and carburetion masks;
v. Objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too
small or too short to be held in the hand;
vi. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
vii. Chamber pipes;
viii. Carburetor pipes;
ix. Electric pipes;
x. Air-driven pipes;
xi. Chillums;
xii. Bongs; and or
xiii. Ice pipes or chillers.
B. Determination of Drug Paraphernalia. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the
following shall be considered, without limitation of such other considerations a court may deem relevant:
1. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use.
2. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, under any city, state or
federal law relating to any controlled substance.
3. The proximity of the object in time and space to a direct violation of this Section.
4. The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
5. The existence of any residue of controlled substance on the object.
6. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to
deliver it to persons whom the person knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of this Section. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of this object,
as to a direct violation of this Section, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or
designed for use, as drug paraphernalia.
7. Oral or written instructions provided with the object concerning its use.
8. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use.
9. National and local advertising concerning its use.
10. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
11. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sale of the business
enterprise.
12. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community;
13. Expert testimony concerning its use.
C. Prohibited Uses.
1. Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. No person may use, or possess with the sole intent to use,
drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale
or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this Section.
2. Manufacture or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia. No person may deliver, or possess with intent to
deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be solely used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this Section.
3. Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia by a Minor to Minor. Any person who is under eighteen (18) years
of age, who violates Subsection C.3. by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under eighteen
(18) years of age who is at least three (3) years younger than the violator, is guilty of a special
offense.
4. Exemption. This Section does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners, pharmacists, owners of
pharmacies and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with Ch. 161, Wis. Stats. This Section
does not prohibit the possession, manufacture or use of hypodermics, in accordance with Ch. 961,
Wis. Stats.
D. Penalties. Any person who violations Section C. shall upon conviction, the Court shall suspend the
juvenile’s operating privilege, as defined in Sec. 340.01(40), Wis. Stats., for not less than six (6) months
nor more than five (5) years and, in addition, shall order one of the following penalties:
1. For a first violation, a fine of not more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) or participation in community service
work under Sec. 938.34 (5g), Wis. Stats., or both.
2. For a violation committed within twelve (12) months of a previous violation, a fine of not more than
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or participation in community service work under Sec. 938.34 (5g),
Wis. Stats., or both.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.01.11
Page 1
Table of Contents
Title 13 Unified Development Code ..................................................................................................................... 2
Chapter 01 Introductory Provisions .............................................................................................................. 2
Authority ................................................................................................................................ 2
Interpretation ......................................................................................................................... 4
Official Map ........................................................................................................................... 5
Administration ........................................................................................................................ 6
Chapter 02 Zoning Districts .......................................................................................................................... 7
General Provisions ................................................................................................................ 7
Base Districts ...................................................................................................................... 10
Design Overlay Districts ...................................................................................................... 20
Natural and Historic Resource Protection Overlay Districts ............................................... 40
District Specific Standards .................................................................................................. 74
Use Specific Standards ....................................................................................................... 83
Chapter 03 General Development Standards .......................................................................................... 106
Performance Standards .................................................................................................... 106
Parking and Circulation ..................................................................................................... 108
Landscaping ...................................................................................................................... 112
Fences and Hedges .......................................................................................................... 114
Screens and Buffers .......................................................................................................... 116
Tree Protection and Restoration ....................................................................................... 118
Chapter 04 Subdivision Standards .......................................................................................................... 121
Basic Subdivision Requirements ....................................................................................... 121
Subdivision Design Standards .......................................................................................... 121
Required Improvements .................................................................................................... 124
Dedications ........................................................................................................................ 125
Chapter 05 Administration and Procedures ............................................................................................. 129
General Provisions ............................................................................................................ 129
Site Related ....................................................................................................................... 133
Subdivision Related .......................................................................................................... 144
Ordinance or Plan Amendment Related ........................................................................... 151
Impact Studies ................................................................................................................... 157
Chapter 06 Definitions .............................................................................................................................. 159
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.01.11
Page 2
Title 13 Unified Development Code
Chapter 01 Introductory Provisions
Authority
13.01.11 Legislative Authority
A. This Title is adopted under the authority granted by Sec. 62.23(7), Sec. 87.30 and Ch. 236 Wis. Stats.
as may be amended.
B. For the purposes listed in Sec. 236.01 and Sec. 236.45 Wis. Stats. as may be amended, the
Common Council of the City of Onalaska, Wisconsin, does hereby ordain that the provisions of this
Title shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted to promote the health, safety, morals,
comfort, prosperity and general welfare of the City of Onalaska.
13.01.12 Title
A. This Title shall be known as, referred to and cited as the "Unified Development Code, City of
Onalaska, Wisconsin" and is hereinafter referred to as the "UDC" or "Title."
13.01.13 Purpose and Intent
A. The purpose of this Title is to promote the comfort, health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and
general welfare of the residents of the City of Onalaska, Wisconsin by establishing minimum
regulations and restrictions for the use of all lands, waters, and structures in the City to:
1. Divide the City into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, appearance, form and use of buildings, structures and
land for residence, business and manufacturing and other specified uses;
2. Protect the character and the stability of the residential, business, manufacturing and other
districts within the City and to promote the orderly and beneficial development thereof;
3. Regulate lot coverage, the intensity of use of lot areas and the size and location of all structures
so as to prevent overcrowding and to provide adequate sunlight, air, sanitation and drainage;
4. Regulate population density and distribution so as to avoid sprawl and to facilitate the provision of
adequate public services, utilities and other public requirements;
5. Regulate parking, loading and access so as to promote the safety and efficiency of streets and
highways;
6. Secure safety from fire, panic, flooding, pollution, contamination and other dangers;
7. Stabilize and protect existing and potential property values and encourage the most appropriate
use of land throughout the City;
8. Preserve and protect the beauty of the City of Onalaska through careful siting of structures in bluff
areas, preservation of unique landscapes and the encouragement of good design and
architecture;
9. To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures which are
adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in each district;
10. Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution into surface and subsurface
waters;
11. Prevent flood damage to persons and property and minimize expenditures for flood relief and
flood control projects;
12. Implement those municipal, county, watershed and regional Comprehensive Plans or
components of such plans adopted by the City of Onalaska;
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.01.14
Page 3
13.01.14 Jurisdiction and General Provisions
A. Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of this Title shall apply to all structures, lands, water and air within the
corporate limits of the City of Onalaska.
B. Compliance. No new structure, new use of land, water or air or change in the use of land, water or
air shall hereafter be permitted and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected,
moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without proper zoning
and full compliance with the provisions of this Title and all other applicable local, county and state
regulations.
13.01.15 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
A. It is not intended by this Title to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing
easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously
adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this Title imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this Title shall govern.
13.01.16 Severability and Non Liability
A. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Title is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Title shall not be affected thereby.
B. If any application of this Title to a particular structure, land or water is adjudged unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not be applicable to any other
structure, land or water not specifically included in said judgment.
C. The City does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas designated as flood lands
will be subject to periodic inundation and hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the City
of Onalaska, its agencies or employees for any flood damages, sanitation problems or structural
damages that may occur as a result of reliance upon and conformance with this Title.
13.01.17 Payment of Taxes and Fees Prior to Application
A. Applications for licenses, permits, and other approvals under this Title shall not be accepted by the
City until the Financial Services Director/Treasurer certifies that all real estate taxes, personal
property taxes, special assessments and other fees or charges then due and owing to the City of
Onalaska by the applicant or which relate to the property for which the license, permit, approval, or
application is requested, have been paid in full.
13.01.18 Violations
A. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator or Designated Agent to enforce the
provisions of this Title.
B. Compensation. No compensation shall be allowed for any building or development erected in
violation of this Title, which is razed by any government agency, for street, highway, railroad right of
way or parkway purposes.
C. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this Title shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the forfeiture and such additional penalties as provided for in
Title 1 of the City of Onalaska Code of Ordinances.
D. The City of Onalaska may impose a special charge in accordance with §66.0627 Wis. Stats. as may
be amended should the owner of any lands fail to comply with the provisions of this Title.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.01.21
Page 4
Interpretation
13.01.21 General Application
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Title shall be held to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the City and shall not be construed to be a
limitation or repeal of any other power now possessed by the City of Onalaska.
13.01.22 Relationship to Comprehensive Plan
A. The regulations established herein are derived from and established in accordance with the City of
Onalaska Comprehensive Plan. This Unified Development Code provides regulations to implement
the goals, objectives, policies and recommendations of the City of Onalaska Comprehensive Plan.
References to the contents of the City of Onalaska Comprehensive Plan are contained herein.
13.01.23 Repeal, Effective Date and Transition Standards
A. All other Ordinances or parts of Ordinances of the City inconsistent or conflicting with this Title, to the
extent of the inconsistency or conflict only, are hereby repealed.
B. Development Plans. The provisions of this UDC shall apply to all Development Plans (general,
revised or final) filed on or after February 11, 2020. Plans on file before February 11, 2020 shall be
reviewed for compliance with the UDC effective at the time of filing.
C. Permits. The provisions of this UDC shall apply to all permits filed on or after February 11, 2020.
Permit applications on file before February 11, 2020 shall be reviewed for compliance with the UDC
effective at the time of filing.
13.01.24 Conflicting Regulations or Provisions
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Title shall be held to be minimum
requirements. Wherever the UDC imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other
provisions of law or by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of the UDC shall
govern except as otherwise provided in State Statutes or Rules.
13.01.25 Use of Graphics, Illustrations, Figures, Photos, and Cross-References
A. Graphics, illustrations, figures, and photos are provided for illustrative purposes only and shall not be
construed as regulations. Where a conflict may occur between the text and any graphic, illustration,
figure, or photo, the text shall control.
B. In some instances, cross-references between chapters, divisions, sections, and subsections are
provided that include the chapter, division, section or subsection number along with the name of the
reference. Where a conflict may occur between the given cross-reference number and name, the
name shall control.
13.01.26 Nonconformities
A. Existing Legal Nonconforming Uses and Structures.
1. A legal, nonconforming land use or structure, including but not limited to fences, parking and
setbacks existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Title may be continued
although the use does not conform to the provisions of this Title. However, only that portion of the
land in actual use may be so continued. A nonconforming structure may not be extended,
enlarged, reconstructed, substituted, moved or structurally altered except when required to do so
by law or order or so as to comply with the provisions of this Title. Repairs or alterations shall not,
during the structure’s life, exceed fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the structure unless
permanently changed to a conforming structure.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.01.31
Page 5
2. Substitution of new equipment may be permitted by the Planning Department if such equipment
will reduce the incompatibility of the nonconforming use or structure with the neighboring uses.
B. Termination or Restoration.
1. Termination. If such nonconforming use is discontinued or terminated for a period of twelve (12)
months, any future use of the structure or land shall conform to the provisions of this Title.
2. Restoration of Certain Nonconforming Structures. A nonconforming structure damaged or
destroyed by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation shall be allowed to
be restored provided the structure is restored to the size, location and use it had immediately
before the damage or destruction. An increase in size shall only be permitted if necessary to
comply with applicable State or Federal requirements.
C. Changes and Substitutions.
1. Once a nonconforming use or structure has been changed to conform, it shall not revert back to a
nonconforming use or structure.
2. Once the Board of Zoning Appeals has permitted the substitution of a more restrictive
nonconforming use for an existing nonconforming use, the existing nonconforming use shall lose
its status as a legal nonconforming use and may not be reestablished.
Official Map
13.01.31 Purpose
A. The Official Map is created for the purpose of serving and promoting the public health, safety,
convenience, economy, orderliness and general welfare of the community; to further the orderly
development and use of the land; stabilize the location of real property boundary lines; to facilitate
adequate provisions for public transportation, parks, playgrounds and storm water drainage and to
facilitate orderly subdivision of larger parcels of land.
13.01.32 Authority
A. This Chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Sec. 62.23(6) Wis. Stats. as may be
amended.
13.01.33 Official Map
A. The Official Map of the City of Onalaska shall show the location and extent of all platted streets,
highways, railroad right of ways, public transit facilities, waterways, parks, playgrounds and parkway
corridors within the City of Onalaska and within one and one half (1 1/2) miles or less of the City of
Onalaska corporate boundary as herein laid out, adopted and established by Ordinance. An Official
Map updated in 2020 and as may be amended which accompanies this Title is hereby designated as
the Official Map of the City of Onalaska and all notations, references and other information shown
thereon shall be part of this Title.
13.01.34 Requirements
A. Building and Site Plan Permits. No permit shall hereafter be issued for any proposed development
or building proposed in conflict with an existing or proposed street, highway, railroad right of way,
waterway, park or parkway corridor shown on the Official Map.
B. Municipal Improvements. No public sewer or other municipal street utility shall be constructed in
any street, highway or parkway within the corporate limits of the City of Onalaska until such street,
highway or parkway is duly placed on the Official Map.
C. Certification. There shall be a certified copy of the Official Map kept in the office of the City Engineer
and shall be available for inspection by any interested person during regular office hours. Thereafter,
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.01.35
Page 6
no change or addition to the map shall become effective until it is amended in accordance with this
Title and Wis. State Stats. requirements.
13.01.35 Map Interpretation
A. Street, highway, railroad right of ways and parkway locations are approximate. Boundary lines
indicated as approximately following municipal boundaries, parcel or lot lines, congressional township
section lines or fractional parts thereof, shall be construed to follow such lines. Boundary lines
indicated as parallel to or extensions of street, highway, railroad right of way or parkways, municipal
boundaries, parcel or lot lines or congressional township lines or fractional parts of congressional
township lines shall be so construed to be parallel to or extensions of said boundary lines.
Administration
13.01.41 General Administrative System
A. This Title contemplates an administrative and enforcement officer entitled the "Zoning Administrator”
to administer and enforce the same. Certain considerations, particularly with regard to granting of
conditional uses, subdivisions, and planned unit developments, changes in zoning districts and
zoning map, and amending the text of this Title require review and recommendation by the Plan
Commission and ultimate action by the Common Council. A Board of Zoning Appeals is provided to
assure proper administration of the Title and to avoid arbitrariness.
13.01.42 Zoning Administrator
A. The Common Council shall designate the Zoning Administrator as the administrative enforcement
officer for the provisions of this Title. The duty of the Zoning Administrator shall be to interpret and
administer this Title and to issue, after on-site inspection, all permits required by this Title, unless
specifically designated to other departments. The Zoning Administrator shall further:
1. Maintain records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official
actions.
2. Record the lowest floor elevations of all structures erected, moved, altered or improved in the
floodplain districts.
3. Establish that all necessary permits that are required for floodplain uses by state and federal law
have been secured.
4. Inspect all structures, lands and waters as often as necessary to assure compliance with this
Title, including assessment of all damaged floodplain structures to determine if substantial
damage to the structures has occurred.
5. Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures and the use of structures,
lands and waters, give notice of all violations of this Title to the owner, resident, agent or
occupant of the premises and report uncorrected violations to the City Attorney in a manner
specified by them.
6. Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until they have inspected and approved
such use or erection.
7. Request assistance and cooperation from the Police Department and City Attorney as deemed
necessary.
13.01.43 Role of Specific City Bodies in Zoning Administration
A. Plan Commission. The Plan Commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall make reports
and recommendations relating to the orderly planning and development of the City to the Common
Council, other public officials and other interested organizations and citizens. In general, the Plan
Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.11
Page 7
promote municipal planning. The Plan Commission shall have such duties as set forth under this Title
and under Title 2 of the City Ordinances.
B. Common Council. The Common Council, the governing body of the City, subject to
recommendations by the Plan Commission and the holding of public hearings by said Council, has
ultimate authority to grant subdivisions, including planned unit developments, make changes and
amendments in zoning districts, the zoning map and supplementary floodplain zoning map, and to
amend the text of this Title. The Common Council may delegate to the Plan Commission the
responsibility to hold some or all public hearings as required under this Title.
C. Board of Zoning Appeals. A Board of Zoning Appeals is established to provide an appeal procedure
for persons who deem themselves aggrieved by decisions of administrative officers in enforcement of
this Title and to hear requests for variances.
D. Long Range Planning Committee. The Long Range Planning Committee is established to provide
opinions regarding development conformance with the City's Comprehensive Plan. The Plan
Commission also hears suggestions and recommendations on Long Range Planning matters.
Chapter 02 Zoning Districts
General Provisions
13.02.11 Establishment of Zoning Districts
A. Base Districts. For the purpose of this Chapter, present and future, provision is hereby made for the
division of the City of Onalaska into the following base zoning districts:
1. A-1 Agricultural District
2. R-1 Low Density Residential District
3. R-2 Low-Medium Density Residential District
4. R-3 Medium Density Residential District
5. R-4 High Density Residential District
6. R-MMH Manufactured and Mobile Home District
7. B-1 Neighborhood Business District
8. B-2 Community Business District
9. B-3 Regional Business District
10. MU-N Mixed Use Neighborhood District
11. MU-C Mixed Use Community District
12. MC Medical Campus District
13. I-1 Light Industrial District
14. I-2 Heavy Industrial District
15. P-1 Public and Semi-Public District
16. P-2 Park and Open Space District
B. Overlay Districts. In addition to the base zoning districts above, the following overlay districts have
been established.
1. Design Overlay Districts:
a. PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District
b. D-RN Downtown Residential Neighborhood Overlay District
c. D-PUD Downtown Planned Unit Development Overlay District
d. PCID Planned Commercial Industrial Overlay District
e. AOZD La Crosse Municipal Airport Overlay Zoning District
2. Natural and Historic Resource Protection Overlay Districts:
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.12
Page 8
a. FP Floodplain Protection Overlay District
b. BP Bluffland Protection Overlay District
c. SP Shoreland Protection Overlay District
d. WP Wellhead Protection Overlay District
e. HP Historic Preservation Overlay District
13.02.12 Zoning Map
A. The City of Onalaska is hereby divided into Base Zoning Districts as shown upon the map designated
as the Base Zoning Map of the City of Onalaska updated annually and all applicable amendments
thereto and made a part of this Chapter.
B. In addition to Base Zoning Districts, the UDC establishes a number of Overlay Zoning Districts which
may be applied to applicable portions of the City of Onalaska. These Overlay Zoning Districts may
include but are not limited to natural and historic resource protection, airport land and airspace
protection, and planned unit development. The Overlay Zoning Districts are shown on the Overlay
Zoning Map of the City of Onalaska updated annually and all applicable amendments thereto and
made a part of this Chapter.
C. The Base and Overlay Zoning Maps and all the notations, references and other information shown
thereon are a part of this UDC and shall have the same force and effect as if the matters and
information set forth by said maps were fully described herein.
D. The Base and Overlay Zoning Maps shall be properly attested and kept on file along with the text of
the UDC in the office of the City Engineer of the City of Onalaska.
13.02.13 District Boundaries
A. The district boundaries shall be determined by measurement from and as shown on the Base and
Overlay Zoning Maps, and in case of any questions as to the interpretation of such boundary lines,
the Plan Commission shall interpret the maps according to the reasonable intent of this UDC.
B. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Base and Overlay Zoning
Maps, the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated, as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys
shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
2. Boundaries indicated, as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed to following
such lot lines.
3. Boundaries indicated, as approximately following City boundaries shall be construed as following
municipal boundaries.
4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the
main tracks.
5. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines and, in
the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline;
boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
6. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in the preceding shall be
so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Base and Overlay Zoning Maps shall be
the scale of the maps.
13.02.14 Vacation of Streets and Alleys
A. Vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause the land vacated to be automatically placed in the
same district as the abutting side to which the vacated land reverts.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.15
Page 9
13.02.15 Annexations
A. Recommendations regarding annexations to, or consolidations with, the City subsequent to the
effective date of this Title shall be placed into the appropriate district by the Zoning Administrator
based on the guidance of the Comprehensive Plan unless the application requests consideration of
the land being placed into another district. Requests for Annexation shall include consideration and
recommendation by the Plan Commission and approval by the Common Council following the
procedure set forth in Section 13.05.46.
13.02.16 Substandard Lots
A. In any residential district, a one (1) family detached dwelling and its accessory structures may be
erected on any legal lot or parcel of record in the Office of the La Crosse County Register of Deeds
office before November 17, 1969, that has been deemed to be substandard due to lack of
conformance with lot dimension or site dimension standards.
B. All the district requirements shall be complied with insofar as practical but shall not be less than the
following:
1. Lot.
a. Width. Minimum thirty (30) feet.
b. Area. Minimum four thousand (4,000) square feet.
2. Building.
a. Area. Minimum one thousand (1,000) square feet.
b. Height. Maximum thirty (30) feet.
3. Yards.
a. Street. Minimum twenty-five (25) feet; the second street yard on corner lots shall not be less
than ten (10) feet.
b. Rear. Minimum twenty-five (25) feet.
c. Side. Minimum sixteen percent (16%) of the frontage, but not less than five (5) feet.
13.02.17 Height and Yard Exceptions
A. Height. The districts’ building height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this Chapter may be
exceeded, but such modification shall be in accord with the following:
1. No structure shall exceed the height restrictions established on the map entitled Height Limitation
Zoning Map, which is part of the La Crosse Municipal Airport Overlay Zoning District, as
described in Subsection 13.02.36C.
2. Architectural projections, such as spires, belfries, parapet walls, cupolas, domes, flues and
chimneys are exempt from the height limitations of this Chapter.
3. Special structures, including by not limited to elevator penthouses, gas tanks, radio and television
receiving antennas, manufacturing equipment and necessary mechanical appurtenances, cooling
towers, fire towers, substations, and smoke stacks are exempt from the height limitations of this
Chapter.
4. Essential services, utilities, water towers, electric power and communication transmission lines
are exempt from the height limitations of this Chapter.
5. Communication structures, such as radio and television transmission and relay towers, aerials
and observation towers shall not exceed in height three (3) times their distance from the nearest
lot line.
6. Agricultural structures, such as barns, silos and windmills, shall not exceed in height twice their
distance from the nearest lot line.
B. Yards. The yard requirements stipulated elsewhere in this Chapter may be modified as follows:
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.21
Page 10
1. Uncovered stairs, landings and fire escapes may project from a structure up to six (6) feet into
any yard provided such projection is not closer than three (3) feet to any lot line.
2. Architectural projections, such as chimneys, flues, sills, eaves, belt courses and ornaments, may
project into any required yard; but such projection shall not exceed two (2) feet into a required
side yard nor four (4) feet into a required front yard.
3. Essential services, utility electric power and communication transmission lines are exempt from
the yard and distance requirements of this Chapter.
4. Landscaping and vegetation are exempt from the yard requirements of this Chapter, with the
exception that any landscaping or vegetation shall be subject to the restrictions in Chapter 03,
Division 3.
Base Districts
13.02.21 Purpose Statements
A. The following are purpose statements for each of the City’s base zoning districts:
1. A-1 Agricultural - The purpose of the A-1 District is to maintain and conserve agricultural lands
which are historically valuable for crop and animal production, pastureland and natural habitat for
wildlife. This district is intended for large agricultural parcels but does allow farm-related
dwellings.
2. R-1 Low Density Residential – The purpose of the R-1 District is to encourage the
establishment and preservation of neighborhoods with single-household detached dwellings.
3. R-2 Low-Medium Density Residential – The purpose of the R-2 District is to accommodate
single-household detached dwellings, two-household dwellings, and zero lot line dwellings.
4. R-3 Medium Density Residential – The purpose of the R-3 District is to accommodate a mixture
of single-household housing types, including single-household dwellings, two-household
dwellings, zero lot line dwellings, and attached townhouses and row houses [up to eight (8) units
per parcel].
5. R-4 High Density Residential – The purpose of the R-4 District is to accommodate a range of
medium density and high density housing types, including row houses, townhouses, and
apartments.
6. R-MMH Manufactured and Mobile Home – The purpose of the R-MMH District is to establish
and preserve neighborhoods comprised of manufactured homes or mobile homes.
7. B-1 Neighborhood Business – The purpose of the B-1 District is to accommodate small-scale
commercial uses that are primarily intended to serve adjacent neighborhoods.
8. B-2 Community Business – The purpose of the B-2 District is to provide shopping areas along
major community roadways with moderately scaled commercial uses that are primarily intended
to serve the local community.
9. B-3 Regional Business – The purpose of the B-3 District is to accommodate large-scale
commercial uses that benefit from access and visibility to major regional highways and are
primarily intended to serve the regional market area.
10. MU-N Mixed Use Neighborhood – The purpose of the MU-N District is to provide areas for the
development and redevelopment of land based on the design principles of traditional
neighborhoods including a mix of complementary uses consisting of residential, commercial,
civic, institutional, and open space uses in close proximity to each other; a mix of housing styles,
types and sizes to accommodate households of all ages, sizes and incomes; compact and human
scale design; an interconnected street system with sidewalks, bikeways, and transit access;
retains existing buildings with historical or architectural features that enhance the community’s
visual character; and preserves and incorporates significant environmental features.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.22
Page 11
11. MU-C Mixed Use Community - The purpose of the MU-C District is to provide areas for the
development and redevelopment of land based on the design principles of pedestrian-oriented
mixed-use districts that integrate retail, services, entertainment, civic, institutional, residential, and
small parks/plazas. This district is characterized by multi-story buildings, higher development
densities, buildings located close to streets and sidewalks, and site and building design that
create vibrant and unique places within the community.
12. MC Medical Campus – The purpose of the MC District is to encourage and foster the planning,
design and construction of well-functioning, attractive medical campus environments, and
coordinate the master plans of these institutions with the City’s plans, policies and zoning
standards. It is intended, but not required, that multiple principal uses will be present on an overall
campus facility without separate lots for each use.
13. I-1 Light Industrial – The purpose of the I-1 District is to provide areas for light industrial uses,
such as the assembly, fabrication, and processing of goods and materials, provided that industrial
activities are conducted entirely within buildings and where the byproducts of industrial activities,
such as noise, odors, smoke, and storage are confined entirely within the buildings and ordinarily
do not have nuisance impacts on surrounding properties.
14. I-2 Heavy Industrial – The purpose of the I-2 District is to provide areas for heavy industrial
uses, including the manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, warehousing, distribution,
and related operations that generally require larger land areas, significant exterior operation or
storage of equipment and materials, and/or where the byproducts of industrial activities, such as
noise, odors, smoke and storage may have nuisance impacts on surrounding properties.
15. P-1 Public and Semi-Public – The purpose of the P-1 District is to provide areas for a variety of
public and semi-public institutional uses that offer important services needed by the community,
including governmental, educational, social service, religious, and cultural.
16. P-2 Park and Open Space - The purpose of the P-2 District is to provide areas that reserve and
protect land for recreational (active and passive), scenic and natural resource uses.
13.02.22 Use Tables
A. General.
1. Table 13.02.22-1: Principal Uses Table lists land uses and indicates whether they are
permitted, permitted with standards, conditional, or prohibited. The table also includes references
to whether additional use specific standards are applicable to that use. The following definitions
shall be referenced when using Table 13.02.22-1:
a. Permitted Uses – a “P” in a cell of the use table indicates that the land use is allowed by
right in that base zoning district.
b. Permitted with Standards Uses – a “PS” in a cell of the use table indicates that the land use
is allowed when standards identified in the Use Specific Standards (Chapter 02, Division 6)
are met. Uses permitted with standards are also subject to all other applicable requirements
of the UDC.
c. Conditional Uses – a “C” in a cell of the use table indicates that the land use is allowed in
the base zoning district only upon approval of a conditional use permit as described in
Section 13.05.22 and in compliance with any use specific standards identified in the Use
Specific Standards (Chapter 02, Division 6). Uses subject to a conditional use permit are
also subject to all other applicable requirements in the UDC.
d. Prohibited Uses – a blank cell in the use table indicates that the land use is prohibited in that
base zoning district.
2. Table 13.02.22-2: Accessory Uses Table lists accessory uses and indicates whether they are
permitted or permitted with standards, conditional, or prohibited. The table also includes
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.22
Page 12
references to whether additional use specific standards are applicable to that use. The following
definitions shall be referenced when using Table 13.02.22-2:
a. Permitted Uses – a “P” in a cell of the use table indicates that the accessory land use is
allowed by right in that base zoning district.
b. Permitted with Standards Uses – a “PS” in a cell of the use table indicates that the
accessory land use is allowed when standards identified in the Use Specific Standards
(Chapter 02, Division 6) are met. Uses permitted with standards are also subject to all other
applicable requirements of the UDC.
c. Conditional Uses – a “C” in a cell of the use table indicates that the accessory land use is
allowed in the base zoning district only upon approval of a conditional use permit as
described in Section 13.05.22 and in compliance with any use specific standards identified in
the Use Specific Standards (Chapter 02, Division 6). Uses subject to a conditional use
permit are also subject to all other applicable requirements in the UDC.
d. Prohibited Uses – a blank cell in the use table indicates that the accessory land use is
prohibited in that base zoning district.
3. Unlisted Uses. When a proposed land use is not explicitly listed in the use table, the Planning
Department shall determine whether or not it is included in the definition of a listed use or is so
consistent with the size, scale, operating characteristics, and external impacts of a listed use that
it should be treated as the same use. Any such interpretation shall serve as a finding for future
decisions of the City until the Zoning Administrator makes a different interpretation.
4. Uses for Properties Within Overlay Zoning Districts. When a property is located within the
boundaries of one or more overlay districts, the most flexible use provision among the overlay
and base zoning districts shall apply.
B. Principal Uses Table.
Table 13.02.22-1 Principal Uses Table
P = Permitted PS = Permitted with Standards C = Conditional Blank Cell = Prohibited
Principal Use Type
Residential Business Mixed Use Industrial
Agricultural
Public
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Residential R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Household Living
Dwelling, single-family P P P P
Dwelling, manufactured home P
Dwelling, mobile home P
Dwelling, two-family P P
Dwelling, zero lot line PS PS
Dwelling, attached townhouses or row
houses
P P P P
Dwelling, apartment mixed use P P P P
Dwelling, live/work P P P P P
Dwelling, apartment P P P
Dwelling, senior independent living PS PS PS PS
Planned Residential Development PS
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.22
Page 13
P = Permitted PS = Permitted with Standards C = Conditional Blank Cell = Prohibited
Principal Use Type
Residential Business Mixed Use Industrial
Agricultural
Public
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Existing residences P P P P P P P
Group Living
Group home for adults P P P P P
Group home for foster children P P P P P P
Senior care facility P P P P
Lodging
Bed and breakfast establishment PS PS PS PS
Hotel or motel P P P P P P
Public, Social or Health Care R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Cemetery P
Child care center, licensed group PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Clinic, including medical, dental or
therapeutic
P P P P P
Club, lodge or meeting place of a noncommercial
nature
P P P P P
Correctional facility P
Day care center, adult P P P P P P P
Diagnostic or medical laboratory P P P P P P
Funeral home or mortuary PS PS PS
Hospital PS
Inpatient nursing, supervision, and
other rehabilitative services
P P P
Municipal social, cultural, or
recreational facility
P P P P P P
Municipal, county, state or federal
administrative or services building
P P P P P P P
Outpatient health care center P P P
Place of worship PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
School,
college/university/trade/business
PS PS PS PS PS
School, elementary or secondary PS PS PS PS
Social assistance, welfare, or charitable
services
PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Business R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Food or Beverage Services
Bar or drinking place P P P P P
Brewpub PS PS PS PS PS
Restaurant P P P P P
Specialty food or coffee shop P P P P P
Retail Sales or Services
Animal/veterinary clinic or hospital P P PS P
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.22
Page 14
P = Permitted PS = Permitted with Standards C = Conditional Blank Cell = Prohibited
Principal Use Type
Residential Business Mixed Use Industrial
Agricultural
Public
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Animal boarding, shelter or daycare
center
PS PS PS PS PS
Automobile fueling, washing and
service station
PS PS PS PS PS
Automobile repair and service, minor P P P P P P
Automobile repair and service, major P P P P
Automobile sales, leasing and service P P
Business Incubator P P P
Carwash P P P P
Contractor/Trade Supply Store P P P
Professional Service P P P P P P
Retail Store, high intensity P P
Retail Store, medium intensity P P P P
Retail Store, low intensity P P P P P P
Retail with residential above street level P P P P P
Retail with office above street level P P P P P
Shopping Center, Community P P P P
Shopping Center, Regional P P P
Storage facility, personal PS PS
Business or Technical Services
Laboratory, research/scientific/medical P P P P
Financial Institutions/Banks P P P P P P
Office building P P P P P P P P
Payday, Pawn, Auto/Title Loan,
Currency Exchange and Similar Uses
PS PS PS
Studio or gallery P P P P P P P
Industrial R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Brewery, winery or distillery PS PS PS PS
Construction contractor yard P P
Makerspace P P P P P P
Manufacturing, heavy P
Manufacturing, light P P
Outside storage and manufacturing
area
PS
Printing and publishing, large scale P P P
Public works facility P P P
Scrap or salvage storage yard PS
Storage and sale of machinery and
equipment
PS PS PS
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.22
Page 15
P = Permitted PS = Permitted with Standards C = Conditional Blank Cell = Prohibited
Principal Use Type
Residential Business Mixed Use Industrial
Agricultural
Public
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Warehouse and distribution facility P P
Wholesale trade establishment P P P P P
Arts, Entertainment or Recreation R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Active park or playground P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Adult oriented entertainment business PS PS
Indoor recreational facility, commercial P P P P P P
Indoor recreational facility, public P P P P P
Outdoor recreational facility,
commercial
PS PS PS PS PS
Outdoor recreational facility, public PS PS PS PS PS
Theater, dance or music performance
facility
P P P P P PS
Wellness, Fitness & Exercise Facility P P P P P P
Natural Resources or Agriculture R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Agriculture - raising of crops P
Agriculture - raising of livestock P
Arboretum P P
Commercial greenhouse or nursery P P P P
Extraction of sand, gravel, or other
materials
P
Forestry P P
Wildlife or nature preserve/conservation
area
P P
Transportation R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Airport PS PS PS PS
Ambulance or medical carrier service P P P P P
Public passenger transportation
terminal (air, bus or rail)
PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Parking, multi-level structure PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Parking, standalone lot P
Freight rail yard P
Freight terminal or transshipment facility P
Utilities R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Essential public services PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Municipal earth or sanitary landfill
operation
P P P P
Stormwater ponding P
Telecommunication structure or tower PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Waste collection, storage or processing
(sewer, solid, hazardous)
P P
Water reservoir P
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.22
Page 16
C. Accessory Uses Table.
Table 13.02.22-2 Accessory Uses Table
P = Permitted PS = Permitted with Standards C = Conditional Blank Cell = Prohibited
Accessory Use Type
Residential Business Mixed Use Industrial
Agricultural
Public
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Accessory dwelling unit PS PS PS
Accessory structure PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Agriculture - keeping of bees PS PS PS PS PS
Agriculture - temporary or seasonal
roadside stand P P P P P P P P
Billboard or outdoor advertising PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Catering P P P P P
Central utility plant or electrical
generator PS PS PS
Child care center, licensed family PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Child care provider, certified family P P P P P P P
Clubhouse, banquet center P
Community garden P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Drive-through facility PS PS PS PS PS PS
Farm dwellings for those resident
owners and laborers actually engaged
in the permitted uses
PS
Food truck or cart P P P P P P P P P
Garage sale PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Helipad or helistop in conjunction with a
medical facility PS PS
Home occupation, major PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Home occupation, minor PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Mobile service support structure or
facility
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Outdoor dining area PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Outdoor sales area or tent PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Outdoor sales display PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Radio broadcast service facility or other
non-mobile service telecommunication
facility
PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Radio or television antenna tower PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.23
Page 17
P = Permitted PS = Permitted with Standards C = Conditional Blank Cell = Prohibited
Accessory Use Type
Residential Business Mixed Use Industrial
Agricultural
Public
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
RMMH
B-1 B-2 B-3
MUN
MUC
MC I-1 I-2 A-1 P-1 P-2
Residential swimming pool PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Satellite television dish or earth station PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Short term vacation rental PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Sign PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Solar panel P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Temporary tent, canopy, or similar
membrane-material structure
PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
Wellness, fitness or exercise facility P P P P P
Wind energy system PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS PS
13.02.23 Lot & Site Dimensions
A. Street Frontage. To be buildable, a lot shall comply with the frontage requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located. Every lot shall front or abut for a distance of at least forty five (45) feet on
a public street that curves or terminates in a dead end or cul-de-sac.
B. Principal Structures.
1. All principal structures shall be located on a lot.
2. Only one (1) principal structure shall be located, erected or moved onto a residential lot in the R-1
and R-2 Districts.
3. More than one (1) principal structure shall be allowed on a lot for manufactured and mobile home,
medium density residential, high density residential, business, industrial, and planned unit
development uses as long as:
a. The standards of the applicable zoning district can be met.
b. A minimum separation of twenty (20) feet per building is maintained.
c. Individual buildings are not sold independently.
d. Any future subdivision can only occur if setbacks of the zoning district can be met and
easements established as needed for access and parking.
e. Parking and access is evaluated and maintained on a shared basis between buildings.
C. Dedicated Street. A Site Plan Permit shall only be issued for a lot which abuts a public street
dedicated to its proposed width.
13.02.24 Lot Dimension Standards Table
A. Table 13.02.24-1 establishes the minimum lot development standards for all base zoning districts.
Table 13.02.24-1 Lot Dimension Standards Table
Zoning District Use Type
Lot Area
Minimum (sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage Minimum (ft.)
R-1 Low Density Residential
Single-family dwelling 7,200 70
Other permitted/permitted with standard
uses
10,000 100
R-2 Low-Medium Density Residential
Single-family dwelling 6,500 60
Two-family dwelling (duplex) 7,700 70
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.25
Page 18
Zoning District Use Type
Lot Area
Minimum (sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage Minimum (ft.)
Zero lot line dwelling (twindo) 7,700 total for both lots 35
Other permitted/permitted with standard
uses
10,000 100
R-3 Medium Density Residential
Single-family dwelling 6,000 60
Two-family dwelling (duplex) 7,000 60
Zero lot line dwelling (twindo) 7,700 total for both lots 35
Attached townhouse or row house dwelling
on individual lots
3,500 per lot 30
Attached townhouse or row house dwelling
with common yard
3,000 for each unit,
including each unit’s
portion of the common
yard
90
Apartment with residential support services
10,000; with minimum
2,000 SF per 1-BR
unit, 2,500 SF per 2-
BR unit, and 3,000 SF
per 3-BR unit
100
Other permitted/permitted with standard
uses
10,000 100
R-4 High Density Residential
Attached townhouse or row house dwelling
on individual lots
3,500 per lot 30
Attached townhouse or row house dwelling
with common yard
3,000 for each unit,
including each unit’s
portion of the common
yard
90
Live/Work dwelling 10,000; with minimum
2,000 SF per 1-BR
unit, 2,500 SF per 2-
BR unit, and 3,000 SF
per 3-BR unit
Apartment dwelling 100
Apartment with residential support services
Other permitted/permitted with standard
uses
10,000 100
R-MMH Manufactured and Mobile Home
Manufactured home or mobile home
15 acres per mobile
home community; 10
spaces per acre;
4,000 SF per
individual space
40
Other permitted/permitted with standard
uses
10,000 100
MU-N Mixed Use Neighborhood All uses None None
MU-C Mixed Use Community All uses None None
MC Medical Campus All uses 5 developable
contiguous acres
200
All Business Districts All uses None None
All Industrial Districts All uses None 100
A-1 Agricultural
Farms 10 acres 200
Other permitted/permitted with standard
uses
None None
P-1 Public and Semi-Public All uses None None
P-2 Park and Open Space All uses None None
13.02.25 Site Dimension Standards Table
A. Table 13.02.25-1 establishes the minimum site dimension standards for all base zoning districts. All
site dimension standards shown are subject to the height and yard exceptions in Section 13.02.17
and any applicable AOZD limitations in Section 13.02.36.
B. Required setbacks apply to principal structures, access drives, and parking. Required setbacks shall
not apply to landscaping, stormwater facilities, or required fencing or buffering.
C. Street yard setback may be averaged between two (2) abutting property street yard setbacks in the
R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.25
Page 19
D. No existing lot, yard, parking area, building area or other space shall be reduced in area or
dimensions so as not to meet the provisions of this Chapter.
E. Base district setbacks in Table 13.02.25-1 may be superseded by an applicable overlay district.
Table 13.02.25-1 Site Dimension Standards Table
Zoning District
Street Yard
Setback (min.
ft.)
Street Yard
Setback (max.
ft.)
Rear Yard
Setback (min.
ft.)
Side Yard
Setback
(min. ft.)
Building
Width (min.
ft.)
Building
Height (max
ft.)
R-1 Low Density
Residential
25
40
30 6 20 35
Cul-de-sac 60
R-2 Low-Medium Density
Residential
25
40
30
6
20 35
Cul-de-sac 60
Two family
dwelling and
Zero lot line
dwelling 10
R-3 Medium Density
Residential
25
40
30 10 20 40
Cul de sac - 60
R-4 High Density
Residential
25 40 30 10 20 60
R-MMH Manufactured and
Mobile Home
40 minimum
from all public
ROW
10 minimum
from any
common area
None 10 10 None None
B-1 Neighborhood
Business
None, 6 if
required
None 10
None, or 6 if
required
None 45
B-2 Community Business
None, 6 if
required
None 10
None, or 6 if
required
None 45
B-3 Regional Business 10 None 10
None, or 6 if
required
None 60
MU-N Mixed Use
Neighborhood
None, 6 if
required
25 20 6 None 45
MU-C Mixed Use
Community
None, 6 if
required
10 10
None, or 6 if
required
None 60
MC Medical Campus 20 None 20 20 None 100
I-1 Light Industrial 10 None 10
None, or 6 if
required
None 100
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.31
Page 20
Zoning District
Street Yard
Setback (min.
ft.)
Street Yard
Setback (max.
ft.)
Rear Yard
Setback (min.
ft.)
Side Yard
Setback
(min. ft.)
Building
Width (min.
ft.)
Building
Height (max
ft.)
I-2 Heavy Industrial 10 None 10
None, or 6 if
required
None 100
A-1 Agricultural 50 None 10 50 None 50
P-1 Public and Semi-Public
20 None 20 20 None 45
P-2 Park and Open Space None None 10 10 None None
Design Overlay Districts
13.02.31 Design Overlay Districts Generally
A. The standards and requirements listed in an overlay district shall supersede those listed in the
underlying base districts. All other zoning requirements not specifically listed in the overlay district,
but included in the Onalaska UDC, shall apply. The five (5) types of design overlay districts include:
1. Planned Unit Development (PUD)
2. Downtown Residential Neighborhoods (D-RN)
3. Downtown Planned Unit Development (D-PUD)
4. Planned Commercial Industrial Development (PCID)
5. La Crosse Municipal Airport Overlay Zoning District (AOZD)
13.02.32 Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District
A. Applicability. A Planned Unit Development may be used as an overlay zoning district over any base
zoning district or combination of zoning districts.
B. Size. Planned Unit Developments shall be on a tract of land not less than one (1) acre.
C. Ownership. An application for a PUD must be filed by the owner(s) or an authorized agent of the
owner(s).
D. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall generally be consistent with the permitted uses of the
underlying base district. However, a PUD application can request alternative uses to the permitted
uses of the underlying base district, subject to approval by the Common Council.
E. Dimensional and Design Standards. The following provisions shall be applied by the Plan
Commission and Common Council in their consideration of a PUD:
1. Density. Density of development will be reviewed based on the following criteria:
a. Effect on adjacent properties;
b. Adequacy of public and private services and infrastructure;
c. Overall design;
d. Scale and massing of structures;
e. Building elevations and setbacks;
f. Landscaping, screening and buffering;
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.32
Page 21
g. Open space provision and design; and
h. Retention of natural, cultural and historic resources.
2. PUD Perimeter. A PUD shall be designed to complement existing adjacent uses and
infrastructure.
3. Lot Area. Lot area may vary from the underlying base district standard in a PUD provided the
developer has demonstrated that the proposed design and layout meets the provisions of this
Title.
4. Yard Setbacks. Setbacks may vary from underlying base district standards in a PUD provided
the developer has demonstrated that the proposed design and layout meets the provisions of this
Title. Perimeter setbacks shall be consistent with the setbacks of adjacent zoning districts.
5. Building Height. Building height may vary from the underlying base district standard and shall be
proposed as part of the PUD proposal to the City. The City may request cross sections,
elevations and other information from the developer in order to determine if the structure height
meets the provisions of this Title.
6. Environmental Design. A PUD shall be designed to preserve existing vegetation and
topography where practical and shall be consistent with the goals and objectives of the Onalaska
Comprehensive Plan.
7. Common Open Space. A PUD shall include common open space that is functional, improves
appearance and aesthetics, is accessible and where possible adds to existing common or public
open space systems.
a. Common open space shall comprise a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the gross land
area in the PUD and shall not include:
i. Setback areas
ii. Street right-of-way
iii. Parking areas and driveways
iv. Building sites
v. Inaccessible stormwater ponds
b. Common open space may include land dedicated for public parks, trails or pathways.
c. All structures or facilities proposed as part of common open space systems shall be
completed as part of the required improvements or infrastructure of the proposed PUD.
8. Architecture. A PUD shall include and incorporate architectural planning by the developer and
implementation provisions for controlling the architecture by protective covenants, design overlay
districts enforced by the City or other legal methods. Overall architectural design shall be
generally compatible with the characteristics of the surrounding developments.
9. Parking. Parking ratios may deviate from the off-street parking space standards but shall be
proposed as part of the PUD application. Where alternative parking ratios are not stated in the
PUD application, they shall conform to the Section 13.03.21 parking standards.
10. Streets, Utilities and Drainage. All publicly dedicated streets, utilities and storm-water facilities
shall be designed in accordance with City Ordinances and Policies. The City may consider
flexible standards for streets if the developer has demonstrated that the proposed design and
layout warrants varying standards and the design meets the provisions of this Title.
11. Traffic Calming-Design. Traffic calming measures and good street design shall be considered in
all PUDs.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.33
Page 22
Figure 13.02.32-1 Traffic Calming Examples
12. Circulation/Access. Vehicular access to lots adjoining an arterial as defined by the functional
classification system shall be designed by way of a frontage road, service road or local street.
Streets in a PUD shall be designed to promote a grid network of streets, minimizing dead ends
and cul-de-sacs and connecting to adjoining developments where streets have been ‘stubbed in’
for the purpose of continuation. A PUD shall include provisions for pedestrians, bicycles and
transit.
13. Landscaping. A master landscape plan shall be included in the PUD submittal to the City
including street tree provisions, screening, parking lot landscaping where applicable and the
preservation of mature, healthy hardwood trees where applicable.
14. Signs. A master signage plan shall be included in the PUD submittal to the City. Signage shall
generally conform to the City Sign Ordinance Title 14. Freestanding pylon type signs shall
consolidate tenants or uses in predetermined locations, minimizing the number of freestanding
signs where possible.
13.02.33 Downtown Residential Neighborhood (D-RN) Overlay District
A. Applicability. A Downtown Residential Neighborhood (D-RN) may be used as an overlay district for
single family and/or two family residential properties as shown on the Downtown Overlay Districts
Map (Figure 13.02.33-1).
B. Ownership. An application for a D-RN overlay district must be filed by the owner(s) or an authorized
agent of the owner(s).
C. Dimensional Standards.
1. Lot Frontage. All principal structures shall occupy a minimum of thirty-three percent (33%) of the
lot frontage. Corner lots shall be subject to thirty-three percent (33%) minimum lot frontage on
both street frontages.
2. Building Width. Minimum twenty (20) feet (principal structure).
3. Building Height. Maximum thirty-five (35) feet.
4. Street Yard Setback. Build-to-line is equal to that of the forward most principal structure of an
adjacent neighboring property. Minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet and maximum setback of
twenty-five (25) feet.
5. Side Yard Setback. Minimum six (6) feet.
6. Rear Yard Setback. Minimum thirty (30) feet.
D. Porch / Accessory Structure Standards.
1. Porches and/or stoops may extend into the required street yard up to an additional ten (10) feet,
but in no case be closer than five (5) feet to the street yard parcel boundary.
2. Garages shall be accessed off of an alley if an alley is present. If an alley is not present, a garage
may be accessed off a public street; however, if a garage faces the public street it may not
exceed thirty-three percent (33%) of the lot frontage.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.33
Page 23
3. Accessory structures shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and/or exceed the height of the
principal structure.
4. Driveways shall not exceed a width of twenty-four (24) feet.
E. Conversion from Downtown Residential Neighborhood to Downtown Planned Unit
Development.
1. If a minimum of one-quarter (1/4) acres of land (10,890 square feet) is amassed by a single
entity, an applicant/developer may petition the Plan Commission and Common Council to
consider a Downtown Planned Unit Development.
2. The applicant/developer shall submit a letter describing the proposed project and a conceptual
plan with proposed architecture, building height, and other information as requested to the Plan
Commission for consideration. If the Plan Commission recommends to the Common Council to
allow a Downtown Planned Unit Development and the Common Council approves the concept,
the formal review process as described in Section 13.05.25 shall apply.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.33
Page 24
Figure 13.02.33-1 Downtown Overlay Districts Map.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.34
Page 25
13.02.34 Downtown Planned Unit Development (D-PUD) Overlay District
A. Applicability. A Downtown Planned Unit Development (D-PUD) may be used as an overlay zoning
district for any land use or mix of land uses on downtown properties as shown on the Downtown
Overlay Districts Map (Figure 13.02.33-1). An approved D-PUD will supersede any underlying zoning
district and rezoning of a combination of dissimilar parcels will not be required.
B. Size. D-PUDs shall be on a tract of land not less than one-quarter (1/4) acre of land (10,890 square
feet).
C. Ownership. An application for a D-PUD must be filed by the owner(s) or an authorized agent of the
owner(s).
D. Permitted Uses. Permitted Uses shall be defined in the D-PUD proposal to the City.
E. Dimensional and Design Standards. The following provisions shall be applied by the Plan
Commission and Common Council in their consideration of a D-PUD:
1. Density. Density of development will be reviewed based on the following criteria:
a. Effect on adjacent properties;
b. Adequacy of public and private services and infrastructure;
c. Overall design;
d. Scale and massing of structures;
e. Building elevations and setbacks;
f. Landscaping, screening and buffering;
g. Open space provision and design; and
h. Retention of natural, cultural and historic resources.
2. Yard Setbacks. Setbacks may vary from underlying base zoning district standards in a D-PUD
as requested by a developer.
3. Building Height. Building height(s) of structure(s) may vary from the underlying base district
standard and shall be proposed as part of the D-PUD proposal to the City. The City may request
cross sections, elevations and other information from the developer in order to make a
determination.
4. Environmental Design. A D-PUD shall be designed to preserve existing vegetation and
topography where practical and shall be consistent with the goals and objectives of the Onalaska
Comprehensive Plan.
5. Open Space. A D-PUD shall include open space that is functional, improves appearance and
aesthetics, is accessible and where possible adds to existing common or public open space
systems. The amount of “common” open space shall be determined by the Plan Commission
which may include setback areas, rooftops, decks, etc.
6. Architecture. A D-PUD shall include and incorporate architectural design by the developer and
implementation provisions for controlling the architecture by protective covenants, architectural
zoning standards or other legal methods.
7. Parking. Parking ratios may deviate from the off-street parking space standards but shall be
proposed as part of the D-PUD application. Where alternative parking ratios are not stated in the
D-PUD application, they shall conform to the Section 13.02.21 parking standards.
8. Streets, Utilities and Drainage. All publicly dedicated streets, utilities and storm-water facilities
shall be designed in accordance with City of Onalaska Ordinances and policies. The City may
consider flexible standards for streets if the developer has demonstrated that the proposed
design and layout warrants varying standards and the design meets the provisions of this
Section.
9. Circulation/Access. A D-PUD shall include provisions for access to pedestrian/bicycle trails and
transit.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.35
Page 26
10. Landscaping. A Landscape Plan shall be included in the D-PUD submittal to the City including
street tree provisions, screening, parking lot landscaping where applicable and the preservation
of mature, healthy hardwood trees where applicable.
11. Signs. A master signage plan may be included in the D-PUD submittal to the City. Signage shall
generally conform to the City’s Sign Ordinance Title 14. Freestanding pylon type signs shall
consolidate tenants or uses in predetermined locations, minimizing the number of freestanding
signs where possible.
13.02.35 Planned Commercial Industrial Development (PCID) Overlay District
A. Applicability. All existing Planned Commercial Industrial Developments (PCIDs) were intended to
provide a desirable and stable environment in harmony with that of the surrounding area; permit
flexibility that would result in a more efficient and aesthetic use of land; permit flexibility in design,
type of use or buildings, use of open spaces, circulation facilities and off-street parking; and utilize the
best potential of sites. The approved plan for a PCID area does not necessarily correspond in lot size,
type of building, lot coverage or open space to the regulations in any one zoning district established in
the City of Onalaska UDC. The PCID plan includes all agreements, bylaws, covenants, grants of
easements and conditions relating to use, location, project size and area, and open space.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to continue existing PCIDs approved under provisions of the
previous UDC. No new PCIDs shall be approved. Existing PCIDs shall be in compliance with their
final implementation plan for the development, as well as all other commitments and contractual
agreements with the City, offered or required with regard to project value, character and other factors
pertinent to an assurance that the proposed development will be carried out as presented in the
official submittal plans, such plans having been recorded in the City Clerk’s office by the developer.
C. Status of Existing PCIDs. Land uses permitted by existing approved PCIDs remain permitted uses
in the zoning district in which the property is located and are hereby continued in full force and effect.
D. General Compliance for Continued PCID Uses. Any property within an existing PCID shall comply
with all provisions of the PCID which were in effect on the approval date of the PCID. If it is
subsequently determined that a property is not in compliance with the provisions of the continued
PCID, the property owner shall take whatever actions are necessary to bring the property into
compliance with the conditions and provisions set forth in the approved PCID, including submitting an
application for a minor or major amendment to the PCID. An application for a PCID minor amendment
shall follow the procedure specified in Section 13.05.26. An application for a PCID major amendment
shall follow the procedure specified in Section 13.05.27 and will require conversion of the PCID to a
PUD. Failure to bring the PCID into compliance within twelve (12) months of written notification of
noncompliance by the City shall be grounds for termination of the continued PCID. The procedure to
be followed in terminating the PCID shall be that specified in Section 13.05.27. Upon termination of
the continued PCID, the use shall be subject to the regulations for the underlying base district and all
other applicable provisions of the UDC.
13.02.36 La Crosse Municipal Airport Overlay Zoning District (AOZD)
A. Purpose. The general purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to assume jurisdiction to administer the
City of La Crosse’s Airport Zoning Overlay Regulations (AOZD Regulations) for those areas affected
by the City of La Crosse Airport Zoning Overlay District (AOZD) which fall within the City of Onalaska
corporate limits, as defined below in Section B. Further, to provide citizens of the City of Onalaska
with clarification of the requirements under the AOZD Regulations which are applicable to the area
within the City of Onalaska jurisdictional boundary as defined below in Section B. The purpose of the
AOZD Regulations, of which the City of Onalaska shall be responsible for implementing in their
jurisdictional boundary include to:
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 27
1. Promote the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the residents surrounding
the Airport;
2. Protect the Airport approaches and surrounding airspace from encroachment, as well as, limit the
exposure of impacts to persons, property, and facilities in proximity to the Airport, located within
the area encompassed by the AOZD;
3. Impose land use controls, which are in addition to those underlying zoning classifications, that will
maintain a compatible relationship between airport operations and existing and future land uses
within the City of Onalaska three (3) mile jurisdictional boundary as defined below;
4. Regulate and restrict the height of structures and objects of natural growth, concentrations of
people (density), visual obstructions (smoke, steam, dust, etc.), electrical and navigational
interference, noise sensitive land uses, and wildlife and bird attractants within the City of
Onalaska three (3) mile jurisdictional boundary as defined below in Subsection B;
5. Implement recommendations developed in the La Crosse Regional Airport Master Plan, Airport
Land Use Plan, Airport Layout Plan and/or City of Onalaska Master Plan for those areas within
the City of Onalaska three (3) mile jurisdictional boundary as defined below in Subsection B;
6. Promote compatible land uses while respecting the physical characteristics of the area, the
Airport, and surrounding property within the City of Onalaska’s three (3) mile jurisdictional
boundary as defined below in Subsection B;
7. Promote development in an orderly, planned, cost-effective, and environmentally-sound manner
within the City of Onalaska three (3) mile jurisdictional boundary as defined below in Subsection
B;
8. Regulate and restrict building sites, placement of structures, and land uses by separating
conflicting land uses and prohibiting certain land uses that are detrimental to airport operations,
navigable airspace, and the Airport and by limiting conflicts with airport operations, navigable
airspace, and provide for the public health, safety, and welfare of residents located in the vicinity
of the Airport within the City of Onalaska three (3) mile jurisdictional boundary of the AOZD;
9. Provide a uniform basis for the preparation, implementation, and administration of sound airport
protection regulations for all areas within the City of Onalaska three (3)-mile jurisdictional
boundary of the AOZD.
B. Authority and Jurisdiction. The City of Onalaska hereby assumes the authority to administer the La
Crosse Airport Zoning Overlay Regulations for those areas within the corporate limits of the City of
Onalaska, within the three (3) mile jurisdictional boundary of the AOZD as those boundaries now exist
and as they are amended in the future. The regulations of the AOZD shall apply to all properties
within the three (3) mile jurisdictional boundary identified by the application of Section 114.136 of the
Wisconsin Statutes as may be amended, measured from the La Crosse Regional Airport property
lines and to the limits represented by the six (6) independent zones which are defined below as well
as the height limitations outlined below.
C. General Provisions.
1. Areas to be Regulated. The AOZD has defined the following areas to be regulated, which may
fall within the City of Onalaska jurisdictional boundaries:
a. Airport Height Zoning District. The boundaries of each district are hereby established as
shown on a map dated December 9, 2010 and as it may be amended, entitled La Crosse
Regional Airport Overlay Zoning District Map, La Crosse, Wisconsin, and the height
restrictions are hereby established on a map entitled Height Limitation Zoning Map, La
Crosse Regional Airport, La Crosse Wisconsin which accompanies it and is hereby adopted
as part of this Ordinance. Both the La Crosse Regional Airport Overlay Zoning District Map
and the Height Limitation Zoning Map, La Crosse Regional Airport, La Crosse Wisconsin
shall be on file in the office of the City of Onalaska Planning Department.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 28
i. The elevation numbers indicated within each contour are hereby established and are
made part of this Ordinance. Contour elevation numbers indicated on the Height
Limitation Zoning Map, La Crosse Regional Airport, La Crosse Wisconsin provide the
maximum permissible height above North American Vertical Datum 1988 (NAVD88),
which buildings, structures, objects, or vegetation in that contour shall NOT exceed. If
the Height Limitations Zoning Map, La Crosse Regional Airport, La Crosse, Wisconsin
indicates “Permit Required” instead of a height, a permit must be obtained, regardless of
height. The provisions of the AOZD shall apply to all areas indicated on this Map.
b. Airport Overlay Zoning District. All La Crosse Regional Airport Overlay Zones are shown
on the La Crosse Municipal Airport Overlay Zoning District Map and shall be on file in the
office of the City of Onalaska Planning Department. These six (6) zones encompass a three
(3)-mile radius from the La Crosse Regional Airport property line, as authorized by Wisconsin
Statutes. No land use shall be allowed nor shall any structure be constructed, altered,
located, or permitted which encroaches upon the La Crosse Regional Airport creating
hazards for aircraft, airport operational area, and aircraft overflight areas, as well as nearby
citizens. The area of La Crosse County, including those areas in the City of Onalaska
jurisdictional boundaries is divided into the following zones as shown in Table 13.02.36-1 and
Figure 13.02.36-1.
i. ZONE A-RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE. Zone A is a trapezoidal shape which includes
the area off the end of each runway which is designed to enhance the protection of
people and property on the ground.
ii. ZONE B–APPROACH SURFACE. Zone B is a critical overlay zoning surface that
reflects the approach and departure areas for each runway at the Airport. The size of
Zone B is the combination of Zone B1, B2, and B3 and is predicated on a 50:1 approach
surface:
1. ZONE B1-The length of Zone B1 extends 3,750 feet from the outer edge of Zone A.
2. ZONE B2- Zone B2 extends 3,750 feet beyond the outer edge of Zone B1.
3. ZONE B3-Zone B3 extends from Zone B2 in the 50:1 approach, ending at the 3-mile
boundary.
iii. ZONE C-TRANSITIONAL SURFACE. The areas within Zone C are those that extend
one thousand fifty (1,050) feet outward from the edge of the primary surface, paralleling
the runway and extended runway centerline with Zone B1, to a length equal to the outer
edge of Zone A and then squared to meet Zone A.
iv. ZONE D-THREE (3) MILE JURISDICTIONAL BOUNDARY. Zone D encompasses the
horizontal innermost area, all of which represents the three (3) mile jurisdictional
boundary, as provided for within Wisconsin Statutes Sections 114.135 and 114.136 as
may be amended. Zone D is calculated by intersecting a series of three (3) mile arcs
drawn from the outermost property boundaries of the Airport.
Table 13.02.36-1 Airport Overlay Zones B1, B2, C, and D Dimensional Requirements
Dimensions in
Figure 1
Zone Designation
Runway Dimensional
Standards
1
Primary surface width* & Zone A
inner width
1,000’
2
Zone A outer width & Zone B1
inner width
1,750’
3
Zone B1 outer width & Zone B2
inner width
2,875’
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 29
4
Zone B2 outer width & Zone B3
inner width
4,000’
5 Zone C width from primary surface 1,050’
6 Zone A length 2,000’
7 Zone B1 length 3,750’
8 Zone B2 length 3,750’
9 Zone B3 length Varies**
Zone D
3-mile jurisdictional
boundary outside of
Zones A - B3
*Primary surface width measures 1,000 feet across, or 500 feet on either side of
the runway centerline.
**The length and outer width of Zone B3 varies based upon the proximity and
angle at which Zone B3 intersects Zone D, which is the 3-mile jurisdictional
boundary from Airport property.
Source: Mead & Hunt
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 30
Figure 13.02.36-1 Airport Overlay Zones A, B1, B2, B3, C, and D Diagram.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 31
2. Compliance. Any development or use within the City of Onalaska jurisdictional boundaries shall
be in compliance with the terms of this ordinance, AOZD Regulations and other applicable local,
state, and federal regulations.
3. Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities,
villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this ordinance and obtain all necessary
permits. State agencies are required to comply if Section 13.48(13) of the Wisconsin Statutes as
may be amended applies.
4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate,
annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
wherever this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
govern.
5. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the City, and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any powers granted to the City by the Wisconsin Statutes.
6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of protection provided by the AOZD
Regulations relative to aircraft operation and aircraft overflights is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes. Therefore, neither the AOZD Regulations or this Ordinance’s interpretations
thereof imply that land uses within the vicinity of the La Crosse Regional Airport will be totally free
from aircraft noise impacts, aircraft operations, and aircraft overflights. Nor does the AOZD
Regulations or this Ordinance create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against the City
of Onalaska, any officer or employee thereof, for incidents that may result from reliance on this
Ordinance.
7. Severability. Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause, word and provision of this Ordinance is
severable. If any provision of this Ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid for any
reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this Ordinance.
8. Repeal. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the City inconsistent or conflicting with this
Ordinance to the extent of inconsistency only, are hereby repealed.
D. General Standards Applicable to All Permit Required Uses within the City of Onalaska
Jurisdictional Boundary of the AOZD.
1. Any development which exceeds the applicable height limitation in the AOZD by more than ten
(10) feet is not authorized. Any development that exceeds the applicable height limitation in the
AOZD by ten (10) feet or less will automatically become a permit required use.
2. At the owner's expense, the technical expertise of a professional surveyor and/or engineer to
determine exact locations and elevations may be required. This may be done to confirm the
accuracy of information supplied by the applicant.
3. Those Building Inspection and Planning Department staff when reviewing a Zoning/Building Site
Permit (herein referred to as a Permit) application in the AOZD shall consider the factors listed
below:
a. Potential to create an undue concentration of people (density);
b. Potential to cause visual obstructions through the creation of smoke, steam, dust, lighting or
other unspecified obstruction that would adversely affect aircraft operational areas and
airspace; and specifically the proximity to runway ends, runway surfaces and extended
runway centerlines;
c. Potential for noise sensitivity, and when necessary, ensuring building construction that
reduces airport related noises for proposed uses;
d. Potential to minimize the number and size of detention/retention ponds which may attract
wildlife, by designing ponds to drain within forty-eight (48) hours;
e. Potential to create wildlife attractants other than water; and
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 32
f. Potential storage of flammable or hazardous materials as defined by the International
Building Code.
E. Airport Overlay Zoning Districts
1. The AOZD has defined the following use restrictions which shall be applicable to those areas
within the City of Onalaska jurisdictional boundary of the AOZD. Through the use of the La
Crosse Regional Airport Height Zoning Map, heights of structures and features, both man-made
and natural growth, shall be limited.
2. The following specific use restrictions and regulations shall also apply:
a. Existing Uses. All existing property uses allowed by the current zoning classifications, within
the zones defined by the AOZD and set forth in this Ordinance are allowed to remain, subject
to applicable federal, state, and local requirements including height limitations set forth in this
Ordinance. This includes the construction of ancillary uses, such as garages, subject to
existing local requirements. The AOZD Regulations shall not require the removal of or any
change in the construction, alteration, location, or use of any existing use; this includes the
construction, alteration, or use of property or structural improvements lawfully in existence at
the time of the effective date of this AOZD, or which commenced prior to the effective date of
the AOZD Regulations, and has been completed or is being diligently pursued. This includes
vacant platted lots that were established to accommodate proposed development prior to the
effective date of the AOZD Regulations. It is further provided that the height limits of the
AOZD Regulations shall in no event be exceeded by more than ten (10) feet. If a use
penetrates the applicable height limitation by ten (10) feet or less, it must be approved
through the permitting process.
i. Partial/Complete Destruction or Reconstruction. The owner of any existing use,
building, or structure which, as a result of fire, flood, explosion, or other casualty is
destroyed or is demolished by the owner, shall be allowed to rebuild, reconstruct, or
rehabilitate the same existing use on the same parcel, provided the existing use is
reviewed and complies with the La Crosse Regional Airport Height Zoning Map, and is
not otherwise prohibited under the City of Onalaska UDC or Code of Ordinances.
ii. Expansion of Existing Uses. Any existing use, as described in this Ordinance, may be
expanded, altered, or otherwise enlarged as long as the following requirements are met:
1. The expansion, alteration, or enlargement meets the requirements of the La Crosse
Regional Airport Height Limitations Zoning Map, meets the criteria for the existing
land use with no change in zoning classification, and is not otherwise prohibited
under the City of Onalaska UDC or Code of Ordinances.
2. Before any nonconforming structure may be replaced, altered, or rebuilt, a permit
shall be applied for and secured in the manner prescribed by Subsection F below
(Permit Submittal Requirements), authorizing such change, replacement, or repair.
No such Permit shall be denied if the structure will not become a greater hazard to air
navigation than it was on the effective date of this Ordinance, or than it was when the
application for permit was made.
b. Future Land Use. Any changes in land use, requiring a zoning reclassification are subject to
the land use restrictions set forth below and illustrated in Table 13.02.36-2 titled Land Use
Compatibility Chart, and are to be evaluated with the criteria set forth in the AOZD checklist is
hereby adopted by reference.
i. Permitted Uses are those land uses generally considered compatible within a particular
zone of the AOZD. Compatible land uses do not impact or create hazardous conditions
for aircraft, airport operational areas, or aircraft overflight areas, and are considered
reasonably safe for nearby residents. Permitted Uses, however, shall conform to all
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 33
Height Restrictions within the AOZD. A Permit and AOZD checklist is not required for
compliance with this Ordinance.
ii. Permit Required Uses are those land uses that shall be permissible following the
issuance of a Permit. The Permit, which may include development and use related
conditions, along with a signed AOZD checklist, notifies applicants of their responsibilities
and required mitigation for any construction, alteration, location or use of land to minimize
potential hazardous impacts to the La Crosse Regional Airport, aircraft, airport
operational areas, and aircraft overflight areas, as well as nearby residents. Any use
exceeding the height limitations by ten (10) feet or less requires a permit regardless of
the type of land use.
iii. Not Permitted Uses are those land uses generally considered not compatible
(incompatible) and/or not permitted within a particular zone of the AOZD. Incompatible
land uses endanger the health, safety, and welfare of nearby residents and aircraft
utilizing the La Crosse Regional Airport.
3. Exceptions.
a. The restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to temporary cranes, temporary lifts,
temporary scaffolding, and other similar temporary equipment used for normal and routine
construction, provided that a permit with any conditions has been issued by a City of
Onalaska Engineer or Building Inspector after obtaining the approval of the La Crosse
Regional Airport Director or his/her designee and, if required, the Federal Aviation
Administration (“FAA”) as a part of the FAA 7460-1 notification process.
4. Hazard Marking & Lighting.
a. All uses must comply with the FAA’s requirements for marking and lighting per the current
version of the Advisory Circular 70-7460 Obstruction Marking and Lighting. Additionally, any
permit may, if such action is deemed advisable by the La Crosse Regional Airport
Management, Wisconsin Department of Transportation Bureau of Aeronautics (“WI DOT
BOA”) and/or the FAA, require the owner of a structure or trees, to install, operate, and
maintain thereon such markers, lights, and navigational aids as may be necessary to indicate
to pilots the presence of a hazard, at the owners expense.
5. Prohibited Uses in the Airport Overlay Zoning District.
a. Any use that would exceed the Height Restrictions indicated on the Height Limitation Zoning
Map by more than ten (10) feet.
b. Any use that is not permitted according to Table 13.02.36-2 Land Use Compatibility Chart.
c. Any use, temporary or permanent, which is determined to create a safety concern for aircraft
operations, as defined by the WI BOA, the FAA, or the City of La Crosse, as owners of the
Airport.
Table 13.02.36-2 Land Use Compatibility Chart
Land Use Compatibility Chart
P = Permitted R = Permit Required N = Not Permitted
Land Uses[1][2][3] Zone A Zone B1 Zone B2 Zone B3 Zone C Zone D
Residential Activities
Single-Family Uses (1 unit per
lot)
N R R P N P
Multi-Family Uses
(Three or more principal dwelling units within a single building on the same parcel)
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 34
Land Use Compatibility Chart
P = Permitted R = Permit Required N = Not Permitted
Land Uses[1][2][3] Zone A Zone B1 Zone B2 Zone B3 Zone C Zone D
(e.g. apartment, condominium, townhouse-style)
Low-Rise (2 - 3 Stories) or Mid-
Rise (4-12 Stories)
N R R P N P
High-Rise (13+ Stories) N N R P N P
Group Living Uses
(e.g. assisted living, group care, independent group living, nursing and convalescent home)
Residential Group Living Units
N R R P N P
(1 dwelling per lot)
Low-Rise (2 - 3 Stories) or Mid-
Rise (4-12 Stories)
N R R P N P
High-Rise (13+ Stories) N N R P N P
Manufactured Housing Parks N N R P N P
Commercial Activities
Eating and Drinking
Establishments (e.g. restaurant,
cafe, fast food restaurant, bar,
nightclub)
N R R P N P
General Office/Medical Office/Dental Office Uses
(e.g. professional, business, financial, governmental)
Low-Rise (2 - 3 Stories) N R P P R P
Mid-Rise (4 -12 Levels) N N R P N P
High-Rise (13+ Stories) N N R P N P
Hospitality-Oriented
(e.g. hotel, motel, convention center, meeting hall, event facility)
Low-Rise (2 to 3 Stories) N R P P N P
Mid-Rise (4 to12 Stories) N N P P N P
High-Rise (13+ Stories) N N R P N P
Outdoor Storage and Display-
Oriented (e.g. lumber yard,
vehicles sale, landscape sales, or
farm supply equipment sale)
N R P P R P
Personal Service-Oriented
N R P P R P
(e.g. retail service, banking
facility, laundromat, dry cleaning,
beauty salon, funeral home)
Vehicle Servicing Uses
N R R P N P
(e.g. full-serve gas station,
unattended card key service
station, vehicle repair shop, tire
sale)
Retail Uses
(e.g. sale, lease, or rent of new or used products)
Small Sales-Oriented N R P P R P
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 35
Land Use Compatibility Chart
P = Permitted R = Permit Required N = Not Permitted
Land Uses[1][2][3] Zone A Zone B1 Zone B2 Zone B3 Zone C Zone D
(e.g. convenience store, bakery,
garden supply, grocery,
hardware, or electronics store)
Large Sales-Oriented
(e.g. big box store, mall, strip N R R P R P
mall)
Surface Passenger Services
N R P P R P
(e.g. passenger terminal for
buses, rail service, local taxi,
limousine service)
Industrial/Manufacturing Activities
Industrial Service Uses
N R P P R P
(e.g. machine shop, tool repair,
towing/vehicle storage, building
supply yard, exterminator)
Manufacturing and Production Uses
(e.g. manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging or assembly of goods)
General Manufacturing
N R P P R P
(e.g. manufacturing, assembling
or treatment of most articles,
materials, or merchandise)
Heavy Manufacturing
N N R R N R
(e.g. concrete/asphalt plant, meat
packing plant, wet corn milling,
paper mill, ethanol plant, animal
feed)
Mining and Extraction Uses N N N R N R
Salvage Operations
N R R P N P
(e.g. collect, store, and dismantle
damaged or discarded vehicles,
machinery, appliances, building
material)
Self-Service Storage Uses
(e.g. mini-warehouse, storage N P P P R P
facility)
Warehouse/Freight Uses
N R P P R P
(e.g. major wholesale distribution
center, freight storage, railroad
switching yard)
Waste-Related Uses N N N R N R
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 36
Land Use Compatibility Chart
P = Permitted R = Permit Required N = Not Permitted
Land Uses[1][2][3] Zone A Zone B1 Zone B2 Zone B3 Zone C Zone D
(e.g. recycling center, sanitary
landfill, waste transfer station,
composting, sanitary or water
treatment facility)
Wholesale Sales Uses
N R P P R P
(e.g. sale, lease, or rental of
products to retailers for industrial,
institutional, or commercial
business users)
Institutional Activities
College and Universities (e.g.
public or private college or
university, technical college,
seminary)
N N R R N R
Community Service Uses - (e.g.
public, nonprofit, or charitable
nature providing a local service to
the people such as a library,
museum, transit center,
senior/community center,
police/fire/station)
N N R R R R
Daycare Uses - (e.g. childcare center, adult daycare, preschool, after school program)
Residential Daycare Uses
(e.g. in-home adult/child daycare N R R P N P
facility)
Institutional Daycare Uses
N N R R N R
(e.g. childcare center, preschool,
after school program, adult
daycare)
Detention Facilities
N N R R N R
(e.g. prison, jail, probation center,
halfway house, juvenile detention
home)
Educational Facilities
General Educational Facilities
N N R R N R
(e.g. public and private
elementary, middle, junior, and
senior high school including
religious, boarding, military)
Specialized Education Facilities
(e.g. specialized trade, business,
or commercial courses, nondegree
granting school)
N N R R R R
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 37
Land Use Compatibility Chart
P = Permitted R = Permit Required N = Not Permitted
Land Uses[1][2][3] Zone A Zone B1 Zone B2 Zone B3 Zone C Zone D
Hospitals- (e.g. hospital and
medical center)
N N R R N R
Religious Assembly Uses
N N R R N R
(e.g. church, temple, mosque,
synagogue, eagles/moose/elk
lodge)
Infrastructure Activities
Basic Utility Uses
N R R P R P
(e.g. utility substation facility
electrical substation, water and
sewer lift station)
Communication Transmission
Facility Uses
(e.g. broadcast, wireless, point to N N R R N R
point, or emergency tower and
antennae)
Parking Uses
R P P P P P
(e.g. ground lot, parking structure)
Transportation Uses
(e.g. local road, county road, R P P P P P
highway, interstate)
Utility Uses
N R R R N R
(e.g. wind generator, wind farm,
solar power generation
equipment, water tower,
transmission lines)
Agriculture and Open Space Activities
Agricultural Uses
(e.g. commercial cultivation of plants, livestock production)
Animal or Plant related
R P P P P P
(e.g. livestock , dairy , horse farm,
crop farming, vegetable, fruit,
tree, wholesale plant nursery)
Facility-related
N N R P N P
(e.g. fuel bulk storage or pumping
facility, grain elevator, or
livestock, seed, grain sales)
Resident-related
N R R P N P
(e.g. single-family home or mobile
home if converted to real property
and taxed)
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 38
Land Use Compatibility Chart
P = Permitted R = Permit Required N = Not Permitted
Land Uses[1][2][3] Zone A Zone B1 Zone B2 Zone B3 Zone C Zone D
Water Bodies
Man-made resources (e.g. mining
or extraction pond, wetland
mitigation site)
N R R R N R
Wildlife Preservation Areas
N N R R N R
(e.g. petting zoo, wildlife
rehabilitation center, zoo,
conservation areas)
Parks and Recreation Activities
Casino N N R R N R
Commercial Recreational Uses
Indoor or Outdoor
N R R R N R
(e.g. physical fitness center,
bowling alley, skating rink, indoor
theater, campground,
tennis/swimming facility, drive-in
theater, skating rink,
amphitheater)
Parks
N R R R N
(e.g. aquatic, mini, private, sports,
neighborhood, school,
community)
R
Specialty Uses
N N R R N R
(e.g. amusement or theme park,
fairground, racetrack, sports
arena)
1 The following information is not an all-inclusive list; however it provides a sample of the types of land
uses under each individual land use classification.
2 Height limitations set forth in 13.02.36 supersede any land use criteria and must be followed first when
determining compatibility of development.
3 Any future residential development within Zone A or Zone C is allowed, but is limited to those lots
currently zoned for residential use.
F. Permit Submittal Requirements.
1. For all Permit Required Uses, the AOZD checklist shall be utilized to notify the applicant of their
responsibilities as a property owner and will be used by the City of Onalaska Planning
Department to evaluate the proposed development within the Onalaska jurisdictional boundary of
the AOZD and determine if a Permit will be issued. Each applicant shall be responsible to
mitigate any construction, alteration, location or use of land to minimize potential hazardous
impacts to the La Crosse Regional Airport, aircraft, airport operational areas, and aircraft
overflight areas, as well as nearby residents. Failure of applicant to mitigate potential hazardous
impacts shall be a violation of the terms and requirement of this Ordinance through the City’s
authority to implement the Regulations of the AOZD. Applicant (and property owner(s) if
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.36
Page 39
different) shall acknowledge by signature their understanding of the mitigation criteria utilizing the
AOZD checklist provided by the City or its representative according to Subsection G below
(Administration).
G. Administration.
1. The City of Onalaska Planning Department is authorized to administer this Ordinance and shall
have the following responsibilities and powers:
a. Approve or conditionally approve Permits that do not exceed required height restrictions;
b. Inspect any building site or improvement or use of land as required by this Ordinance;
c. Maintain records of approvals, denials, conditions of approvals, and inspections made, and
maintain a complete public record of all proceedings;
d. Review and make recommendations to the Council on all zoning map changes and
amendments to the text of the Ordinance;
e. Oversee the functions of all impacted areas by this Ordinance;
f. Require complete and accurate information necessary to make reasonable evaluations of
applications;
g. Work and communicate with the City of La Crosse as necessary to ensure compatibility with
City of La Crosse Ordinance 8-115 authorizing Administration of this Ordinance to the City of
Onalaska;
h. Hear and grant applications for unclassified and unspecified uses, provided that such uses
are similar in character to the principal uses permitted in the district;
i. Hear and grant applications for temporary uses in any district, provided that such uses are of
a temporary nature, do NOT involve the erection of a substantial structure(s), and are
compatible with neighboring uses. The Permit shall be temporary, revocable, subject to any
conditions required by the Zoning Administrator and shall be issued for a period not to
exceed twelve (12) months. Compliance with all other provisions of this Ordinance shall be
required; and
j. Investigate violations and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Land Use Permit. When required by this Ordinance, a Permit (valid for eighteen (18) months)
shall be obtained from the Planning Department before the removal of or any change in the
construction, alteration, location, or use of any existing use or proposed use. In all cases, the
height limits of the AOZD as set forth in this Ordinance shall not be exceeded by more than ten
(10) feet. Uses that penetrate height limitations by ten (10) feet or less require a permit. The
Permit (for Permit Required Uses or for Future Uses when specified), which may include
development and use related conditions, along with a signed AOZD checklist, notifies applicants
of their responsibilities and required mitigation for any construction, alteration, location or use of
land to minimize potential hazardous impacts to the La Crosse Regional Airport, aircraft, airport
operational areas, and aircraft overflight areas, as well as nearby residents. Said Permit shall be
posted in a prominent place on the premises prior to and during the period of construction,
erection, installation or establishment. Failure to obtain a Permit when required shall be a
violation of this Ordinance. Application for a Permit shall be made to the Planning Department
upon furnished application forms and shall include the following data:
a. Name and address of the applicant, property owner, and contractor-builder;
b. An accurate properly dimensioned map drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals
two hundred (200) feet of the property, showing:
i. The location, dimensions, elevations, and contours of the site; elevations of all pertinent
structures, fill, or storage areas; size, location, and spatial arrangements of all proposed
and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and
sanitary facilities; the relationship of the above to the La Crosse Regional Airport, as well
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 40
as a particular zone(s) of the AOZD; and any other pertinent information that may be
necessary to determine if the proposed use meets the requirements of this Ordinance.
c. Legal description of the property, the type of proposed use, and an indication as to whether
new construction or a modification to an existing structure is involved;
d. A description of the proposed land use and building materials and landscaping materials;
e. The elevation of the highest point of the structure, object, or natural vegetation using National
Geodetic and Vertical Datum when locating within the individual zone of the AOZD, including
existing ground elevations reporting in Mean Sea Level (MSL), height of the structure or
object above ground measured in feet (AGL), and top elevation measured in MSL;
f. When the Planning Department or Airport Director deems necessary, evidence of submission
of a Federal Aviation Administration Form 7460-1, Notification of Proposed Construction or
Alteration, commonly known as an “airspace review”. Receipt of final determination letter
from the FAA is required prior to final approval or denial of a Permit (as required for Permit
Required Uses or for Future Uses when specified). The FAA Form 7460-1 can be found
online at http://forms.faa.gov/forms/faa7460-1.pdf; and
g. Applicant’s signed AOZD checklist accepting mitigation responsibilities to ensure that any
use, construction or alteration of such use is compatible with this Ordinance.
3. Other Permits. It is the responsibility of the applicant to secure all other necessary permits from
all appropriate federal, state, and local agencies.
4. Board of Appeals. Appeals shall be made to the City of La Crosse Board of Appeals as set forth
in the City of La Crosse Municipal Code, as amended, pursuant to Section 8-121 of the City of La
Crosse Municipal Code which is available on the City of La Crosse website
(www.cityoflacrosse.org) or from the City of La Crosse’s City Clerk’s office.
H. Amendments.
1. The Common Council may amend or supplement the regulations of this Section in the manner
provided by law.
I. Fees.
1. Fees for the administration of this Ordinance and zoning permits are established by the City and
are intended to cover the reasonable costs of administering this ordinance. Such fees may be in
addition to other building and zoning permit fees. When a zoning or a building permit fee is not
required for a project but the AOZD checklist is required, a fee as set forth on the City Fee
schedule will be charged.
J. Violations.
1. It shall be unlawful to construct or use any structure, land, or water in violation of any of the
provisions of this Ordinance. The City may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin
violations of this Ordinance or applicable state law.
K. Enforcement & Penalties.
1. Any person or persons violating any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to general penalty
provisions listed in Section 1-1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. Each and every day during which a
violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Notice of violations shall be issued
by the Planning Department.
Natural and Historic Resource Protection Overlay Districts
13.02.41 Floodplain Protection Overlay District
A. Statutory Authorization. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Sec. 61.35 and
Sec. 62.23, for villages and cities; Sec. 59.69, Sec. 59.692, and Sec. 59.694 for counties; and the
requirements in Sec. 87.30, Wis. Stats.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 41
B. Finding of Fact. Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality
would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base.
C. Statement of Purpose. This ordinance is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
1. Protect life, health and property;
2. Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
3. Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers;
4. Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
5. Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
6. Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
7. Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers;
8. Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts
between property owners; and
9. Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to locate the activity,
use or structure outside of the floodplain.
D. Title. This ordinance shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for Onalaska, Wisconsin.
E. General Provisions.
1. Areas to be Regulated. This ordinance regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional
flood or base flood as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other maps approved
by DNR. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH Zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are
displayed as A and AO zones. Regional Flood Elevations (RFE) may be derived from other
studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall
apply.
2. Official Maps & Revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE,
AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) listed below. Any
change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or
floodway in the FIS or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved
by the DNR and FEMA through the Letter of Map Change process (see Subsection L
Amendments) before it is effective. No changes to RFEs on non-FEMA maps shall be effective
until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the Engineering Department
at the City of Onalaska. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive
information shall apply.
a. Official Maps. Based on the FIS:
i. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers (0144, 0161, 0162, 0163, 0164, 0169,
0251, 0252, 0256, 0257), dated January 6, 2012 as approved by the WDNR and FEMA.
b. Official Maps. Based on other studies. Any maps referenced in this section must be
approved by the DNR and be more restrictive than those based on the FIS at the site of the
proposed development. The City will retain copies of any additional maps as needed
including, but not limited to Dam Failure analyses and Letter of Map Revisions as they occur.
3. Establishment of Floodplain Zoning Districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided into
three districts as follows:
a. The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional floodwaters and are contained
within AE Zones as shown on the FIRM.
b. The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion between the regional flood limits and the floodway
and displayed as AE Zones on the FIRM.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 42
c. The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood and does not have a BFE or floodway boundary determined,
including A, AH and AO zones on the FIRM.
4. Locating Floodplain Boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain
zoning map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria below. If a significant
difference exists, the map shall be amended according to Subsection L. The Zoning
Administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a Site Plan
Permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which
the district boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this
section. Disputes between the Zoning Administrator and an applicant over the district boundary
line shall be settled according to Subsection K.3.c and the criteria in (a) and (b) below. Where
the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must
approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to Subsection L.
a. If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine the district
boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
b. Where flood profiles do not exist for projects, the location of the boundary shall be
determined by the map scale.
5. Removal of Lands from Floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall not
be grounds for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the
regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map
is amended pursuant to Subsection L.
6. Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this ordinance shall be in
compliance with the terms of this ordinance, and other applicable local, state, and federal
regulations.
7. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This division supersedes all other provisions of Title 13
as it relates to floodplain.
8. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance are the
minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a limitation
on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this
ordinance, required by Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted
in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this ordinance or in effect on the
date of the most recent text amendment to this ordinance.
9. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The flood protection standards in this ordinance are based
on engineering experience and research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply or guarantee that nonfloodplain
areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. This
ordinance does not create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the City or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this ordinance.
10. Annexed Areas for Cities and Villages. The La Crosse County floodplain zoning provisions in
effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the City for all
annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the
requirements of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code and 44 CFR 59-72, National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map.
County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of
administering this section and are on file in the City of Onalaska Engineering Department. All
plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the floodway location.
F. General Standards Applicable to All Floodplain Districts.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 43
1. The City shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be
reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads;
be constructed with flood-resistant materials; be constructed to minimize flood damages and to
ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions of flooding.
2. Standards for Development. All of the provisions listed below shall apply in addition to the other
requirements of this Section.
a. Any structure or building used for human habitation or use, which is to be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved into the flood zone areas shall meet or exceed
the following standards:
i. The elevation of the lowest floor excluding the basement or crawlway shall be at or above
the flood protection elevation (which is a point two (2) feet above the Regional Flood
Elevation (RFE)) except where subd. (ii) below is applicable. The fill elevation shall be
one (1) foot or more above the RFE extending at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the limits
of the structure. Applicable City staff may authorize other floodproofing where existing
streets or sewer lines are at elevations, which make compliance impractible, provided the
Board of Zoning Appeals grants a variance due to dimensional restrictions.
ii. The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the RFE providing it is floodproffed to
the flood protection elevation. No permit or variance shall any floor, basement, or
crawlway below the RFE.
3. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision
proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and
floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this ordinance and all
other requirements in Subsection K.1. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
4. Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analysis.
a. No floodplain development shall:
i. Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by
itself or with other development, causing any increase in the regional flood height; or
ii. Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed development will
obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional flood height, based on the officially
adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of Subsection L are met.
5. Watercourse Alterations.
a. No Site Plan Permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued
until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the Department and
FEMA regional offices, and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal
permits. The standards of Subsection F.3 must be met and the flood carrying capacity of
any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
b. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date of the watercourse
alteration or relocation and pursuant to Subsection L, the community shall apply for a Letter
of Map Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved
by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process.
6. Chapter 30, 31, Wis. Stats., Development. Development which requires a permit from the
Department, under Ch. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts,
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 44
dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and
amendments to the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to Subsection L.
7. Public or Private Campgrounds. No public or private campgrounds shall be allowed within the
floodplain district.
8. Flooded Agriculture. No flooded agriculture shall be located within municipal limits.
G. Floodway District (FW).
1. Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those
identified pursuant to Subsection I.4.
2. Permitted Uses. The following open space uses are allowed in the Floodway District and the
floodway areas of the General Floodplain District, if they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance, they meet the standards in Subsections G.3 and G.4, and all permits or certificates
have been issued according to Subsection K.1.
a. Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and wild
crop harvesting.
b. Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas and
airport landing strips.
c. Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic
grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and
horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of Subsection G.3.d.
d. Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures that
comply with Subsection G.3 and Subsection G.4.
e. Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with Subsection 3.d.
f. Functionally water dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas,
culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply
with Ch. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats.
g. Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with Subsection G.3.c.
3. Standards for Developments in the Floodway.
a. General.
i. Any development in the floodway shall comply with Subsection F and have a low flood
damage potential.
ii. Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the proposal
according to Subsection F.3 and Subsection K.1.c:
1. A cross section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the watercourse,
showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or
2. An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height.
iii. The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will cause any
increase in the flood elevations upstream or downstream, based on the data submitted
for Subsection (ii) above.
b. Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses, including utility and
sanitary facilities, or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit
if the structures comply with the following criteria:
i. Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood damage potential and is
constructed to minimize flood damage;
ii. Shall either have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation shall
meet all the following standards:
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 45
1. Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and completely dry to the flood protection
elevation without human intervention during flooding;
2. Have structural components capable of meeting all provisions of Subsection
G.3.b.vii; and
3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, through the use of a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing Certificate, that the design
and methods of construction are in accordance with Subsection G.3.b.vii.
iii. Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
iv. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation; and
v. Must not obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the regional flood.
vi. For a structure designed to allow the automatic entry of floodwaters below the Regional
Flood Elevation, the applicant shall submit a plan that meets or exceeds the following
standards:
1. The lowest floor must be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation;
2. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and
3. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the lowest
adjacent grade; openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters, otherwise must remain open.
vii. Certification. Whenever floodproofing measures are required, a registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the following floodproofing measures will be
utilized, where appropriate, and are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the regional flood:
1. Reinforcement of floors and walls to resist rupture, collapse, or lateral movement
caused by water pressures or debris buildup;
2. Construction of wells, water supply systems and waste treatment systems so as to
prevent the entrance of flood waters in such systems and must be in accordance with
provisions in Subsections Subsection G.4.d and Subsection G.4.e.
3. Subsurface drainage systems to relieve external pressures on foundation walls and
basement floors;
4. Cutoff valves on sewer lines or the elimination of gravity flow basement drains; and
5. Placement of utilities above the flood protection elevation.
c. Public Utilities, Streets, and Bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed
by permit, if:
i. Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation; and
ii. Construction meets the development standards of Subsection F.3.
d. Fills or Deposition of Materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if:
i. The requirements of Subsection F.3 are met;
ii. No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is issued by the Department
pursuant to Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and a permit pursuant to s. 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344 has been issued, if
applicable, and all other requirements have been met;
iii. The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover,
sheet piling or bulkheading; and
iv. The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 46
4. Prohibited Uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in Subsection G.2 are prohibited,
including the following uses:
a. Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not associated
with permanent open space uses;
b. Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water quality,
or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life;
c. Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts;
d. Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior to
flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and Department-approved
campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis.
Adm. Code;
e. Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except those for
recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Ch. NR 811 and NR
812, Wis. Adm. Code;
f. Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
g. Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under s. NR
110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code; and
h. Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed
development located outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the
floodplain area occupied.
H. Floodfringe District (FF).
1. Applicability. This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps
and those identified pursuant to Subsection I.4.
2. Permitted Uses. Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the Floodfringe District if
the standards in Subsection H.3 below are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other
ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in Subsection K.1 have been
issued.
3. Standards for Development in the Floodfringe. Subsection F.3 shall apply in addition to the
following requirements according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the floodfringe
must meet the requirements of Subsection J Nonconforming Uses;
a. Residential Uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be newly
constructed or moved into the floodfringe, shall meet or exceed the following standards. Any
existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of Subsection J;
i. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill
unless the requirements of Subsection H.3.a.ii can be met. The fill shall be one (1) foot
or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the
limits of the structure.
ii. The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at or below the regional flood elevation if
it is dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
iii. Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of the
floodplain, except as provided in subd. (iv) below.
iv. In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance with
subd. (iii) above impractical, the municipality may permit new development and
substantial improvements where roads are below the regional flood elevation, if:
1. The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency services that
rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a
regional flood event; or
2. The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation plan.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 47
b. Accessory Structures or Uses. Accessory structures shall be constructed on fill with the
lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation.
c. Commercial Uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the
floodfringe shall meet the requirements of Subsection H.3.a Subject to the requirements of
Subsection H.3.e, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at
lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
d. Manufacturing and Industrial Uses. Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is
erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in Subsection K.5. Subject
to the requirements of Subsection H.3.e, storage yards, surface parking lots and other such
uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life
and property.
e. Storage of Materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to
property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above
the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with Subsection K.5. Adequate
measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during
flooding.
f. Public Utilities, Streets, and Bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to
be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans; and
i. When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public health or
safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction or repair of such
facilities shall only be permitted if they are designed to comply with Subsection K.5.
ii. Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if they are
designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation.
g. Sewage Systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood water into the system, pursuant to Subsection K.5.c, to the flood
protection elevation and meet the provisions of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis.
Adm. Code.
h. Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system, pursuant to Subsection K.5.c, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the
provisions of Ch. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
i. Solid Waste Disposal Sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe
areas.
j. Deposition of Materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this
ordinance.
k. Manufactured Homes. No manufactured homes shall be allowed in the floodfringe areas.
l. Mobile Recreational Vehicles. A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and
security devices and has no permanently attached additions. All mobile recreational vehicles
that are on site for one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days or more or are not fully
licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the following elevation and anchoring
requirements:
i. have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and
ii. be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood
iii. meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in Subsection H.3.a
I. General Floodplain District (GFP).
1. Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains mapped as A, AO or AH
zones.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 48
2. Permitted Uses.
a. Pursuant to Subsection I.4, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located
within the floodway or floodfringe.
b. Those uses permitted in the Floodway (Subsection G.2) and Floodfringe (Subsection H.2)
Districts are allowed within the General Floodplain District, according to the standards of
Subsection I.3, provided that all permits or certificates required under Subsection K.1 have
been issued.
3. Standards for Development in the General Floodplain District. Subsection G applies to
floodway areas, Subsection H applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this ordinance applies to
either district.
a. In AO/AH Zones the structure’s lowest floor must meet one (1) of the conditions listed below
whichever is higher:
i. At or above the flood protection elevation; or
ii. Two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or
iii. The depth as shown on the FIRM
b. In AO/AH zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters
around structures.
4. Determining Floodway and Floodfringe Limits. Upon receiving an application for development
within the general floodplain district, the Zoning Administrator shall:
a. Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which shows the
proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream channel,
and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits
and elevations, building floor elevations and flood proofing measures; and the flood zone as
shown on the FIRM.
b. Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary by the
Department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional
flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries.
i. A Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study.
ii. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill
or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on
the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types
and other pertinent information;
iii. Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging,
channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities.
J. Nonconforming Uses.
1. General.
a. Applicability. If these standards conform with s.87.30, Wis. Stats. and Ch. NR 116.15, Wis.
Adm. Code and 44 CFR 59-72, they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any
nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage of this ordinance or any amendment thereto.
b. The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance may continue subject to the following conditions:
i. No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted
unless they comply with this ordinance. The words "modification" and "addition" include,
but are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or
replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use.
Maintenance is not considered a modification; this includes painting, decorating, paneling
and other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 49
existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Any
costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not considered maintenance;
ii. The construction of a deck that does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet and that
is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension, modification or
addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion of the deck in order to
provide safe ingress and egress to the principal structure;
iii. If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for twelve
(12) consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any future use of the property, and
any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this
ordinance;
iv. The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of all
modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of the
structure's total current value those modifications represent;
v. No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed fifty
percent (50%) of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this ordinance. Contiguous dry land
access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with
Subsection H.3.a. The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a nonconforming building or
a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from
the fifty percent (50%) provisions of this paragraph;
vi. No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a nonconforming
use, the cost of which would equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed
value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a
conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this ordinance. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for
residential and commercial uses in compliance with Subsection H.3.a;
vii. If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done under (v) and (vi) above
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the present equalized assessed value the work
shall not be permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming
structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this
ordinance. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial
uses in compliance with Subsection H.3.a;
viii. Except as provided in Subsection (ix) below, if any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it cannot be
replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current
ordinance requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost
to restore the structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the structure’s present equalized assessed value; and
ix. For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or destroyed by a nonflood
disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming building shall be
permitted in order to restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event,
provided that the minimum federal code requirements below are met and all required
permits have been granted prior to the start of construction.
1. Residential Structures
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 50
a) Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base
flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter
walls must meet the requirements of Subsection K.5.b.
b) Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects
of buoyancy and shall be constructed with methods and materials resistant to
flood damage.
c) Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
d) In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data available from a federal,
state or other source.
e) In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, meet the standards in Subsection I.3.a.
f) In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from the structure.
2. Nonresidential Structures
a) Shall meet the requirements of Subsection J.1.b.ix.1.
b) Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the
regional flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall meet the standards in Subsection K.5.a or K.5.b.
c) In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, meet the standards in Subsection I.3.a.
d) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not
preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure, the
alteration will comply with Subsection G.3.a, flood resistant materials are used,
and construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with
Subsection K.5 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be
exempt from the development standards of Subsection J.1.b.ix.1.a) if it is
determined that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
2. Floodway District.
a. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use in the Floodway District, unless such modification or addition:
i. Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance requirements;
ii. Meets the requirements of Subsection J.1;
iii. Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height;
iv. Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to Subsection K.5,
by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation; and
v. If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed, the following
standards shall apply:
1. The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or engineer to allow for
the efficient entry and exit of flood waters without human intervention. A minimum of
two (2) openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least one (1)
square inch for every one (1) square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the
opening can be no more than twelve (12) inches above the adjacent grade;
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 51
2. The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection elevation must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials;
3. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the
flood protection elevation; and
4. The use must be limited to parking, building access or limited storage.
b. No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal
system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a
hazard to public health, shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any replacement, repair or
maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the
applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, Subsection K.5.c and Ch. SPS 383,
Wis. Adm. Code; and
c. No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed
in the Floodway District. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in the
Floodway District shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances,
Subsection K.5.c and Ch. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
3. Floodfringe District.
a. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been granted a permit or
variance by the municipality, and meets the requirements of Subsection H.3 except where
Subsection J.3.b is applicable.
b. Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection (a) above would result in unnecessary
hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be associated
with a high flood damage potential, the Board of Zoning Appeals, using the procedures
established in Subsection K.3, may grant a variance from those provisions of Subsection (a)
above for modifications or additions using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions
which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted
if:
i. No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or commercial
structures;
ii. Human lives are not endangered;
iii. Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed;
iv. Flood depths shall not exceed two feet;
v. Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and
vi. The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as described in Subsection
H.3.e.
c. All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance
of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all local
ordinances, Subsection K.5.c and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
d. All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the
applicable provisions of this ordinance, Subsection K.5. cand Ch. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis.
Adm. Code.
K. Administration. Where a Zoning Administrator, planning agency or a Board of Zoning Appeals has
already been appointed to administer a Zoning Ordinance adopted under Sec. 59.69, 59.692 or
62.23(7), Wis Stats., these officials shall also administer this ordinance.
1. Zoning Administrator.
a. Duties and Powers. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to administer this ordinance and
shall have the following duties and powers:
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 52
i. Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing permit applications and
appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed development is
shown on all permit applications.
ii. Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this ordinance and
issue certificates of compliance where appropriate.
iii. Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine if substantial damage
to the structures has occurred.
iv. Keep records of all official actions such as:
1. All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
2. Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations;
3. Floodproofing certificates;
4. Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances, nonconforming uses
and structures including changes, appeals, variances and amendments;
5. All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures; and
6. List of nonconforming structures and uses.
v. Submit copies of the following items to the Department Regional office:
1. Within ten (10) days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances, appeals
for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments;
2. Copies of case by case analyses and other required information including an annual
summary of floodplain zoning actions taken; and
3. Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related
correspondence concerning the assessments.
vi. Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this ordinance to the municipal
zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to
the Department Regional office.
vii. Submit copies of amendments to the FEMA Regional office.
b. Site Plan Permit. A site plan permit shall be obtained before any new development; repair,
modification or addition to an existing structure; or change in the use of a building or
structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated.
c. Other Permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit the applicant must secure
all necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including but not limited to
those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under s. 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344.
2. Zoning Agency.
a. The Plan Commission shall:
i. Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator; and
ii. Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments to this ordinance,
maps and text.
b. The Plan Commission shall not:
i. Grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action by the Board of Zoning
Appeals; or
ii. Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the governing body.
3. Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals, created under s. 62.23(7)(e), Wis.
Stats., for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes of
this ordinance. The Board shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt
rules for the conduct of business. The Zoning Administrator shall not be the secretary of the
Board.
a. Powers and Duties. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall:
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 53
i. Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement or administration of this ordinance;
ii. Boundary Disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the district boundaries shown
on the official floodplain zoning map; and
iii. Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the ordinance standards.
b. Appeals to the Board.
i. (a) Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or
department of the municipality affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator or
other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days unless
otherwise provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the official whose decision is in
question, and with the Board, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal.
The official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the Board all records regarding
the matter appealed.
ii. Notice and Hearing for Appeals, Including Variances.
1. Notice. The Board shall:
a) Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
b) Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes, specifying the date,
time, place and subject of the hearing; and
c) Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the Department
Regional office at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing.
2. Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The Board shall:
a) Resolve boundary disputes according to Subsection K.3.c;
b) Decide variance applications according to Subsection K.3.d; and
c) Decide appeals of permit denials according to Subsection K.4.
3. Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall:
a) Be made within a reasonable time;
b) Be sent to the Department Regional office within ten (10) days of the decision;
c) Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the Board;
d) State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's decision;
e) Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of
jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application; and
f) Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship
demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in the
recorded minutes of the Board proceedings.
c. Boundary Disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the Board in hearing disputes
concerning floodplain district boundaries:
i. If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain
studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none
exist, other evidence may be examined;
ii. The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
present arguments and technical evidence to the Board; and
iii. If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the Plan Commission or
the person contesting the boundary location to petition the governing body for a map
amendment according to Subsection L.
d. Variance.
i. The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this ordinance if an
applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 54
1. Literal enforcement of the ordinance will cause unnecessary hardship;
2. The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique property
conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such case the ordinance or
map must be amended;
3. The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
4. The variance is consistent with the purpose of this ordinance in Subsection C.
ii. In addition to the criteria in subd. (i) above, to qualify for a variance under FEMA
regulations, the following criteria must be met:
1. The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation;
2. Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre and are
contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE; and
3. Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall
be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety or
nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be
contrary to the purpose of the ordinance.
iii. A variance shall not:
1. Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district;
2. Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss;
3. Be granted for a hardship which is self-created;
4. Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area;
5. Allow actions without the amendments to this ordinance or map(s) required in
Subsection L; and
6. Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude
its continued designation as an historic structure.
iv. When a floodplain variance is granted the Board shall notify the applicant in writing that it
may increase risks to life and property and flood insurance premiums could increase up
to $25.00 per $100.00 of coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record.
4. To Review Appeals of Permit Denials.
a. The Board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include:
i. Permit application data listed in Subsection K.1.b;
ii. Floodway/floodfringe determination data in Subsection I.4;
iii. Data listed in Subsection G.3.a.ii.a.ii where the applicant has not submitted this
information to the zoning administrator; and
iv. Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the Board with the appeal.
b. For appeals of all denied permits the Board shall:
i. Follow the procedures of Subsection K.3;
ii. Consider Plan Commission recommendations; and
iii. Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
c. For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the Board shall:
i. Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing an increase in flood
elevation. Increases may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and
all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected property owners
as per the requirements of Subsection L; and
ii. Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly demonstrates that the
project does not cause an increase provided no other reasons for denial exist.
5. Floodproofing Standards for Nonconforming Structures or Uses.
a. No permit or variance shall be issued for a non-residential structure designed to be watertight
below the regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.41
Page 55
professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or
development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA Floodproofing Certificate.
b. For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance shall be
issued until the applicant submits a plan either:
i. Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
ii. Meets or exceeds the following standards:
1. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
c. Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
i. Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other regional
flood factors;
ii. Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
iii. Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement;
iv. Minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters; and
v. Minimize or eliminate discharges into flood waters.
6. Public Information.
a. Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood.
b. All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed.
c. Real estate transfers should show what floodplain district any real property is in.
L. Amendments. Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made to this
ordinance, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in
accordance with Subsection L.3 below.
1. In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall be permitted unless the
applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are made
to this ordinance, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in
accordance with Subsection L.3. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA
and the DNR.
2. In A Zones increases equal to or greater than one (1) foot may only be permitted if the applicant
receives a Conditional Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this
ordinance, the official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles, in accordance
with Subsection L.3.
3. General. The governing body shall change or supplement the floodplain zoning district
boundaries and this ordinance in the manner outlined in Subsection L.4 below. Actions which
require an amendment to the ordinance and/ or submittal of a Letter of Map Change (LOMC)
include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the regional
flood height;
b. Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations on the FIRM;
c. Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in Subsection E.2.b;
d. Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above the flood
protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain;
e. Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain maps;
f. Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by sec. NR 116.05, Wis. Adm.
Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the municipality; and
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.42
Page 56
g. All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area
from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM
requires prior approval by FEMA.
4. Procedures. Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any party according to the
provisions of Sec. 62.23, Wis. Stats. The petitions shall include all data required by Subsections
I.4 and K.1. The Site Plan Permit shall not be issued until a Letter of Map Revision is issued by
FEMA for the proposed changes.
a. The proposed amendment shall be referred to the Plan Commission for a public hearing and
recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public hearing shall
be submitted to the Department Regional office for review prior to the hearing. The
amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of s. 62.23, Wis. Stats.
b. No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the Department.
c. All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the
regional flood height, shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal
arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and notify local units of
government before the amendment can be approved by the governing body.
M. Enforcement and Penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance by any person shall be
unlawful and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such
violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not more than $50.00
(fifty dollars), together with a taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall
constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this ordinance is a public nuisance and the creation
may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state,
or any citizen thereof pursuant to sec. 87.30, Wis. Stats.
N. Definitions. See Section 13.06.14.
13.02.42 Bluffland Protection Overlay District
A. Purpose.
1. The protection of visual, aesthetic, and ecological qualities of City bluffs and blufflands are
identified within the City of Onalaska Comprehensive Plan. This ordinance is hereby adopted to
implement the Comprehensive Plan and to achieve the following public purposes:
a. To minimize, to the greatest extent feasible, the visual, functional, and ecological impacts of
land disturbing activities of bluffs and blufflands, while also recognizing the legitimate
expectations of property owners, and overall City economic development goals.
b. To promote the retention and improvement of those ecological and vegetative qualities which
serve to stabilize steep slopes and ridgelines.
c. To protect persons, property, and property values from impacts characteristic of development
occurring within, and in close proximity to bluffs. Such impacts include rock falls, rolling
boulders, subsidence, and those associated with unstable soils, as erosion and
sedimentation.
d. To minimize public costs which may be associated with the development of bluff faces and
ridgelines.
B. Establishment. The Bluffland Protection Overlay District shall encompass all land within the City of
Onalaska that is above 700 feet in elevation and has a slope greater than thirty percent (30%) and
shall include a ten (10) foot buffer surrounding all areas with a minimum thirty percent (30%) slope.
For reference, the limits of Bluffland Protection Overlay District shall be shown on the official City of
Onalaska overlay Zoning Map. Said limits may, in accordance with applicable law, be modified to
reflect updated data sources, and newly annexed lands into the City. As appropriate, specific district
limits shall be verified on a site by site basis.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.43
Page 57
C. Jurisdiction. The provisions of this section shall apply to the use and development of all land located
within the Bluffland Protection Overlay District, as defined pursuant to this ordinance. In cases where
standards of this section conflict with any other adopted standard of the City, the more restrictive
standard shall apply.
D. Erosion Control Permit Required.
1. No person shall commence any land disturbance activity without first securing an Erosion Control
Permit.
2. In determining the need for such a permit, any person proposing to initiate any land disturbance
activity, on a parcel of land including an overlay district designation, shall define specific Bluffland
Protection Overlay District limits for the parcel based on an elevation over 700 feet and a slope
greater than thirty percent (30%). In all cases, information shall be reviewed and approved by the
City Engineer.
E. Exemptions. The following activities may be permitted within the Bluffland Protection Overlay District
if preceded by the approval of an Erosion Control Permit:
1. Selective silvicultural crop harvesting, thinning, or removal activities.
2. Construction of recreation trails, paths, and stairs.
3. Native vegetation restoration projects, and the control and removal of invasive plant species, and
noxious weeds (by mechanical means).
4. The construction of publicly-owned infrastructure such as utilities, water reservoirs, streets,
stormwater retention facilities, etc.
5. Construction of access roads (driveways) or installation of utilities to building sites of less than
thirty percent (30%) slope or where slopes thirty percent (30%) and greater are less than four
thousand (4,000) noncontiguous square feet.
F. Standards. The following standards shall apply to any land disturbance activity that does not meet
the criteria of Subsection E above.
1. All structures shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from any Bluffland Protection Overlay
District. The planting of native tree and groundcover species within these setbacks shall be
encouraged.
2. Mass grading and the creation of artificial building pads shall be avoided. The intent of this
provision being to promote structural design that fits existing site conditions to the greatest extent
feasible.
3. All feasible efforts shall be employed to retain native trees. Tree removal activity shall be limited
only to that which is necessary to facilitate permitted structural or nonstructural use of a parcel.
4. The maximum grade of any driveway serving any lot including an overlay district shall not exceed
fifteen percent (15%).
13.02.43 Shoreland Protection Overlay District
A. General Provisions.
1. Statutory Authority. The controls set forth in this section are pursuant to the authorization in
62.23, 62.231, 62.233 87.30, and 144.26, Wis. Stats., as may be amended.
2. Purpose. Uncontrolled use of shoreland and pollution of navigable waters would adversely affect
the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax base. The
Legislature of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to:
a. Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
b. Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland area; and
c. Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland cover
and controlling shoreland excavation, filling and other earth moving activities.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.43
Page 58
3. Compliance. Any use within or alteration of the shoreland area shall be in full compliance with
the terms of this ordinance and other applicable local, state or federal regulations. All permitted
development shall require the issuance of a Site Plan Permit unless otherwise expressly excluded
by a provision of this section.
4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
a. This section supersedes all other sections of this Title, except that where another section is
more restrictive that section shall continue in full force.
b. The Shoreland Overlay District is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this section imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this section shall prevail.
B. District Boundaries.
1. Shoreland areas regulated by this ordinance shall include all the lands in the City of Onalaska
that are:
a. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the ordinary high water mark of navigable lakes, ponds,
or flowages. Lakes, ponds, and flowages shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed
in the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Surface Water Data viewer
available on the DNR website, or are shown on United States Geological Survey quadrangle
maps or other zoning base maps.
b. Within three hundred (300) feet of the ordinary high water mark of navigable rivers or
streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and
streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as continuous waterways
or intermittent waterways on United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps. Flood
hazard boundary maps, flood insurance rate maps, or other existing floodplain zoning maps
approved by the DNR shall be used to delineate floodplain areas.
c. Determinations of navigability and ordinary high water mark location shall initially be made by
the Zoning Administrator. When questions arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the
appropriate district office of the DNR for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high
water mark.
2. Pursuant to 62.233 of the Wisconsin Statutes as may be amended, this Section does not apply to
lands adjacent to an artificially constructed drainage ditch, pond, or retention basin if the drainage
ditch, pond, or retention basin is not hydrologically connected to a natural navigable water body.
C. Permitted Uses.
1. Uses allowed are determined by the base zoning district.
2. Boathouses are prohibited within the City of Onalaska.
D. Setbacks from Navigable Waters.
1. Principal Building Setbacks. All principal buildings shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from
the ordinary high water mark.
2. Adjustment of Shore Yards. A setback less than that required by Subsection D.1 above may
be allowed if the following apply:
a. The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel of land that is immediately
adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel of land containing a principal building.
b. The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance equal to the average setback
of the principal building on the adjacent lots or thirty-five (35) feet from the ordinary high
water mark, whichever distance is greater.
3. The following accessory structures are allowed within the shoreland setback established in
Subsection D.1 above:
a. A structure that meets all the following:
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.43
Page 59
i. The part of the structure that is nearest to the water is located at least thirty-five (35) feet
landward from the ordinary high water mark.
ii. The total floor area of all of the structures in the shoreland setback area of the property
will not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. In calculating this square footage,
boathouses shall be excluded.
iii. The structure that is the subject of the request for special zoning permission has no sides
or has open or screened sides.
iv. The preservation or establishment of a vegetative buffer zone that covers at least seventy
percent (70%) of the half of the shoreland setback area that is nearest to the water.
b. A fishing raft for which the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources has issued a permit
under Wis. Statutes S. 30.126., as may be amended.
c. A broadcast signal receiver, including a satellite dish, or an antenna that is no more than one
(1) meter in diameter and a satellite earth station antenna that is no more than two (2) meters
in diameter.
d. A utility transmission line, utility distribution line, pole, tower, water tower, pumping station,
well pumphouse cover, private on-site wastewater treatment system that complies with
Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 145, as may be amended, and any other utility structure for
which no feasible alternative location outside of the setback exists and which is constructed
and placed using best management practices to infiltrate or otherwise control storm water
runoff from the structure.
e. A walkway, stairway, or rail system that is necessary to provide pedestrian access to the
shoreline and is no more than sixty (60) inches in width.
E. Vegetative Buffer Zone. A vegetative buffer zone shall be maintained in the shoreland area in
accordance with the following requirements:
1. A person who owns shoreland property that contains vegetation must maintain that vegetation in
a vegetative buffer zone along the entire shoreline of the property and extending thirty-five (35)
feet inland from the ordinary high water mark of the navigable water, except as provided in
Subsections Subsections E.2 and E.3 below.
2. If the vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone contains invasive species or dead or diseased
vegetation, the owner of the shoreland property may remove the invasive, dead, or
diseased vegetation, except that if the owner removes all of the vegetation in the vegetative
buffer zone, the owner shall establish a vegetative buffer zone with new vegetation.
3. A person who is required to maintain or establish a vegetative buffer zone under this subsection
may remove all of the vegetation in a part of that zone in order to establish a viewing and access
corridor that is no greater than thirty-five (35) feet wide for every one hundred (100) feet of
shoreline frontage.
F. Nonconforming Structures and Uses. The lawful use of a building, structure or property which
existed at the time this ordinance, or an applicable amendment to this ordinance, took effect and
which is not in conformity with the provisions of the ordinance, including the routine maintenance of
such a building or structure, may be continued, subject to the following conditions:
1. The shoreland provisions of this ordinance authorized by Sec. 62.231, Wis. Stats. as may be
amended, shall not limit the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling or expansion of a
nonconforming structure in existence on the effective date of the shoreland provisions, or of any
environmental control facility in existence on the effective date related to such a structure. All
other modifications to nonconforming structures are subject to Sec. 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., as
may be amended, which limits total lifetime structural repairs and alterations to fifty percent (50%)
of current fair market value.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.44
Page 60
2. If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for twelve (12)
consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform to this
ordinance.
3. Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and which
existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this ordinance adopted under
Sec. 62.231, Wis. Stats., as may be amended, may be continued although such use does not
conform with the provisions of the ordinance. However, such nonconforming use may not be
extended.
4. The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below the ordinary
high water mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of Section 30.121,
Wis. Stats., as may be amended.
5. Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as
nonconforming uses.
13.02.44 Wellhead Protection Overlay District
A. Purpose.
1. The residents of the City of Onalaska depend exclusively on groundwater for a safe drinking
water supply. Certain land use practices and activities can seriously threaten or degrade
groundwater quality. The purpose of this Wellhead Protection Overlay District is to institute land
use regulations and restrictions protecting the municipal water supply of the City of Onalaska and
to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the City’s residents.
B. Authority.
1. Statutory authority of the City to enact these regulations is established under Sec.59.69 and Sec.
62.23(7)(c), Wis. Stats as may be amended.
C. Applicability.
1. The regulations specified in this Wellhead Protection Overlay District shall apply to the
incorporated areas of Onalaska that lie within the recharge areas for municipal water supply wells
as defined in this Section, and are in addition to the requirements in the underlying base zoning
district, if any. If there is a conflict between this ordinance and the underlying base zoning district,
the more restrictive provision shall apply.
2. All Wellhead Protection permits granted shall be subject to conditions that will include such
environmental and safety monitoring as determined necessary to afford adequate protection of
the public water supply.
3. The person making the request shall reimburse the City for consultant fees and technical review
committee expenses associated with this review at the invoiced amount, plus administrative
costs.
D. Supremacy of the District.
1. The regulations of an overlay district shall apply in addition to all other regulations, which occupy
the same geographic area. The provisions of any base zoning districts that underlay this overlay
district shall apply except when provisions of the Wellhead Protection Overlay District are more
stringent.
E. Conflict and Interpretation.
1. Conflict and Interpretation of Provisions. If the provisions of the different chapters of this
Ordinance conflict with or contradict each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to
all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter. In their interpretation
and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum and are not
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by Wisconsin Statutes. Where any
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.44
Page 61
terms or requirements of this ordinance may be inconsistent or conflicting, the most restrictive
requirements or interpretations shall apply.
F. District Boundaries.
1. The locations and boundaries of the Wellhead Protection Overlay Districts established by this
Section are:
a. City of Onalaska – Well Fields #7, #8 and #10 Wellhead Protection Area; and
b. City of Onalaska – Well Field #9 Wellhead Protection Area.
The locations and boundaries of these overlay districts shall be shown on the City of Onalaska
Overlay Zoning Districts Map, which are hereby made a part of this Title. Said map, together with
everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this Title a
though fully set forth and described herein.
2. The Wellhead Protection Overlay Districts are represented by the area encompassing the
modeled 5-year time of travel. The Wellhead Protection Districts were determined utilizing
accepted hydrogeological research and modeling techniques. Overlay district boundaries have
been normalized to road centerlines, water boundaries, and public land section lines as follows:
a. Well Fields #7, #8 and #10. Part of the Southeast one-quarter (SE1/4), Southwest onequarter
(SW1/4), Section Twenty-eight (28), and part of the Southeast one-quarter (SE1/4),
Section Twenty-nine (29), and part of the Northeast one-quarter (NE1/4), Southwest onequarter
(SW1/4) and Southeast one-quarter (SE1/4), Section Thirty-two (32), and part of the
Northeast one-quarter (NE1/4), Northwest one-quarter (NW1/4), Southwest one-quarter
(SW1/4), Section Thirty-three (33), Township seventeen north (T17N), and part of the
Northwest one-quarter (NW1/4), Section Four (4), and part of the Northeast one-quarter
(NE1/4), Northwest one-quarter (NW1/4) and Southeast one-quarter (SE1/4) Section Five (5),
Township sixteen north (T16N), all in Range seven west (R7W), Town of Onalaska and City
of Onalaska, La Crosse County, Wisconsin described as follows:
i. Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of County Road SN and Juline Way;
ii. Thence Southwesterly along the centerline of Juline Way to the centerline of Kyle Lane;
iii. Thence Southwesterly and Northwesterly along the centerline of Kyle Lane to the
Centerline of Craig Lane East;
iv. Thence Southwesterly along the centerline of Craig Lane East and Craig Lane to the
centerline of Johns Court and the West line of Section twenty-eight (28);
v. Thence South along the centerline of Johns Court and the West line of Section twentyeight
(28) and the West line of Section thirty-three (33) to the intersection of the
centerlines of Rolling Oaks Drive and Victoria Lane;
vi. Thence Northwesterly along the centerline of Rolling Oaks Drive to the centerline of
Meier Line;
vii. Thence Southwesterly along the centerline of Meier Lane to the centerline of Franklin
Street;
viii. Thence Southwesterly to a point on the centerline of Cliffview Avenue which is 200.00
feet East of the centerline of Johnson Street;
ix. Thence West along the centerline of Cliffview Avenue to the centerline of East Avenue
North;
x. Thence South along the centerline of East Avenue North to the centerline of Riders Club
Road;
xi. Thence West along the centerline of Riders Club Road the centerline of Ridgeway
Avenue;
xii. Thence South along the centerline of Ridgeway Avenue to the centerline of Grove Street;
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.44
Page 62
xiii. Thence West along the centerline of Grove Street to the centerline of Third (3RD)
Avenue North;
xiv. Thence Southwesterly to the intersection of the centerlines of Kramer Road and
Hurricane Court;
xv. Thence Southerly along the centerline of Hurricane Court to the centerline of Schnick
Road;
xvi. Thence Southwesterly along the centerline of Schnick Road and Schnick Road extended
Southwesterly to the Ordinary High Water Mark of Lake Onalaska;
xvii. Thence Southeasterly along the Ordinary High Water Mark of Lake Onalaska to the
centerline of Popular Street extended Westerly;
xviii. Thence Northeasterly along the centerline of Popular Street and Popular Street
extended Westerly to the centerline of Fourth (4th) Avenue North;
xix. Thence Southeasterly along the centerline of Fourth (4th) Avenue North to the centerline
of Pearl Street;
xx. Thence East along the centerline of Pearl Street to the centerline of Sixth (6th) Avenue
North;
xxi. Thence North Along the centerline of Sixth (6th) Avenue North to the centerline of Spruce
Street;
xxii. Thence East along the centerline of Spruce Street to the centerline of Oak Avenue North;
xxiii. Thence North along the centerline of Oak Avenue North to the centerline of Vilas
Street;
xxiv. Thence East along the centerline of Vilas Street to the Centerline of Park Ridge
Drive;
xxv. Thence North along the centerline of Park Ridge Drive 470.00 feet;
xxvi. Thence Northeasterly to the centerline of County Road SN at a point 1500.00
feet North of the intersection of County Road SN and State Road Fifty-three (53);
xxvii. Thence Northerly and Westerly along the centerline of County Road SN to the
point of beginning.
b. Well Field #9. Part of the Southwest one-quarter (SW1/4), Southeast one-quarter (SE1/4)
and Northeast one-quarter (NE1/4), Section nine (9), and part of the Northwest one-quarter
(NW1/4), and Southwest one-quarter (SW1/4), Section ten (10), all in Township sixteen north
(T16N), Range seven west (R7W), Town of Medary and City of Onalaska, La Crosse County
Wisconsin, described as follows:
i. Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Wilson Street and Eleventh (11th)
Avenue South;
ii. Thence South along the centerline of Eleventh (11th) Avenue South 530.00 feet;
iii. Thence West parallel with the centerline of Wilson Street 520.00 feet more or less to the
centerline of Tillman Drive extended South;
iv. Thence South parallel with the West line of Section nine (9) 1000.00 feet to the centerline
of Canary Lane extended West;
v. Thence Easterly to the intersection of the centerlines of Canary Lane and Oriole Lane;
vi. Thence East Along the centerline of Canary Lane to the centerline of Eleventh (11th)
Avenue South;
vii. Thence Southerly along the centerline of Eleventh (11th) Avenue South to the centerline
of Oak Forest Drive;
viii. Thence Easterly along the centerline of Oak Forest Drive to the centerline of Twelfth
(12th) Avenue South;
ix. Thence Southerly along the centerline of Twelfth (12th) Avenue South to the centerline of
Interstate Ninety (I-90);
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.44
Page 63
x. Thence East parallel with the South line of Section nine (9) 1700.00 feet;
xi. Thence Northeasterly 900.00 feet more or less to the intersection of the centerlines of
Custer Court and Afton Place;
xii. Thence east along the centerline of Afton Place to the centerline of Winter Street;
xiii. Thence North along the centerline of Winter Street and Winter Street extended North to
the centerline of Esther Drive;
xiv. Thence Northwesterly along the centerline of Esther Drive 520.00 feet;
xv. Thence Southwesterly to the intersection of the centerlines of Oak Forest Drive and
Wilson Street;
xvi. Thence west along the centerline of Wilson Street to the point of beginning.
G. Wellhead Protection Technical Review Committee.
1. The City of Onalaska Wellhead Protection Technical Review Committee shall consist of the
following City staff:
a. City Planner, acting as committee chair;
b. City Engineer/Director of Public Works;
c. Public Works Manager; and
d. City Commercial Building Inspector.
2. The purpose of the Onalaska Wellhead Protection Technical Review Committee is to provide
objective and scientific technical review of requests for Wellhead Protection Permits and to make
recommendations to the Plan Commission to grant or deny Wellhead Protection Permits based
upon the facts discovered during review, to make recommendations on any and all provisions
placed on a Wellhead Protection Permit, and to give advice on matters concerning groundwater.
3. The Onalaska Wellhead Protection Technical Review Committee may retain a consultant to
assist in the review of requests for Wellhead Protection Permits. Any costs incurred as part of the
Wellhead Protection Permit application review shall be reimbursed by the applicant.
H. Uses.
1. Permitted Uses. The following permitted uses in Wellhead Protection Districts are subject to the
separation distance requirements (set forth in Subsection 13.02.44I), prohibited uses (set forth in
Subsection 13.02.44G.3), and applicable design and operational standards (set forth in
Subsection 13.02.44H).
a. Public and private parks, playgrounds and beaches, provided there are no on-site wastewater
disposal systems.
b. Wildlife and natural and woodland areas.
c. Biking, hiking, skiing, nature, equestrian and fitness trails.
d. Municipally sewered residential developments.
e. Routine tillage, planting, and field management operations in support of agricultural crop
production, where nutrients from legume, manure, and commercial sources are accounted for
and credited toward crop nutrient need.
f. Public parks, playgrounds and beaches, provided on-site wastewater shall be discharged to a
holding tank or municipal sewer.
g. Single-family residences on a minimum lot of forty thousand (40,000) square feet with a
private on-site sewage treatment system receiving less than eight thousand (8,000) gallons
per day, which meets the County and State health standards for the effluent, and is in
conformance with Ch.SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code Safety and Professional Services, as may
be amended.
h. Residential use of above ground LP gas tanks for heating, not to exceed one thousand
(1,000) gallons.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.44
Page 64
i. Commercial and industrial establishments that are municipally sewered and whose aggregate
use, storage, handling and/or production of Regulated Substances does not exceed twenty
(20) gallons or one hundred and sixty (160) pounds at any time. Commercial and industrial
establishments that are municipally sewered and whose aggregate use, storage, handling
and/or production of Regulated Substances exceed twenty (20) gallons or one hundred and
sixty (160) pounds at any time must obtain a Wellhead Protection Permit.
j. A limited exclusion from the provision of Subsection 13.02.44H.1.h is authorized for nonroutine
maintenance or repair of property or equipment. The aggregate of Regulated
Substances in use, storage, handling, and/or production may not exceed fifty (50) gallons or
four hundred (400) pounds at any time.
k. A limited exclusion from the provisions of Subsection 13.02.44H.1.h is authorized for each
medical and research laboratory use, provided however, Regulated Substances shall be
stored, handled or used in containers not to exceed five (5) gallons or forty (40) pounds of
each substance and the aggregate inventory of Regulated Substances shall not exceed two
hundred and fifty (250) gallons or two thousand (2,000) pounds.
l. A limited exclusion from the provision of Subsection 13.02.44H.1.h is authorized for
Regulated Substances which are cleaning agents, provided such cleaning agents are
packaged for personal or household use or are present in the same form and concentration
as a product packaged for use by the general public, and provided the aggregate inventory of
such cleaning agents shall not exceed one hundred (100) gallons or eight hundred (800)
pounds at any time. Citrus based, biodegradable cleaners are not considered a regulated
substance. In no case shall Regulated Substances claimed under this exclusion include
hydrocarbon or halogenated hydrocarbon solvents.
2. Provisional Permitted Uses.
a. The following uses are provisionally permitted in the Wellhead Protection Districts with a
Wellhead Protection Permit and specified conditions of approval:
i. Buried hydrocarbon, petroleum or hazardous chemical storage tanks. (Hazardous
chemicals are identified by OSHA criteria under 40CFR part 370 as may be amended).
ii. Coal storage.
iii. Motor vehicle services, including filling and service stations, repair, renovation and body
working.
b. Wellhead Protection Permits.
i. Any person may request a Wellhead Protection Permit for the uses, activities and
structures within the Wellhead Protection Overlay District set forth in this Subsection. All
requests for a Wellhead Protection Permit shall be submitted in writing to the City of
Onalaska Planning Department for a review of permit application materials. The request
will then, if properly prepared, be forwarded to the City Planner, as the Chairperson of the
Wellhead Protection Technical Review Committee, for inclusion on the agenda of the
next Plan Commission Meeting.
ii. All Wellhead Protection Permits granted shall be subject to provisions that will include
such environmental and safety monitoring as determined necessary to afford adequate
protection of the public water supply. These provisions shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Provide current copies of all Federal, State and local facility operation approval or
certificates and on-going environmental monitoring results to the City.
2. Establish environmental or safety structures/monitoring to include an operational
safety plan, material processes and containment, operations monitoring, best
management practices, stormwater runoff management, and groundwater
monitoring.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.44
Page 65
3. Replace equipment or expand in a manner that improves the environmental and
safety technologies being utilized.
4. Prepare, file and maintain a current contingency plan, which details the response to
any emergency, which occurs at the facility, including notifying municipal, county and
state officials. Provide a current copy to the City.
iii. The Plan Commission shall decide upon an application for a Wellhead Protection Permit
only after full consideration of the recommendations made by the Wellhead Protection
Technical Review Committee. Any provisions above and beyond those specified in
Subsection ii above, that are recommended by the Wellhead Protection Technical
Review Committee may be applied to the granting of the Wellhead Protection Permit by
the Plan Commission.
iv. The Wellhead Protection Permit will become effective only after any costs incurred during
the Wellhead Protection Permit application review are satisfied by the applicant.
v. Wellhead Protection Permits are non-transferable. In a case of business or property
transfer, the new owner is responsible for applying for a new Wellhead Protection Permit
subject to Subsections 13.02.44H.2.b.i through iv.
3. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited in the Wellhead Protection Districts:
a. Cemeteries.
b. Chemical manufacturers (Standard Industrial Classification Major Group 28).
c. Dry cleaners.
d. Industrial lagoons and pits.
e. Landfills and any other solid waste facility, except post-consumer recycling.
f. Manure and animal waste storage except animal waste storage facilities regulated by the
County.
g. All mining, including sand and gravel pits.
h. Pesticide and fertilizer dealer, transfer or storage facilities where the pesticides and fertilizer
are in bulk and/or unpackaged.
i. Railroad yards and maintenance stations.
j. Rendering plants and slaughterhouses.
k. Salt or de-icing material storage where the salt or de-icing materials are in bulk and/or
unpackaged.
l. Salvage or junkyards.
m. Septage or sludge spreading, storage or treatment.
n. Septage, wastewater or sewage lagoons.
o. Private on-site wastewater treatment systems or holding tanks receiving eight thousand
(8,000) gallons per day or more.
p. Stockyards and feedlots.
q. Construction of a storm water detention, retention or infiltration basin within four hundred
(400) feet of a public water supply well shall not be allowed in accordance with State
separation distance requirements (NR811.12 (5)(d)(6).
r. Wood preserving operations.
I. Design and Operational Standards.
1. The following Design Standards apply to permitted Wellhead Protection land use activities within
the Wellhead Protection Overlay District:
a. All parking lots exceeding eight (8) stalls, all sump pumps and all roof drains shall be
connected to a storm sewer or other approved drain. Use of drywells or other subsurface
drains is prohibited.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.44
Page 66
b. No more than seventy percent (70%) of a lot shall be covered by impervious surfaces such
as buildings or parking lots.
c. All parking lots shall be paved with asphalt or concrete.
d. All storm water conveyance within four hundred (400) feet from a well shall be via a swale
lined with an appropriate impervious material or a watertight storm sewer pipe.
e. Storm water retention/infiltration ponds shall be avoided. Where their use cannot be
practically avoided, the storm water retention/infiltration ponds shall, at a minimum, use a fore
bay design intended to maximize natural filtration. The fore bay designs shall include spill
containment measures, initial and secondary detainment weirs and/or outfall control valves,
per the State of WI manual on Infiltration Basins. Soils within the Onalaska Wellhead
Protection Areas consist of low organic sands. The groundwater is susceptible to
contamination from certain herbicides, pesticides, volatile organic compounds, polynuclear
aromatic hydrocarbons, salt and heavy metals potentially found in storm water runoff.
Persons proposing storm water detention, retention or infiltration basins within the Onalaska
Wellhead Protection Districts shall submit to the City Engineer plans and specification signed
and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Wisconsin delineating: area of
storm water contribution, distance from public water supply wells, vertical distance from base
of facility to normal groundwater table, anticipated potential storm water pollutants, annual
average mass for each parameter, and proposed operations and maintenance procedures.
All proposed facilities shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts to the ground water.
f. Stormwater and sanitary sewer mains must meet separation distance requirements as
defined in Subsection 13.02.44I.
g. Sanitary sewer mains must be pressure tested in place to meet current State of Wisconsin
Department of Administration Division of Facilities Development Master Specifications and
applicable local or project specific specifications.
h. Facilities that handle Regulated Substances shall have a minimum of one (1)
loading/unloading area designated for the handling of Regulated Substances. The designated
loading/unloading areas shall be designed with spill and/or runoff containment that is
connected to a municipal sanitary sewer lateral. The loading/unloading areas shall be
designed to minimize precipitation or stormwater run on from entering the sanitary sewer.
Regulated Substances may be loaded/unloaded only in a designated handling area.
i. Above ground storage areas for Regulated Substances shall be designed with secondary
containment capable of controlling one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the maximum
design capacity of the liquid storage area.
j. Facilities involved in the handling of Regulated Substances will, when determined necessary
by the Committee, prepare a groundwater monitoring plan.
k. All rail spurs used to transport Regulated Substances shall be designed to minimize
infiltration and convey runoff to a stormwater conveyance system. Rail car loading/unloading
areas used to handle Regulated Substances shall be designed with spill and/or runoff
containment that is connected to a municipal sewer lateral. The loading/unloading area shall
be designed to minimize precipitation or stormwater run on from entering the sanitary sewer.
2. The following Operational Standards apply to permitted Wellhead Protection land use activities
within the Wellhead Protection Districts:
a. No outdoor storage of product, material, or equipment other than that approved through the
provisional use permitting process shall be allowed. Any designated outdoor storage area
shall be an impervious surface paved with concrete or asphalt and have secondary
containment when applicable.
b. Regulated Substances associated with paving, the pouring of concrete, or construction for
which all necessary permits have been obtained may be handled in the Wellhead Protection
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.44
Page 67
Overlay District, provided such Regulated Substances are present at the construction site for
which the permits have been issued and do not pose a real and present danger of
contaminating surface and/or groundwater. For the onsite storage of fuel for vehicles or other
equipment, which may be associated with such construction activity, the fuel storage
containers shall be secondarily contained. Regulated Substances not used in the
construction process and all wastes generated during construction shall be removed from the
construction site not later than at the time of the completion of the construction. If
construction activity has ceased for thirty (30) days, all Regulated Substances shall be
removed from the site until such time as the construction activity is to resume.
c. The use of de-icing salt or other chemical deicing materials shall be minimized and used only
when threats to safety occur.
d. Except in the case of seasonal discontinuation of operation, the owner or operator of any
non-residential property that becomes unoccupied or has discontinued operation for a period
of thirty (30) consecutive days shall remove all Regulated Substances from the property,
except those approved to be exclusively used for heating, cooling, and providing electrical
lighting for the premises, within thirty (30) days after the date upon which the property initially
became unoccupied or the operation discontinued. The owner or operator shall secure the
Regulated Substances on the property until they have been removed. The owner or operator
shall notify the Planning Department in writing of the date of the cessation of operation or the
property becoming unoccupied no later than the day upon which the operation actually
ceases or the property becomes unoccupied, and such notification shall include the owner’s
name, phone number, and address and the operator’s name, phone number, and forwarding
address.
e. Truck, truck trailer, rail car, or tank truck loading and unloading procedures for Regulated
Substances shall meet the minimum requirements of the U.S. Department of Transportation
(DOT) and Wisconsin DOT.
f. No truck, trailer, rail car, or tank truck shall be used for onsite storage of Regulated
Substances. Regulated Substances shall be transferred from the delivery vehicle to the
Regulated Substance storage area as soon as feasibly possible.
g. Loading and unloading procedures for Regulated Substances shall occur in designated
loading/unloading areas. Warning signs and chock blocks shall be provided in the loading
and unloading area to prevent premature vehicular departure.
h. Daily visual inspections of Regulated Substances shall be conducted to check for container
damage or leakage, stained or discolored storage surfaces in all storage areas, excessive
accumulation of water in outdoor curbed areas, and to ensure that dike drain valves are
securely closed in outdoor curbed areas.
i. Storage areas for Regulated Substances shall have access restricted to properly authorized
and trained personnel.
j. Companies shall provide adequate training to ensure that established operational safety
plans and contingency plans are understood by all authorized personnel.
k. Companies using or producing Regulated Substances shall have an adequate quantity of
spill response equipment and supplies onsite to contain and cleanup spills of Regulated
Substances.
l. Annual spill prevention briefings shall be provided to authorized personnel by company
management to ensure adequate understanding of the operational safety and contingency
plans. These briefings shall highlight any past spill events or failures and recently developed
precautionary measures. Records of these briefings shall be kept for documentation
purposes.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.44
Page 68
m. Instructions and phone numbers for reporting spills to the Onalaska Fire Department and
other local, State and Federal agencies shall be posted in all areas where Regulated
Substances are handles.
J. Separation Distance Requirements. The following separation distances as specified in NR
811.12(5)(d), Wis. Adm. Code, shall be maintained:
1. Ten (10) feet between a well and an emergency standby power system that is operated by the
same facility which operates the well and that has a double wall above ground storage tank with
continuous electronic interstitial leakage monitoring. These facilities shall meet the installation
requirements of s. ATCP 93.260 and receive written approval from the Department of Safety and
Professional Service (DSPS) or its designated Local Program Operator under ATCP 93.110.
2. Fifty (50) feet between a public water supply well and a stormwater sewer main or any sanitary
sewer main constructed of water main class materials and joints. Gravity sanitary sewers shall be
successfully air pressure tested in place. The air pressure test shall meet or exceed the
requirements of the 4 psi low pressure air test for plastic gravity sewer lines found in the latest
edition of Standard Specifications for Sewer & Water Construction in Wisconsin. Force mains
shall be successfully pressure tested to meet the AWWA C600 pressure and leakage testing
requirements for one (1) hour at one hundred and twenty-five percent (125%) of the pump shutoff
head.
3. Two hundred (200) feet between a well and any sanitary sewer main not constructed of water
main class materials, sanitary sewer manhole, lift station, one or two-family residential heating
fuel oil underground storage tank or above ground storage tank or Private Onsite Wastewater
Treatment Systems (POWTS) treatment tank or holding tank component and associated piping.
4. Four hundred (400) feet between a well and a POWTS dispersal component with a design
capacity of less than twelve thousand (12,000) gallons per day, a cemetery or a storm water
retention or detention pond.
5. Six hundred (600) feet between a well and any farm underground storage tank system or other
underground storage tank system with double wall and with electronic interstitial monitoring for
the system, which means the tank and any piping connected to it; any farm above ground storage
tank with double wall, or single wall tank with other secondary containment and under a canopy
or other above ground storage tank system with double wall, or single wall tank with secondary
containment and under a canopy; and with electronic interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank
or electronic leakage monitoring for a single wall tank secondary containment structure. These
installations shall meet the standard double wall tank or single wall tank secondary containment
installation requirements of sec. ATCP 93.110. These requirements apply to tanks containing
gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel,
burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances.
6. One thousand (1,000) feet between a well and land application of municipal, commercial or
industrial waste; the boundaries of a landspreading facility for spreading of petroleumcontaminated
soil regulated under Ch. NR 718 while that facility is in operation; agricultural,
industrial, commercial or municipal waste water treatment plant treatment units, lagoons, or
storage structures; manure stacks or storage structures; or POWTS dispersal component with a
design capacity of 12,000 gallons per day or more.
7. Twelve hundred (1,200) feet between a well and any solid waste storage, transportation, transfer,
incineration, air curtain destructor, processing, wood burning, one time disposal or small
demolition facility; sanitary landfill; any property with residual groundwater contamination that
exceeds Ch. NR 140 enforcement standards; coal storage area; salt or de-icing material storage
area; any single wall farm underground storage tank or single wall farm above ground storage
tank or other single wall underground storage tank or above ground storage tank that has or has
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.44
Page 69
not received written approval from DSPS or its designated Local Program Operator under sec.
ATCP 93.110 for a single wall tank installation. These requirements apply to tanks containing
gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel,
burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances; and bulk pesticide or fertilizer handling
or storage facilities.
K. Requirements for Existing Facilities.
1. Existing facilities within the Wellhead Protection Overlay Districts at the time of enactment of such
district which use, store, handle, or produce Regulated Substance in excess of quantities outlined
in Subsections Subsections 13.02.44G and I, and all other facilities which are considered a
prohibited use in Prohibited Uses, Subsection 13.02.44G.3, or a Wellhead Protection use in
Wellhead Protection Permits, Subsection 13.02.44G.2 shall be subject to the following
requirements.
a. Such facilities as defined in this Subsection 13.02.44J which exist within the district at the
time of enactment of a district shall provide copies of all current, revised or new federal, state
and local facility operation approvals, permits or certificates; operational safety plans; and ongoing
environmental monitoring results to the City.
b. Such facilities as defined in Subsection 13.02.44J which exist within the district at the time of
enactment of a district shall have the responsibility of devising, filing and maintaining, with the
City, a current contingency plan which details how they intend to respond to any emergency
which may cause or threaten to cause environmental pollution that occurs at their facility,
including notifying municipal, county and state officials.
c. Such facilities as defined in Subsection 13.02.44J cannot engage in or employ a use,
activity, or structure listed in Prohibited Uses, Subsection 13.02.44G.3, or in Permitted
Wellhead Protection Uses, Subsection 13.02.44G.2, which they did not engage in or employ
at the time of enactment of a district, and can only expand, replace in kind or rebuild those
present uses, activities, equipment, or structures on the site or property of record associated
with the facility at the time of enactment of a district, and in a manner that improves the
environmental and safety technologies already being utilized. No existing use, activity, or
structure listed as a prohibited use or provisional permitted use shall be expanded, replaced
in kind, or rebuilt unless a Wellhead Protection Permit is granted for such expansion,
replacement, or rebuilding. This section does not apply to normal maintenance or minor
repairs.
d. Such facilities as defined in this Subsection 13.02.44J cannot change the quantity or type of
Regulated Substances handled, used or stored by the facility at the time of enactment of a
district unless a provisional use permit is granted for such change in quantity or type.
L. Changing Technology.
1. The uses prohibited by this district are prohibited based upon the combined pollution experience
of many individual uses, and the technology generally employed by a particular use considered to
be of a high risk for pollution to the groundwater resource. As the technology of other uses
change to low or non-risk materials or methods, upon petition regarding such use, after conferring
with the Wellhead Protection Technical Review Committee or other expert opinion, and after
appropriate public notice and hearing, the City, through appropriate procedures and actions to
change these provisions of the UDC, may remove from the designated prohibited uses such uses
as are demonstrated convincingly that they no longer pose a groundwater pollution hazard.
2. In dealing with uses which attempt to become permissible, under the terms of this district, by
continuing to utilize pollutant materials but altering their processing, storage and handling, it is not
the intention to accept alternate or reduced hazards as the basis for making a use permissible. It
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.44
Page 70
is the intention to continue a prohibition on such uses until the technology of the use removes
reliance upon the pollutant materials or processes deemed to be a groundwater hazard.
M. Enforcement and Penalty.
1. Penalty. Any person who violates, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provision of this
ordinance shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Title 1 of this Code of Ordinances.
2. Injunction. The City of Onalaska may, in addition to any other remedy, seek injunction or
restraining order against the party alleged to have violated the provision herein, the cost of which
shall be charged to the defendant in such action.
3. Notice of Violation.
a. Any person found in violation of any provisions of this ordinance will be served with a written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing reasonable time for compliance.
b. The notice shall be served in the manner provided by the law for the service of civil
processes. Where the address of the violator is unknown, service may be made upon the
owner of the property involved at the tax-mailing address of the owner as shown on the
County tax record.
4. Inspection. Subject to applicable provision of law, a City of Onalaska Inspector or authorized
representative thereof shall be permitted to enter private property at any reasonable time, with
reasonable cause or with prior notification, for such purposes as inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and records examination pertaining to the requirements of this
Ordinance to ensure that activities are in accordance with the provision of Subsections 13.02.44G
through 13.02.44J. Upon request of the entity which is the subject of the inspection, and if
permitted by Wisconsin Public Records Law, information obtained as a result of the inspection
shall be maintained as confidential. If the owner or tenant does not consent to the entry of the
appointed individual for the above stated purposes, the Plan Commission may apply to a court of
competent jurisdiction for an appropriate warrant or other authority to enter said property.
5. Vandalism. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, property, or equipment which is a
part of or used in conjunction with water facilities of the City and/or any other protected public
water supply, or which results in the violation of Subsections 13.02.44G through 13.02.44J.
6. Subject Area. The area subject to the provisions of this ordinance is the Wellhead Protection
Overlay District as shown on the official Zoning Map of the City of Onalaska and as legally
described in Subsection 13.02.44D.
7. Determination of Applicability. It shall be the responsibility of any person owning real property
and/or owning or operating a business within the Wellhead Protection Overlay District to make a
determination of the applicability of Subsections 13.02.44G through 13.02.44I as they pertain to
the property and/or business, and failure to do so shall not excuse any violation of said sections.
8. Management.
a. No persons shall place, deposit, or permit to be deposited, store, process, use, produce,
dispose of, transport, or discharge, hereinafter referred to as “handle”, any Regulated
Substance on public or private property within the Wellhead Protection Overlay District or in
any area under the jurisdiction of said Wellhead Protection Overlay District, except as
provided by law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulation.
b. Any violation of Subsection 13.02.44M.8.a is hereby determined to be a nuisance.
9. Spills, Leaks or Discharges.
a. Any person with direct knowledge of a spill, leak or discharge of a Regulated Substance
within the Wellhead Protection Overlay District shall, if such spill, leak or discharge escapes
containment or contacts a non-impervious ground surface and is not immediately and
completely remediated, give notice to the Onalaska Fire Department utilizing the county wide
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.45
Page 71
911 service and the Public Works Manager for the City of Onalaska, or the operator on duty
at the affected or potentially affected water treatment facility by telephone within thirty (30)
minutes. The notification shall include at a minimum, the location of the incident, name and
telephone number of the contacting party, date and time thereof, type of substance(s),
concentration and volume, and control or corrective action taken. Such notification shall in no
way alleviate other local, State, and Federal reporting obligations.
b. Any entity or person who spills, leaks or discharges said substance(s) shall be liable for any
reasonable expense, loss or damages incurred by the City of Onalaska in response to such
an incident, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on account thereof under State
and Federal law; said entity or person shall document and maintain sufficient records so as to
reflect accurately the circumstances related to any such incident and develop and implement
procedures to substantially eliminate the likelihood of reoccurrence of such spills, leaks or
discharges as soon as practicable following the incident, but no later than one hundred eighty
(180) days after the incident.
N. Cleanup Costs. As a substitute for or in addition to any other action, the City of Onalaska may
commence legal action against both the person who releases the contaminants and the owner of the
facility whereupon the contaminants were released to recover the costs, together with the costs of
prosecution. Any person who causes the release of any contaminants which may endanger or
contaminate the municipal water supply system associated with a Wellhead Protection Overlay
District shall immediately cease such discharge and immediately initiate clean up satisfactory to the
City of Onalaska and the other State and Federal regulatory agencies. The person who releases such
contaminants and the person who owns the facility whereon the contaminants have been released
shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of cleanup, the cost of any consultant or other
contractor employed for the cleanup, as well as all administrative costs for City, consultant or
contractor oversight, review and documentation, and all costs for use of City staff time, equipment
and direct expenses, such as mileage, photocopying, phone tolls, etc.
13.02.45 Historic Preservation Overlay District
A. Purpose. It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of improvements or sites of special character or special architectural,
archaeological or historic interest or value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the
health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people. The purpose of this Section is to:
1. Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and preservation of such improvements,
sites and districts which represent or reflect elements of the City's cultural, social, economic,
political and architectural history.
2. Safeguard the City's historic, prehistoric and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such
historic structures, sites and districts.
3. To the extent of maintaining the general goals of this Title, protect and enhance the City of
Onalaska's attractions to residents, tourists and visitors and serve as a support and stimulus to
business and industry and foster the revitalization and redevelopment of Onalaska.
4. Improve and enhance the visual and aesthetic character of the City of Onalaska for the purpose
of stabilizing and improving property values.
5. Provide for public education and promotion of the City of Onalaska's architectural, archaeological,
aesthetic, historic and associative improvements, sites and districts.
6. Protect and enhance view-sheds of the Black River, Lake Onalaska and the Mississippi River
Valley to preserve Onalaska's waterfront heritage.
B. Historic Designation Criteria.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.45
Page 72
1. For purposes of this Section, a Historic Structure, Site, or District designation may be placed on
any site, natural or improved, including any building, improvement or structure located thereon, or
any area of particular historic, architectural, archaeological, aesthetic, or cultural significance to
the City which:
a. Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state
or community; or
b. Are identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state or local
history; or
c. Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type of specimen inherently
valuable for a study of a period, style, method of construction, or of indigenous materials or
craftsmanship; or
d. Are representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer or architect who
influenced their age; or
e. Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important to prehistory or history; or
f. Provide dramatic view-sheds of the Black River, Lake Onalaska and the Mississippi River
Valley and Onalaska's historic waterfront.
2. The Historic Preservation Commission shall adopt specific operating guidelines for Historic
Structure, Site and District designation providing such are in conformance with the provisions of
this Section.
C. Designation Procedure for Historic Structures and Sites.
1. The Historic Preservation Commission may make recommendations to the Common Council for
the scheduling of a public hearing after application of the criteria in Subsection 13.02.45B.1 (a-f)
above. At least ten (10) days prior to such hearing, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
notify owners of property in whole or in part situated within two hundred (200) feet of the
boundaries of the property affected.
2. The Common Council, upon receipt of the recommendations from the Historic Preservation
Commission, shall hold a public hearing, notice to be given as noted in Subsection E below, and
following the public hearing shall either designate or reject the Historic Site or Structure.
Designation of the Historic Site or Structure shall constitute adoption of the plan prepared for said
structure(s) and site(s) and direct the implementation of said plan.
3. After the designation or rejection has been made, notification shall be sent to the property
owner(s). Notification shall also be sent to the City Clerk, Building Inspector, Plan Commission,
and the City Assessor. The Historic Preservation Commission shall cause the designation or
rejection to be recorded at the City's expense in the Office of the La Crosse County Register of
Deeds.
D. Designation Procedure for Historic Districts.
1. For preservation purposes, the Historic Preservation Commission shall select geographically
defined areas within the City to be designated as Historic Districts and shall prepare a Historic
Preservation Plan for each area. A Historic District may be designated for any geographic area of
particular historic, architectural or cultural significance to the City, after application of the criteria
in Subsection B.1 (a-f) above. Each Historic Preservation Plan prepared for or by the Historic
Preservation Commission shall include a cultural and architectural analysis supporting the
historic/archaeological significance of the area, the specific guidelines for development, and a
statement of preservation objectives.
E. Historic Designation Review and Adoption Procedure.
1. Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a Class 1
public hearing when considering the plan for a Historic District and notification shall be sent to the
owners of record within the proposed Historic District and those properties situated in whole or in
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.45
Page 73
part within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries of the Historic District. Following the public
hearing, the Historic Preservation Commission shall vote to recommend, reject or withhold action
on the plan.
2. Common Council. The Common Council, upon receipt of the recommendation from the Historic
Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing, notice to be given as noted in Subsection
E.1 above and shall following the public hearing either designate or reject the Historic District.
Designation of the Historic District shall constitute adoption of the plan prepared for that district
and direct the implementation of said plan.
F. Guidelines for Development of Historic Structures, Sites or Districts.
1. Facade treatments, roof design, building additions, and architectural elements should be visually
compatible with the buildings and environment to which the improvement is visually related.
2. Building materials, colors and patterns should be visually compatible with the buildings and
environment to which the improvement is visually related.
3. Signage, lighting and other amenities should be properly scaled and compatible with the visual
surroundings.
4. Landscape treatments should be well maintained and properly designed for the individual
building, its occupants and the surrounding visual environment.
G. Building Permits.
1. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector for the alteration, construction,
demolition, or removal of a nominated Historic Structure or Site unless approved by the Historic
Preservation Commission or the Common Council. Where such alteration, removal or demolition
is necessary to avoid imminent peril to life or property as determined by the Inspection
Department, a building permit may be issued by the Inspection Department without formal
approval by the Historic Preservation Commission or the Common Council. In no event shall the
delay be for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
H. Recognition of Historic Structures, Sites and Districts. At such time as a Historic Structure, Site
or District has been properly designated, the Historic Preservation Commission, in cooperation with
the property owner, may cause to be prepared and erected on such property at City expense, a
suitable plaque declaring that such property is a Historic Structure, Site or District.
I. General Standards.
1. Property Maintenance. Every person in charge of an improvement on a Historic Site or
designated structure in a Historic District shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portion of
such improvement and all interior portions thereof which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend
to cause the exterior portions of such improvements to fall into a state of disrepair. Ordinary
maintenance and repairs may be undertaken without a Certificate of Appropriateness provided
that the work involves repairs to existing features of a historic structure or site or the replacement
of elements of a structure with pieces identical in appearance and provided that the work does
not change the exterior appearance of the structure or site and does not require the issuance of a
building permit.
2. Penalties for Violations. Any person or persons violating any provision of this Overlay District
shall be subject to the general penalty provisions listed in Title 1 of the Onalaska Code of
Ordinances. Each and every day during which a violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate offense. Notice of violations shall be issued by the Building Inspector.
3. Public Safety and Health Issues. The Building Inspector may order the remedy to any condition
affecting public safety or health in any Historic Site, Structure or site within a Historic District prior
to the approval of the Historic Preservation Commission and Common Council. The Building
Inspector shall promptly notify the Historic Preservation Commission and Common Council of any
such action.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.51
Page 74
District Specific Standards
13.02.51 R-3 Medium Density Residential and R-4 High Density Residential Districts
A. Building Height Standards.
1. Upper Stories Stepback. (See Figure 13.02.51-1)
a. A new building/addition that is more than one (1) story taller than directly adjacent buildings
(non-historically designated) shall incorporate a minimum eight-foot (8) stepback for the
stories that are more than one (1) story above directly adjacent buildings.
B. Building Facade Standards.
1. Facade Horizontal Articulation/Divisions. (See Figure 13.02.51-1)
a. A building facade fronting on a public street, park, or plaza shall have an architectural feature
along the top of the ground story and along the bottom of the top story. A horizontal
architectural feature is composed of a decorative, three-dimensional, horizontal element that
projects out or is recessed in from the exterior facade of a building at least two (2) inches.
2. Facade Vertical Articulation/Divisions. (See Figure 13.02.51-1)
a. Any ground story facade fronting on a public street, park, or plaza that exceeds forty (40) feet
in width shall be visually divided into smaller sections through articulation of the facade, every
forty (40) feet at a minimum. Articulation techniques include vertical recesses or projections
of the building facade, window bays, balconies, and changes in exterior materials.
b. For upper stories, facade articulation shall occur for facades exceeding eighty (80) feet in
width on a public street, park, or plaza, every eighty (80) feet at a minimum.
3. Facade Transparency.
a. A residential building facade fronting on a public street, park, or plaza shall have a minimum
transparency of twenty percent (20%).
b. Side and rear facades, which are clearly visible from a public street, park, or plaza, shall have
a minimum transparency of twelve percent (12%), unless otherwise prohibited by the City’s
Building Code.
c. Blank wall areas fronting on a public street, park, or plaza shall not exceed a rectangular area
greater than thirty percent (30%) of a story’s facade, as measured from floor to floor, and
shall not exceed a horizontal distance greater than fifteen (15) feet of a story’s facade.
4. Building Entries.
a. A prominent entry is required on any building facade fronting on a public street, park, or
plaza.
C. Open Space Standard.
a. For the R-4 District, common open space shall comprise a minimum of twenty-five (25%) of
the gross land acres and shall not include:
i. Setback areas;
ii. Street right-of-way;
iii. Parking areas and driveways;
iv. Building sites; and
v. Inaccessible stormwater ponds.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.52
Page 75
Figure 13.02.51-1 Residential Building Height and Façade Standards
13.02.52 R-MMH Manufactured and Mobile Home District
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, maintain or administer or permit to be
established, operated or maintained upon any property owned, leased or controlled by them a
manufactured or mobile home community within the City without a valid, unexpired Mobile Home Park
License as set forth 7-17-2 of the City of Onalaska Ordinances.
B. It is the intent of this Section to recognize mobile homes constructed prior to October 1, 1974, as
distinct and different from units designated as Mobile Home within the definitions of this Title and to
prohibit units not meeting the requirements for mobile homes as defined herein. Units constructed
prior to 1974 are prohibited. A Site Plan Permit may be obtained only after approval by the Plan
Commission and Common Council.
C. In addition to the definitions in Chapter 06, definitions contained in Sec. 66.0435 of the Wis. Stats. as
may be amended shall also be applicable.
D. No person shall park, locate or place any manufactured or mobile home outside of a licensed
manufactured and mobile home district in the City of Onalaska, except unoccupied manufactured or
mobile homes may be parked on the lawfully situated premises of a licensed manufactured or mobile
home dealer for the purposes of sale display; the lawfully situated premises of a vehicle service
business for purposes of servicing or making necessary repairs; the premises leased or owned by the
owner of such manufactured or mobile home for purposes of sales display for a period not exceeding
one hundred twenty (120) days, provided no business is carried on therein, or in an accessory private
garage, building or rear yard of the owner of such manufactured or mobile home, provided no
business is carried on therein.
E. No person shall construct, alter, modify or extend any mobile home community or mobile home
community building or facility within the limits of the City without first securing a Site Plan Permit from
the City.
F. Minimum dimensional requirements for a R-MMH District consists of the following:
1. Where a R-MMH District is to be established for the development of a manufactured or mobile
home community, the minimum area shall be fifteen (15) acres.
2. The minimum number of manufactured or mobile home spaces completed and ready for
occupancy before first occupancy is permitted shall be established as twenty-five percent (25%)
of total spaces permitted on a zoned site.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.52
Page 76
3. The two limitations above shall not apply where expansion of an existing manufactured or mobile
home district is concerned and where such expansion will not increase variation from
requirements that apply to manufactured or mobile home districts, as set forth herein.
4. The maximum number of manufactured or mobile home spaces shall be ten (10) per acre and
individual spaces shall not be less than four thousand (4,000) square feet in area and arranged to
afford ample area for a variety of units.
5. The minimum dimensions of a manufactured or mobile home space shall be forty (40) feet wide
by one hundred (100) feet long and no manufactured or mobile home shall cover more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the space. Accessory structures, such as awnings, cabanas, storage
cabinets, carports, garages, windbreaks or attached porches shall be considered part of the
manufactured or mobile home unit for purposes of determining compliance with this provision.
6. A minimum setback of twenty-five (25) feet from all public rights-of-way and ten (10) feet from any
park drive or common area, including common parking areas for newly established districts.
7. Minimum side and rear lot setbacks of ten (10) feet, fifteen (15) feet from any other unit.
G. In manufactured or mobile home districts, recreational vehicles shall not be occupied as living
quarters and sales lots shall not be permitted, but dwellings may be sold on spaces they occupy in
residential use.
H. No manufactured or mobile home space shall be rented for a period of less than thirty (30) days.
I. State Uniform Dwelling Code SPS 321.40 and SPS 326 and the State Electrical Code SPS 316, as
may be amended, are hereby made a part of this Section and incorporated herein by reference as if
fully set forth, except that such regulations shall not be deemed to modify any requirement of this
Section or any other applicable law or Ordinance of the State or City.
J. All drives, parking areas and walkways shall be of hard surfaced material [bituminous concrete or
similar material capable of carrying a wheel load of four thousand (4,000) pounds] and there shall be
two (2) such surfaced automobile parking spaces for each manufactured or mobile home space.
K. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured or mobile home district shall be paved or
covered with stone screenings or other solid material or protected with a vegetative growth that is
capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating objectionable dust.
L. All manufactured or mobile home districts shall have a greenbelt or buffer strip not less than ten (10)
feet wide along all boundaries. Unless adequately screened by existing vegetative cover, all
manufactured and mobile home districts shall be screened by a vegetative buffer in the form of
evergreens and/or deciduous plantings so arranged that within ten (10) years they will have formed a
screen equivalent in opacity to a solid fence or wall, except where the adjoining property is also a
manufactured or mobile home district. Compliance with this requirement shall be made prior to
granting Occupancy Permits. Permanent plantings shall be grown and maintained at a height of not
less than fifteen (15) feet.
M. Single family nondependent manufactured or mobile homes and approved accessory structures
included in the original plans and specifications or revisions thereof, parks, playgrounds, open space,
off street parking lots, one (1) park office and service and/or storage buildings for exclusive use of
residents shall be the only permitted uses in manufactured or mobile home districts, provided the
Common Council may approve the following uses when designed and limited to exclusive use of
residents:
1. Laundromats;
2. Clubhouses and facilities for private, social or recreation clubs; and
3. Swimming pools.
N. Park occupants shall be responsible for proper placement of their manufactured or mobile homes on
its space and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the
park management.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.52
Page 77
O. New manufactured or mobile homes constructed after April 1, 2007 shall adhere to the Manufactured
Home Installation Manuel in accordance with Chapter Comm 21, Wis. Stats., as may be amended,
provided by the State of Wisconsin Department of Commerce Division of Safety and Buildings.
P. Inspection Department. No person shall construct, alter or add to any structure, attachment or
building in a manufactured or mobile home district or on a manufactured or mobile home space
without a permit from the Inspection Department. Construction on, or addition or alteration to the
exterior of a manufactured or mobile home shall be of the same type of construction and materials as
the mobile home affected. This Subsection shall not apply to addition of awnings, antennas or skirting
to mobile homes.
Q. Common Recreational Facilities.
1. In all manufactured or mobile home districts, there shall be one (1) or more recreation areas
easily accessible to all residents.
2. No less than ten percent (10%) of the total area of any manufactured or mobile home district
established under these regulations shall be devoted to common recreational areas and facilities,
such as playgrounds, swimming pools, community buildings, ways for pedestrians and cyclists
away from streets and play areas for small children for other recreational areas in block interiors.
At least one (1) principal recreation and community center shall contain not less than five percent
(5%) of the total area of the district. No single recreation area shall contain less than two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet unless each manufactured or mobile home space is
provided with contiguous common recreational area not less than twenty (20) feet wide at the
narrowest dimension.
3. To be countable as common recreational area, interior block ways for pedestrians or cyclists shall
form part of a system leading to principal destinations. Such ways may also be used for
installations of utilities.
4. Common recreational area shall not include streets or parking areas, shall be closed to
automotive traffic except for maintenance and service vehicles, and shall be improved and
maintained for the uses intended.
5. Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and convenient to mobile
home spaces that they serve.
R. Exterior Yards for Manufactured or Mobile Home Districts; Minimum Requirements;
Occupancy. The following requirements and limitations shall apply to yards at the outer edges of
mobile home districts:
a. Along Public Streets. Where R-MMH districts adjoin public streets along exterior
boundaries, a yard at least twenty-five (25) feet in minimum dimensions shall be provided
adjacent to such streets. Such yard may be used to satisfy open space depth requirements
for individual dwellings but shall not contain carports, recreational shelters, storage structures
or any other structures generally prohibited in yards adjacent to streets in residential districts.
No direct vehicular access to individual lots shall be permitted through such yards, and no
group parking facilities or active recreation areas shall be allowed therein.
b. At Edges of R-MMH Districts (Other than at Streets or Alleys). Where R-MMH districts
are so located that one (1) or more boundaries are at the edges of R-MMH Districts and
adjoining neighboring districts without an intervening street, alley or other permanent open
space at least twenty (20) feet in width, an exterior yard at least twenty (20) feet in minimum
dimension shall be provided. Where the adjoining district is residential, the same limitations
on occupancy and use of such yards shall apply as stated above concerning yards along
public streets. Where the adjoining district is nonresidential, such yards may be used for
group or individual parking, active recreation facilities or carports, recreational shelters or
storage structures.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.53
Page 78
13.02.53 MC Medical Campus District
A. District Intent.
1. Encourage the development of medically-related uses which, by their interrelationship, benefit by
proximity;
2. Provide an appropriate and healing setting for delivering high quality healthcare services;
3. Encourage the preparation of Campus Master Plans that enable adjacent neighborhoods and the
broader community to understand the levels of development being proposed, their likely impacts,
and appropriate mitigation measures;
4. Create well-designed development with a unified feel while providing flexibility in placement and
clustering of buildings, use of open space, provision for pedestrian and traffic circulation, parking,
transit facilities and related site design and safety considerations; and
5. Ensure future capacity for the placement of medical facilities to meet the evolving healthcare
needs of the City and region.
B. Pre-Existing Standards.
1. Any development, lot of record, or structure legally operated prior to February 11, 2020 shall be
considered a permitted use and legally conforming within the MC District. Any redevelopment or
addition to a development, lot of record or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and
functions and development standards found within the MC District. Any change in form or function
shall conform to permitted and permitted with standards form and function standards as
described in the MC District.
C. Architectural Review.
1. Architectural review shall be in conformance with the requirements of this Subsection and the
following standards, and will follow Site Plan Permit procedures in Section 13.05.21.
a. The intent of the architectural review is to ensure that architectural features and building
designs contribute to a cohesive image and identity for the MC District.
b. Exterior materials, colors, accents, styles and rooflines shall be compatible with the purpose
and intent of this district.
c. All exterior building and accent materials shall be of a color(s) compatible with other buildings
within the district and have comparable color intensity/value. Acceptable colors consist of
neutral earth tone colors such as brown, gray, tan, umber, mahogany, terra cotta, forest
green, burgundy or dark blue. Glass, brick or decorative stone or high quality architectural
concrete panels for exterior building materials shall be required.
d. To prevent long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls; recesses, projections, columns, offsets, or
change in building wall plan or material and/or color shall be required, at a minimum, every
seventy-five (75) feet of wall length. Projections, recesses and decorative columns shall be a
minimum of one (1) foot wide and (1) foot deep.
e. To prevent long monotonous, uninterrupted pitched roof planes; dormers, gables or roof
offsets shall be required, at a minimum, every seventy-five (75) feet of pitched roof length.
D. Site Design Elements.
1. Landscaping, lighting, and other site design elements shall be in conformance with the
requirements of this Section and shall contribute to a cohesive image and identity for the MC
District. Internal and external sidewalks and/or trail connections shall be provided for safe and
convenient pedestrian movements. Provision for existing or future transit service shall be
provided where appropriate.
a. Distance between Buildings. Minimum distance between buildings is twenty (20) feet.
b. Building Height. Buildings in excess of the district’s maximum height limitation may be
allowed, provided that setback requirements from shared parcel boundaries shall be
increased by at least one (1) foot for each additional five (5) feet of building height above the
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.54
Page 79
maximum building height allowed by this district, with recommended vegetated or nonvegetated
screening. Maximum building height cannot exceed the AOZD height limitations.
c. Screening and Fencing. Screening via berms and landscaping is required for any side yard
or rear yard immediately adjacent to a residential district. A landscaped buffer zone of not
less than twenty (20) feet wide and five (5) feet in height at the time of installation shall be
established and maintained, consisting of evergreens, shrubs, or other screening vegetation.
Other non-vegetated screening may also be required. Non-vegetative screening to comply
with screen and buffer standards set forth in Chapter 03, Division 5.
d. Environmental Design. Development within the MC District shall be designed to preserve
existing vegetation and topography where practical and shall be consistent with the goals and
objectives of the Onalaska Comprehensive Plan and La Crosse County Sanitary Sewer
Agreement.
e. Parking. Off-street parking for separate uses may be provided collectively if the total number
of spaces is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use unless a
reduction in required parking is allowed as part of the Campus Master Plan. See Section
13.03.21 for parking requirements.
f. Streets, Utilities and Drainage. All publicly dedicated streets, utilities and storm-water
facilities shall be designed in accordance with City ordinances, policies and standards. The
City may consider flexible standards during site plan review for streets if the developer has
demonstrated that the proposed design and layout warrants varying standards and the
design meets the provisions of this Ordinance.
g. Open Space. Overall site to provide a minimum of ten percent (10%) open space which may
include courtyards, grassed areas, pedestrian ways, accessible stormwater ponds, etc.
h. Landscaping. Refer to Section 13.03.31. Recommended additional landscaping along
pedestrian ways.
i. Accessory Building. No accessory buildings shall exceed the height, floor space or footprint
of a principal building or exceed forty (40) feet in height.
j. Outdoor Display, Sales Area or Tent. No outdoor display, sales area or tent shall be
allowed per Subsection 13.02.68, M and Subsection 13.02.68N.
k. Outdoor Storage. All outdoor storage is subject to the standards in Subsection
13.03.52A.2.
l. Refuse and Recycling. All waste material, refuse, garbage or recycling shall be kept
indoors, or if kept outdoors will be subject to Chapter 03, Division 1.
m. Other Requirements. The Plan Commission and Common Council may apply additional
requirements as necessary to implement the purpose of this district and the Comprehensive
Plan.
13.02.54 MU-C Mixed Use Community and MU-N Mixed Use Neighborhood Districts
A. Building Siting Standards.
1. Building Street Frontage. (See Figure 13.02.54-1)
a. In the MU-C District, the minimum percentage of the street frontage for each lot that must be
occupied by a building facade, as measured at the required maximum front yard setback,
shall be seventy-five percent (75%). This standard applies to the front property line street
frontage and, for a corner lot, one exterior side property line frontage. Recesses in a building
facade do not qualify as meeting the minimum building street frontage standard. In the MU-N
District, the minimum building street frontage for each lot shall be sixty percent (60%).
b. The portion of a lot’s front property line that does not have a building facade located at the
maximum front yard setback, up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot’s front property line in
the MU-C District and up to forty percent (40%) in the MU-N District, shall be designed and
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.54
Page 80
used for outdoor seating or dining, building entries, landscaping, pedestrian pathways,
driveways, or parking areas.
Figure 13.02.54-1 MU-C and MU-N Building Street Frontage
2. Off-Street Parking Location.
a. Off-street surface parking shall not be allowed between a building and a sidewalk.
b. Parking area entrances and exits shall be located on secondary streets or alleys, where
possible.
c. The number of driveways shall be limited in order to maximize the amount of on-street
parking spaces.
d. A parking structure shall meet all building siting, height, and facade standards.
B. Building Height Standards.
1. Building Height.
a. A new non-residential building/addition shall have a minimum building facade height of one
and a half (1.5) stories and a new mixed-use or residential building/addition shall have a
minimum building height of two (2) stories.
b. A new building/addition that is more than one (1) story taller than directly adjacent buildings
(non-historically designated) shall incorporate a minimum eight-foot (8) stepback for the
stories that are more than one (1) story above directly adjacent buildings.
2. Story Height.
a. The ground story of a new building/addition shall have a minimum interior clear (floor to
ceiling) height of twelve (12) feet.
b. Minimum interior clear height for upper stories shall be nine (9) feet.
C. Building Facade Standards. (See Figure 13.02.54-2)
1. Horizontal Facade Articulation/Divisions.
a. A building facade fronting on a public street, park, plaza, or downtown alley shall have an
architectural feature along the top of the ground story and along the bottom of the top story. A
horizontal architectural feature is composed of a decorative, three-dimensional, horizontal
element that projects out or is recessed in from the exterior facade of a building at least two
(2) inches.
b. A non-residential or mixed-use building facade fronting on a public street, park, plaza, or
downtown alley shall have a flat or low-slope roof with a parapet or cornice cap. A residential
building is allowed to have either a pitched roof typical of residential buildings or a roof form
that complements existing roof forms in the MU-C District.
2. Vertical Facade Articulation/Divisions.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.54
Page 81
a. Any ground story facade fronting on a public street, park, plaza, or downtown alley that
exceeds forty (40) feet in width shall be visually divided into smaller sections through
articulation of the facade, every forty (40) feet at a minimum. Articulation techniques include
vertical recesses or projections of the building facade, window bays, balconies, and changes
in exterior materials.
b. For upper stories, facade articulation shall occur for facades exceeding eighty (80) feet in
width on a public street, park, or plaza, every eighty (80) feet at a minimum.
Figure 13.02.54-2 MU-C and MU-N Building Façade Standards
3. Facade Transparency. (See Figure 13.02.54-3)
a. A ground story facade of a non-residential or mixed-use building fronting on a public street,
park, or plaza shall have a minimum transparency of sixty percent (60%); residential buildings
shall have a minimum of twenty percent (20%).
b. Upper story facades fronting on a public street, park, or plaza shall have a minimum
transparency of twenty percent (20%).
c. Side and rear facades, which are clearly visible from a public street, park, plaza or downtown
alley, shall have a minimum transparency of twelve percent (12%), unless otherwise
prohibited by the City’s Building Code.
d. Tinted or reflective glass is prohibited for windows and doors on ground story facades
fronting on a public street, park, plaza, or downtown alley. Non-tinted, clear low-e window
coatings are permitted. Glass block is prohibited on all facades, ground and upper stories,
fronting on a public street, park, or plaza.
e. Blank wall areas fronting on a public street, park, plaza, or downtown alley shall not exceed a
rectangular area greater than thirty percent (30%) of a story’s facade, as measured from floor
to floor, and shall not exceed a horizontal distance greater than fifteen (15) feet of a story’s
facade.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.55
Page 82
Figure 13.02.54-3 MU-C and MU-N Façade Transparency
D. Facade Materials.
1. In the MU-C District, dominant materials, constituting a minimum seventy-five percent (75%) of a
facade (excluding glass windows), fronting on a public street, park, plaza, or downtown alley shall
consist of higher quality, more durable materials characteristic of traditional downtown buildings,
including masonry (clay or concrete brick, natural or textured cast concrete stone). Other modern
materials will be considered by the City if they provide similar visual character, color, and quality
to that of traditional downtown building materials.
2. In the MU-C District, prohibited materials on a facade fronting on a public street, park, plaza, or
downtown alley are lower quality, less durable finish materials that do not complement materials
characteristic of traditional downtown buildings, including non-textured cast concrete, cementbased
stucco, synthetic stucco or EIFS (below the third story), glass block, vinyl, aluminum, and
other materials resulting in similar visual character. These materials may be used on rear and
side building facades.
3. In the MU-C District, accent materials, constituting a maximum twenty-five percent (25%) of a
facade (excluding glass windows), allowed on a facade fronting on a public street, park, plaza, or
downtown alley may include dominant facade materials, as well as glass, architectural or
decorative metal, architectural exposed concrete panels, decorative tile, and stucco/EIFS (above
the second story).
4. The facade materials standards above shall apply to all facades of buildings for stories above the
second story, which are clearly visible from a public street, park, plaza, or downtown alley.
E. Building Entries.
1. A prominent entry is required on any building facade fronting on a public street, park, plaza, or
downtown alley.
13.02.55 A-1 Agricultural District
A. Farm dwellings for those resident owners and laborers actually engaged in the permitted uses are
accessory uses and shall comply with all of the provisions of the R-2 Low-Medium Residential
District.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.61
Page 83
Use Specific Standards
13.02.61 Specific Residential Principal Uses
A. Bed and Breakfast Establishment.
1. Compliance with State Standards. All bed and breakfast establishments and licensees shall be
subject to and comply with Chapter ATCP 73, Wis. Adm. Code, relating to bed and breakfast
establishments or ATCP 72 Wis. Adm. Code relating to hotels, motels and tourist rooming
houses.
2. City Permit Required. In addition to the permit required by Chapters ATCP 72 and 73, Wis.
Adm. Code, before opening for business every bed and breakfast establishment shall obtain a
permit from the City Clerk.
3. Off Street Parking Required. Permits shall be issued only to those establishments that provide a
minimum of one (1) improved off street parking space for each room offered for occupancy in
addition to one (1) parking space provided for the dwelling unit. Establishments otherwise
qualifying under this Section regulating bed and breakfast establishments shall not be subject to
the other requirements of the UDC with respect to traffic, parking and access.
B. Dwelling, Zero Lot Line.
1. The outside walls of the structure shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the side
property lines of the lot of record before subdivision, side yard setback to be measured along a
line parallel to the street from the closest point of the structure to the side property line.
2. An appropriate document shall be submitted to the Inspection Department and filed with the
Office of the La Crosse County Register of Deeds which provides for the maintenance of common
areas and facilities and resolution of disputes with respect to maintenance of the entire structure
and grounds. Said document to be signed, recorded and remain as a condition on the real estate.
This provision shall only apply to new construction commenced after September 17, 1984.
C. Dwelling, Senior Independent Living.
1. The proper preservation, care and maintenance by the original and all subsequent owners of the
exterior design, including all common structures, facilities, utilities, access and open spaces shall
be assured by deed restrictions and/or by contract.
D. Existing Planned Residential Development.
1. The proper preservation, care and maintenance by the original and all subsequent owners of the
exterior design, including all common structures, facilities, utilities, access and open spaces shall
be assured by deed restrictions and/or by contract.
2. The following provisions shall be complied with:
a. Lot Area. Minimum of two-thirds (2/3) of the minimum of the R-3 Medium Density District
minimum lot area in Table 13.02.24-1.
b. Lot Width. Minimum of two-thirds (2/3) of the minimum of the R-3 Medium Density District
minimum lot frontage in Table 13.02.24-1.
13.02.62 Specific Public and Institutional Uses
A. Club, Lodge or Meeting Place of a Non-Commercial Nature.
1. All principal structures and uses shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any lot line.
B. Child Care Center, Licensed Group.
1. All principal structures and uses shall have the greater of the applicable district side yard setback
or a minimum six-foot (6) side yard setback.
2. Play equipment, swings, sand boxes, or similar structures shall not be located in the required
front yard setback and shall be effectively screened from any adjacent residential use.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.63
Page 84
3. The boundaries of an outdoor play space shall be defined by a permanent enclosure not less
than four (4) feet high to protect the children. Fencing, plants or landscaping may be used to
create a permanent enclosure.
C. Funeral Home or Mortuary.
1. All principal structures and uses shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any lot line.
D. Hospital.
1. All principal structures and uses shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet from any lot line.
E. Place of Worship.
1. All principal structures and uses shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet from any lot line.
F. School, College/University/Trade/Business.
1. The lot area shall be a minimum of two (2) acres and all principal structures and uses shall be a
minimum of forty (40) feet from any lot line.
G. School, Elementary or Secondary.
1. The lot area shall be a minimum of two (2) acres and all principal structures and uses shall be a
minimum of forty (40) feet from any lot line.
13.02.63 Specific Business Uses
A. Animal/Veterinary Clinic or Hospital.
1. All principal structures and uses shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any
residence. The aforesaid minimum lot area and minimum distance from any residence shall not
be required for animal hospitals which do not provide outside boarding for animals.
B. Animal Boarding, Shelter or Daycare Center.
1. An odor mitigation plan shall be provided to demonstrate how impacts from odors will be
minimized.
2. All outdoor areas for animals shall be enclosed with a fence.
3. Any pets being boarded overnight shall be confined within an indoor area between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
4. A facility sharing a common building wall, ceiling, or floor plate with another use or structure must
provide engineering detail demonstrating sound attenuation to STC rating of fifty-five (55) or
higher for such common walls and ceilings. Noise testing by a qualified noise professional may be
required as a condition of approval prior to issuance of a building certificate of occupancy.
5. All outdoor designated areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from a
residence.
6. An indoor facility must be located at a minimum of fifty (50) feet from a residence.
C. Automobile Fueling and Service Station.
1. All gas pumps and tanks shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any side or rear lot line and
twenty (20) feet from any existing or proposed street line.
D. Brewpub.
1. Compliance with all applicable provisions of state and local law and obtain all required licenses.
2. Owner/operator shall install all standard or necessary equipment to ensure that detectable odors
coming from brewing/distilling operation are eliminated to prevent odors from presenting a public
nuisance.
3. No exterior storage allowed including but not limited to: brewing/distilling equipment, product, raw
materials or waste materials.
4. A loading and unloading area for all trucks greater than twenty-two (22) feet in length must be
provided off-street.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.64
Page 85
5. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the total gross floor area of the establishment shall be used
for the brewery function, including but not limited to, the brewhouse, boiling and water treatment
areas, bottling and kegging lines, malt milling and storage, fermentation tanks, conditioning tanks
and serving tanks.
6. Revenue from food sales must constitute at least fifty percent (50%) of total business revenue.
E. Payday, Pawn, Auto/Title Loan, Currency Exchange and Similar Uses
1. Intent. The City of Onalaska has experienced an increase in the number and location of payday
loan establishments, payday loan establishments, title loan agencies, pawn shops, rent-to-own
establishments, and similar uses. Furthermore, the clustering of these businesses may create an
undesirable image of the vitality of the commercial districts and the community as a whole.
Consequently, it is the intent of this section to regulate the distance between these uses and
prevent clustering of these uses for the benefit of the health, safety and welfare of the public.
2. Time. No such business shall be open between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
3. Distance. Payday loan establishments, title loan agencies, pawn shops, rent-to-own
establishments, and similar uses shall not be within five thousand (5,000) feet of another
business of such nature and the business entrance shall not be within one hundred and fifty (150)
feet of any residential district.
F. Storage Facility, Personal.
1. Facility shall consist of a permanent structure(s) only; temporary/mobile storage units, such as
storage pods and shipping containers, are prohibited.
2. Individual storage units shall be used for dead storage only. Storage units shall not be used for
retail, commercial, human habitation, office, workshop, studio, hobby or rehearsal area,
manufacturing or processing of goods, or repair/service of autos or equipment. Auctions, garage
or estate sales are prohibited.
3. Storage of flammable, hazardous or perishable materials and keeping of animals is prohibited.
4. Outdoor storage is prohibited, including vehicles and boats.
5. All doors to the storage units in new facilities shall be internally accessed; doors shall be
internally facing and shall not face any street or property line.
6. The entire facility shall be secured by either the walls of the structure(s) and/or fencing, subject to
the screening standards in Chapter 3, Division 5.
7. All areas intended for driving, parking and loading shall be paved with asphalt or concrete.
8. Mini-storage facilities adjacent to residential properties shall not operate or allow tenant access
between the hours of 10:00pm and 7:00am.
9. The overall height of light fixtures installed to illuminate parking lots and exterior grounds shall not
exceed the height of any principal structure.
13.02.64 Specific Industrial Uses
A. Brewery, Winery or Distillery.
1. Compliance with all applicable provisions of state and local law and obtain all required licenses.
2. Owner/operator shall install all standard or necessary equipment to ensure that detectable odors
coming from brewing/distilling operation are eliminated to prevent odors from presenting a public
nuisance.
3. No exterior storage allowed including but not limited to: brewing/distilling equipment, product, raw
materials or waste materials.
4. A loading and unloading area for all trucks greater than twenty-two (22) feet in length must be
provided off-street.
B. Outside Storage and Manufacturing Area.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.65
Page 86
1. Use shall be surrounded by a solid fence or evergreen planting screen completely preventing a
view from any other property or public right of way and shall be at least six hundred (600) feet
from Residential, Public and Semi-Public, and Park and Open Space Districts.
C. Scrap or Salvage Storage Yard.
1. Compliance with all necessary state and local licensing as well as all state and federal
environmental regulations.
2. Travelways through the storage yard shall be maintained to allow for fire and emergency access.
3. A landscape buffer area of at least fifteen (15) feet shall be provided along the frontage of the
property with a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) plant units per every one hundred (100) linear
feet.
4. All buildings shall include an automatic fire sprinkler system.
5. All vehicle fluid draining shall be conducted within a building.
6. Vertical stacking of vehicles shall not be permitted on the property where they are visible from
public right-of-way or adjacent properties.
7. Hours of operation, including deliveries and hauling to and from the property, shall be between 7
a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
8. All petroleum products, anti-freeze and hazardous materials shall be disposed of in accordance
with local and state regulations
9. Any buildings, salvage yard, salvage parking areas, vehicle crusher, loading areas and
dumpsters as well as any outdoor storage areas or equipment shall be enclosed within a solid
perimeter fence eight (8) feet in height. The fence shall be faced with aluminum or galvanized
steel panels and coated with a non-reflective neutral earth tone color.
10. Storage kept outside of a building shall not be located in the front yard.
D. Storage and Sale of Machinery and Equipment.
1. Travelways through the storage yard shall be maintained to allow for fire and emergency access.
2. Any buildings shall include an automatic fire sprinkler system.
3. Storage kept outside of a building shall not be located in the front yard.
4. Hours of operation, including deliveries and hauling to and from the property, shall be between 7
a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
5. Any buildings, storage yard, storage yard parking areas, loading areas and dumpsters as well as
any outdoor storage areas or equipment shall be enclosed within a solid perimeter fence eight (8)
feet in height. The fence shall be faced with aluminum or galvanized steel panels and coated with
a non-reflective neutral earth tone color.
13.02.65 Specific Arts, Entertainment or Recreation Uses
A. Adult Oriented Entertainment Business. The Common Council finds that adult oriented uses may
have a direct and detrimental effect on the character of the City’s residential neighborhoods and
commercial areas. The following standards are designed to protect the character and stability of
Residential, Commercial, and Industrial Districts within the City, to prevent crime, to stabilize and
protect existing and potential property values and to prohibit uses that adversely affect the character
and stability of desirable development in each district. It shall not impose a limitation on the content of
any communication materials, including sexually oriented materials as protected by the First
Amendment.
1. Such use shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any Residential District.
2. Such use shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school, including private
schools and preschools, public library, daycare facility, recreational facility, place of worship,
church or senior/elderly housing facility.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.66
Page 87
3. Such use shall not be located within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of another adult
oriented use as measured by the radius from each business.
4. Such use shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of an establishment licensed to
sell or dispense fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor.
5. Such use shall not be operated between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday through
Saturday or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon Sundays.
6. Such use shall not permit any public view of its stock in trade or adult entertainment from the
exterior of the establishment.
7. Such use shall not permit entry to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
8. No employees shall solicit business outside the building in which the Adult Orientated
Entertainment Business is located.
9. No male or female person, while on the premises, shall impose to public view his or her genitals,
pubic area, anus or anal cleft. Full nudity is prohibited.
10. No person on the premises shall engage in sexual conduct, sadomasochistic abuse or in any way
fondle their genitals.
11. Nudity is prohibited for any employee of an adult orientated business where such person is in
direct, personal contact with another person.
12. The building’s exterior shall meet the following requirements:
a. Colors shall be earth or neutral tones with primary accents to be in the same color family; and
b. The exterior shall be adequately maintained in good condition.
B. Outdoor Recreational Facility, Commercial.
1. All structures shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any district boundary.
C. Outdoor Recreational Facility, Public.
1. All structures shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any district boundary.
13.02.66 Specific Natural Resource and Agricultural Uses
A. Agriculture – Raising of Crops.
1. The combination of all nutrient sources applied or available on individual fields may not exceed
University of Wisconsin soil test recommendations for that field.
13.02.67 Specific Utility and Transportation Uses
A. Airport.
1. The lot area shall be a minimum of twenty (20) acres.
B. Parking, Multi-Level Structure.
1. Vehicle entrances onto city roadways shall be located in a manner that aligns with the roadway’s
access design standards.
2. Vehicle entrances shall be located and designed to minimize conflict with public pedestrian
facilities.
3. Vehicle entrances shall be minimized so that they do not dominate the structure’s street frontage.
Potential techniques include recessing the entrance, extending portions of the structure over the
entrance, using screening and landscaping, and using the smallest curb cut width that is
necessary.
4. The impacts of vehicle headlights on surrounding residential properties shall be minimized
through the design of the parking structure.
5. View of parked cars shall be screened on each level through the use of decorative screening,
such as decorative metal grilles, railings, architectural panels, and trellis wall plantings.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 88
6. A multi-level parking structure shall be complementary in massing and architecture with
surrounding buildings. Potential techniques include the use of building facade articulation, upper
level stepbacks, complementary exterior materials, and similar design techniques.
7. A multi-level parking structure shall include habitable space along street level frontages for
commercial uses, where feasible.
8. A multi-level parking structure shall be designed to enable potential future conversion of the
structure to non-parking uses. Ramped floors are prohibited and floor heights need to be a
minimum of twelve (12) feet [nine (9) feet clear from floor to ceiling] for upper floors and fifteen
(15) feet [twelve (12) feet clear from floor to ceiling] for a ground floor to accommodate future
non-parking uses.
9. A multi-level parking structure shall be illuminated to a level to allow safe, secure access to the
parking structure and within it. Light fixtures on the top level of parking structures shall be set
back from the edge so that they are not visible from the adjoining street.
10. All exterior lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to reflect lights
away from all adjacent residential districts or adjacent residences in such a way as not to exceed
one-half (1/2) footcandle measured at any residential property boundary, and one (1) footcandles
measured at any non-residential property boundary. A lighting plan shall be provided that
demonstrates compliance with this requirement.
C. Public Passenger Transportation Terminal (Air, Bus or Rail).
1. All principal structures and uses shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any
Residential District boundary.
13.02.68 Specific Accessory Uses
A. Accessory Dwelling Units.
1. Accessory dwelling units shall only be allowed as a new, freestanding structure; as a conversion
of an existing, detached garage; or as an addition to an existing, detached garage.
2. Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit is allowed in R-1, R-2 and MU-N Districts.
3. The accessory structure containing the accessory dwelling unit shall have a six (6) foot side yard
setback and meet all other required setbacks for an accessory structure. An existing accessory
structure may not be converted into an accessory dwelling unit if required setbacks are not met.
4. The accessory dwelling unit must be at least three hundred (300) square feet in size and no more
than eight hundred (800) square feet in size.
5. Off-street parking spaces must be available for use by the owner-occupant(s) and tenant(s) with
at least two (2) spaces available for the principal residence and one (1) space available for the
accessory dwelling unit.
6. Any outside entrance serving the accessory dwelling unit shall be located on the side or rear of
the accessory structure, if new.
7. Water and sewer for the accessory dwelling unit shall be connected to the principal residence.
8. An owner of the property must occupy either the principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling
unit unless there is a bona fide temporary absence approved by the Planning Department.
9. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the construction of the accessory dwelling unit, the owner(s)
shall file a deed restriction with the Office of the La Crosse County Register of Deeds stating that
the independent sale of the accessory dwelling unit is not allowed.
B. Accessory Structure.
1. An accessory use or structure in any zoning district shall not be established prior to the principal
use or structure being present or under construction on the same parcel. Any accessory use or
structure shall conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as
specifically otherwise provided.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 89
2. Accessory structures greater than twenty-five (25) square feet require a building permit.
3. Retaining walls are allowed as follows:
a. No individual retaining wall shall exceed six (6) feet in height and is required to provide a
terrace of at least three (3) feet in width between any series of such walls.
b. Retaining walls are allowed to be installed on side and rear property lines that are not
adjacent to right-of-way.
c. Retaining walls must be setback a minimum of three (3) feet from street rights-of-way.
4. Lawn accessories such as walks, drives, paved terraces and purely decorative garden
accessories, including ponds, fountains, statuary, sun dials, flag poles, shall be permitted in all
setback areas, but not closer than three (3) feet to an abutting property line.
5. Residential Districts.
a. Accessory structures shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade or industry except
for allowed home occupations as defined herein. Accessory structures shall not be used for
residential purposes.
b. Decks constructed in a manner where the principal structure provides structural support (is
load bearing), are considered “attached” and part of the principal structure. In these
instances, setbacks for the principal structure apply to attached decks. Decks constructed in
a manner where they support themselves, but abut a principal structure are considered
detached accessory structures.
c. Accessory structures shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from a principal structure,
unless one of the following apply:
i. The applicable building code regulations in regard to one (1) hour fire resistive
construction are complied with.
ii. The accessory structure is located in a mobile home park. The minimum separation
required for mobile home parks is four (4) feet between any principal structure, accessory
structure, and deck on the same lot.
d. Accessory structures shall not occupy any portion of the street yard and/or required side yard
setback.
e. In no event can the accessory structure be forward of the front line of the principal structure.
f. Accessory structures shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
g. Accessory structures shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the rear yard.
h. Accessory structures shall not be located within three (3) feet of any other accessory
structure or parcel line, or within five (5) feet of an alley right-of-way line.
i. When an accessory structure is located on the rear of a reversed corner parcel, it shall not be
located beyond the minimum front yard setback required on the adjacent interior parcel, or
closer than three (3) feet to the side parcel line of the adjacent structure.
6. Non-Residential Districts.
a. Accessory structures in a non-residential district may be established in the rear yard or side
yard setback area.
b. Accessory structures shall be setback from a principal structure as based on the construction
type and classification as required in the International Building Code (Table 602).
c. Accessory structures shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from all parcel lines
d. Accessory structures shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height.
e. When an accessory structure is located on the rear of a reversed corner parcel, it shall not be
located beyond the minimum front yard setback required on the adjacent interior parcel, or
closer than three (3) feet to the side parcel line of the adjacent structure.
C. Agriculture – Keeping of Bees.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 90
1. All properties which include agriculture-keeping of bees as an accessory use shall comply with
Section 7-1-22.
D. Billboard or Outdoor Advertising.
1. All properties which include billboards or outdoor advertising must comply with the regulations of
Title 14 Sign Code.
E. Central Utility Plant or Electrical Generator.
1. The central utility plant or electrical generator must be screened in accordance with Chapter 03,
Division 5.
2. Noise from the central utility plant or electrical generator must meet standards in Subsection
13.03.12A and State requirements.
F. Child Care Center, Licensed Family.
1. Must comply with all state and local standards.
2. No person, other than members of the family residing on the premises, shall be engaged or
employed. This shall not apply to a substitute non-resident person providing care on the premises
while the owner/operator is sick or otherwise unable to provide care on a short-term basis.
3. The use of any accessory building or accessory structure for a day care is not allowed.
4. Play equipment, swings, sand boxes, or structures shall not be located in front yards or required
side yards adjacent to streets.
5. If required to have an outdoor play area, such play area shall be fully enclosed by a fence, wall,
or hedge of at least four (4) feet in height.
G. Drive-through Facilities.
1. Drive-through facilities may be allowed as an accessory use to a specialty food or coffee shop,
restaurant, financial institutions, and commercial establishments, and other similar type uses as
approved by the Planning Department.
2. Drive-through facilities shall be located to the side or rear of a building and shall not be located
between the principal building and a public street, park, plaza, or downtown alley.
3. Drive-through facilities are limited to one (1) drive-through lane in the B-1 and MU-N districts.
4. Drive-throughs must not be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. if within
three hundred (300) feet of properties used for residential purposes.
5. A drive-through canopy must meet principal structure setbacks.
6. All elements of the drive-through service area, including, but not limited to, menu boards, order
stations, teller windows, and vehicle lights from stacking lanes must be screened from view of
residences through one of the following:
a. Opaque fence at least six (6) feet high;
b. Landscaped berm at least six (6) feet high; or
c. Two (2) staggered rows of evergreen trees with trees in each row spaced a maximum of
twelve (12) feet.
7. In addition to meeting the noise regulations included in Title 11, if within three hundred (300) feet
of residential properties, speakers must not produce noise that exceed seventy-five (75) dBa as
measured five (5) feet from the speaker.
8. Vehicle stacking spaces for drive-through facilities shall be provided according to the following
provisions:
a. Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet in size. Required
width for vehicle drive aisles may not be allocated toward stacking spaces or stacking lanes.
b. Measurement of stacking spaces shall begin behind the first point at which the vehicle must
stop (which may be the order board, a pre-order board or payment/pick-up window).
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 91
c. Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal driveways by surface markings.
Raised medians may be required where deemed necessary by staff for the purpose of traffic
movement and safety.
d. Stacking spaces may not impede pedestrian movements, on- or off-site traffic movements, or
movements in or out of off-street parking spaces.
e. A minimum stacking lane of six (6) spaces or one hundred and twenty (120) feet must be
provided.
H. Farmstead Dwelling.
1. Farmstead dwellings for those resident owners and laborers actually engaged in the permitted
uses are accessory uses and shall comply with all of the site dimensional standards of the R-2
Low-Medium Residential District.
I. Garage Sale.
1. No more than two (2) garage sales per calendar year, lasting no more than three (3) days each,
may be conducted on a given property.
2. Garage sale items and signage shall not be displayed on public right of way.
J. Helipad or Helistop.
1. Helipads or helistops are only allowed in conjunction with medical facilities.
2. There shall be a minimum distance from a heliport or helistop to any residential use of at least
five hundred (500) feet, or the minimum required by federal or state agencies, whichever is
greater.
3. The location and lighting of helipads or helistops in the vicinity of public roadways shall be
shielded or screened so as to minimize distractions to motorists.
4. The landing pad shall be clearly designated as emergency only.
5. The direction of routes for take-offs and landings shall minimize flight over adjacent residential
areas.
K. Home Occupation.
1. The following activities shall be prohibited from being a Home Occupation:
a. Contractor shop;
b. Medical/dental office;
c. Repair or painting of motorized vehicles, trailers, boats or lawn equipment;
d. Animal kennels;
e. Dog breeding as defined by ATCP 16, Wis. Admin Code;
f. Funeral chapel;
g. Dispatch where persons come to a site and are dispatched to other locations;
h. Welding or machine shop;
i. Firearm training or instruction;
j. Business that rents vehicles or equipment, such as trailers;
k. Tow truck;
l. Excavating; and
m. Large volume sales, wholesaling, storage and warehousing.
2. Minor Home Occupation is permitted as long as a Home Occupation license is obtained and the
following standards are met:
a. The home occupation is conducted entirely within the enclosed portion of the residence and
does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of any one (1) floor.
b. The entrance to the space devoted to the home occupation is within the residence. There
shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation and no alterations, whether interior or
exterior, shall change the character of the structure as a dwelling unit. This includes that no
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 92
mechanical equipment or machinery shall be used for the home occupation other than is
usually, customary, and incidental to the residence for domestic or hobby purposes.
c. The home occupation shall not have onsite outside employees. The home occupation shall
not have more than one (1) customer at a time and no customers shall be allowed between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
d. No mechanical equipment/machinery shall be used other than is usual, customary, and
incidental to the residence for domestic purposes. There shall be no activity or equipment
used to create vibrations, glares, fumes, odors, electric or television interferences or noise in
violation of the City’s noise ordinances which is measureable at the property line.
e. There shall be no outside display or storage of goods, equipment or materials used in
connection with the home occupation.
f. Except for articles produced on the premises, no stock in trade shall be stored or displayed
on the premises with the exception of samples of photography (i.e. canvas, metal, framed
photographs in a photography studio, or similar use). Orders previously made by telephone
or a sales party may be filled on the premises.
g. Garage, basement, yard or other similar sales related to the home occupation are not
allowed.
h. Signage shall be in compliance with regulations found in Title 14 Sign Ordinance.
i. The property containing the home occupation shall maintain the required number of legal offstreet
parking spaces required for the residential use(s) and the home occupation use(s).
j. There shall be no commodities sold or services rendered that require receipt or delivery by
means other than a delivery service customary to residential uses.
3. Major Home Occupation is permitted as long as a Home Occupation license is obtained and the
following standards are met:
a. The home occupation is conducted entirely within the enclosed portion of the residence or a
detached accessory structure. The home occupation does not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the area of any floor within the principal structure. The home occupation may
occupy as much of a detached accessory structure as is not needed to meet off-street
parking requirements.
b. There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation and no alterations, whether
interior or exterior, shall change the character of the structure as a dwelling unit. This
includes that no mechanical equipment or machinery shall be used for the home occupation
other than is usually, customary, and incidental to the residence for domestic or hobby
purposes.
c. The home occupation may have one (1) on-site employee or contractor that is not an
inhabitant of the dwelling. The home occupation shall not have more than two (2) customers
at a time by appointment and no customers shall be allowed between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
d. No mechanical equipment/machinery shall be used other than is usual, customary, and
incidental to the residence for domestic purposes. There shall be no activity or equipment
used to create vibrations, glares, fumes, odors, electric or television interferences or noise in
violation of the City’s noise ordinances which is measureable at the property line.
e. There shall be no outside display or storage of goods, equipment or materials used in
connection with the home occupation.
f. Except for articles produced on the premises, no stock in trade shall be stored or displayed
on the premises. Except for articles produced on the premises, no stock in trade shall be
stored or displayed on the premises with the exception of samples of photography (i.e.
canvas, metal, framed photographs in a photography studio, or similar use).
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 93
g. Hobby, craft or art sales are permitted once per year for not more than three (3) calendar
days per calendar year.
h. Signage shall be in compliance with regulations found in Title 14 Sign Ordinance.
i. In addition to the minimum off-street parking required for the dwelling, two (2) off-street
parking spaces must be provided for customers and one (1) off-street parking space must be
provided for each on-site employee or contractor that is not an inhabitant of the dwelling.
j. There shall be no commodities sold or services rendered that require receipt or delivery by
means other than a delivery service customary to residential uses.
L. Outdoor Dining Area.
1. The outdoor dining area shall be contiguous to the food or beverage service principal use to
which it is accessory.
2. The outdoor dining area must not extend beyond the frontage of the principal use, unless a
written statement, signed by the owners and tenants of any adjacent business fronting the street,
indicates approval of the placement of the outdoor dining area in front of their business.
3. Outdoor dining may be permitted within any setback area on private property and on public rightof-
way with the approval of the Board of Public Works and Common Council.
4. The outdoor dining area shall be clearly delineated by fences, walls, or plant materials that have a
height of less than forty-two (42) inches.
5. None of the minimum number of off-street parking stalls required for the principal use shall be
occupied by the outdoor dining area.
6. When an outdoor dining area is located adjacent to a street, a clear, continuous pedestrian path,
parallel to the curb and not less than five (5) feet in width, shall be required for pedestrian
circulation outside of the outdoor dining area.
7. The outdoor dining area shall not include nor be located within five (5) feet of bus stops, fire
hydrants, or other facilities deemed necessary for public safety.
8. Operating hours for the outdoor dining area shall be consistent with the hours of the associated
business. Outdoor dining areas within three hundred (300) feet of a residential zoning district
shall not be operated between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
9. All food and drink preparation shall be performed within the principal use. No preparation or
storage of food or drink shall be permitted within the outdoor dining area.
10. All equipment associated with the outdoor dining area that is stored outdoors when not in use
shall be neatly stacked in an area approved by the Planning Department on a site plan.
11. Prerecorded music within the outdoor dining area shall only be permitted during the hours of
operation of the outdoor dining area and shall be kept at a volume that does not create a
nuisance for adjacent properties. There shall be no televisions within the outdoor dining area.
Live music is not allowed unless otherwise approved under a special event permit.
12. Adequate lighting in and around the outdoor dining area shall be provided at all times. Lighting
fixtures shall be limited to fixtures attached to the building facade or upon private property.
Battery operated lamps or candles placed on tables are permitted.
M. Outdoor Sales Area or Tent.
1. Prior to installation, the applicant shall obtain a Temporary Tent Permit for Outdoor Sales and/or
Events from the Inspection Department if the temporary tent is greater than one hundred and
twenty (120) square feet. The applicant must abide by Wisconsin State Statutes concerning
Temporary Structures as stated in the International Building Code.
2. Location(s) of outdoor sales areas and tents must be shown on a site plan for the property and
are subject to the approval of the City. Outdoor sales areas and temporary tents and are not
allowed in City rights-of-way. Outdoor sales areas and temporary tents shall not impede handicap
parking stalls and shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from a principal structure.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 94
3. Outdoor sales areas and tents are limited to thirty (30) days per calendar year unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Department. Temporary tent(s) may be installed for a maximum of one
hundred and eighty (180) days annually, however, tent sale events that last longer than thirty (30)
days require Planning Department approval. Seasonal garden centers are allowed for a
maximum of one hundred and twenty (120) days annually.
4. Outdoor sales areas and tents shall be limited to the goods sold at the principal use present on
the site, except as regulated below:
a. Temporary Tents for Off-premise Sales (Sales Event by an External Party). Tent(s) are
allowed for up to thirty (30) days. Plan Commission approval is required for tent(s) to be
installed up to for a maximum of ninety (90) days annually. The external party is required to
have property owner consent to operate, to disclose materials being stored and sold during
the event, maintain liability insurance for the duration of the temporary sale in the amount of
one million ($1,000,000) dollars, and obtain a Solicitor’s License from the City Clerk prior to
the event.
b. Temporary Produce Tents/Stands. The owner/operator of the temporary produce
tent/stands is required to have a La Crosse County Health Department Permit, property
owner consent to operate and all equipment shall be removed from the property nightly.
Temporary produce tents/stands are limited to fewer than thirty (30) days annually.
5. Temporary Tents for Events Held on Non-residential Parcels.
a. Private Events. Private events are defined as “invitation only” events and not open to the
general public. A Temporary Tent Permit for Outdoor Sales or Events is required.
b. Community Events. If a temporary tent for a community event is installed for up to ninety-six
(96) hours, a Temporary Tent Permit for Outdoor Sales or Events is required, but the fee
shall be waived. If such tent(s) are up for longer than ninety-six (96) hours, the fee is
required. No tent may be allowed in City rights-of-way unless approved by the City Engineer.
6. Outdoor sales areas and tents shall not include portable toilets.
N. Outdoor Display Areas.
1. Outdoor display areas may not be located within required setback areas and are limited to the
lesser of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet or a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of
the width of a building frontage that contains a customer entrance or exit. There shall be no more
than one (1) building frontage with an outdoor display area.
2. Outdoor display areas are to be located immediately adjacent to and within the dimensions of the
building frontage and shall not extend beyond the building edge.
3. Outdoor display shall not be located so as to block pedestrian walkways, doorways, parking
stalls, drive aisles (including access for emergency services). Four (4) feet is the minimum width
required to maintain pedestrian access.
4. Outdoor display areas shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet, except that vending machines or
cabinets for items such as beverages, ice, movies, and propane may exceed the height as long
as there are no more than three (3) machines per frontage.
5. Outdoor display areas shall be maintained in an orderly and attractive manner.
6. Outdoor display areas shall be limited to products sold within the principal structure and shall not
serve as a storage area for inventory.
O. Residential Swimming Psool.
1. Permit Required. Before work is commenced on the construction or erection of a swimming pool
or on any alterations, additions, remodeling or other improvements; an application for a building
permit, electrical permit, and/or a gas piping permit to construct, erect, alter, remodel or add must
be submitted in writing to the Inspection Department. Plans and specifications and pertinent
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 95
explanatory data shall be submitted to the Inspection Department at the time of application and
no work shall commence until a permit has been issued by the Inspection Department.
2. Types of Pools Requiring Permits. Permits shall be required for the construction of the
following types of swimming pools:
a. In-ground pools, whether indoor or outdoor.
b. Above ground pools, except for storable swimming or wading pools having a diameter of
eighteen (18) feet or less and a wall height of four (4) feet or less and installed for less than
one hundred and eighty (180) days in a calendar year.
3. Construction Requirements. In addition to such other requirements as may be reasonably
imposed by the Inspection Department, the Inspection Department shall not issue a permit for
construction, unless the following construction requirements are observed:
a. All materials and methods of construction in the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling
or other improvements and pool installation shall be in accordance with all state regulations
and code and with any and all Ordinances of the City now in effect or hereafter enacted.
b. All plumbing work shall be in accordance with all applicable Ordinances of the City and all
state codes. Every swimming pool shall be provided with a suitable draining method. No
swimming pool shall be constructed so as to allow water therefrom to drain into any sanitary
sewer or septic tank nor to overflow upon or cause damage to any adjoining property.
Provisions may be made for draining the contents of any swimming pool into a storm sewer,
but such installation shall be subject to prior approval by the Inspection Department.
c. All electrical installations, including lighting and heating but not limited thereto, which are
provided for, installed and used in conjunction with a swimming pool shall be in conformance
with the state laws and City Ordinances regulating electrical installations.
d. All pumps, filters, disinfectant and chemical feeders, drains, ladders, lighting, ropes and
appurtenant equipment used in the operation of all swimming pools, spas, diving towers and
water slides shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
e. Areas surrounding a swimming pool, including decks and fencing, bathhouses, dressing
rooms, toilets, shower stalls and lounging areas shall be kept clean and in a state of good
repair at all times. The walls, floors, equipment of appurtenant facilities at a spa or swimming
pool must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
4. Setbacks. Swimming pools requiring a building permit must meet the following setbacks:
a. Swimming pools are allowed only in rear yards of parcels with existing principal structures or
where a principal structure is under construction with a valid building permit issued by the
Inspection Department.
b. No swimming pool shall be located, constructed or maintained closer than six (6) feet to any
side or rear parcel line.
c. Swimming pools shall not be located within three (3) feet of any other accessory structure.
d. Detached accessory structures shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from a principal
structure.
e. Swimming pools are considered a detached accessory structure and alone, or in combination
with other detached accessory structures, shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the rear yard.
5. Proper Enclosure Required. Every swimming pool which extends wholly above the ground or
partially above the ground shall, at all times, be enclosed so as to prevent people and animals
from accidentally falling into such pool.
a. Pool Wall May Serve as Barrier. An approved barrier shall consist of a solid wall of durable
material of which the pool itself is constructed and shall extend directly above the vertical
water-enclosing wall of the pool a minimum of four (4) feet above the level of the ground
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 96
immediately adjacent to the pool. Every entrance to a pool, such as a ladder, must be
secured or adequately safeguarded to prevent unauthorized entry into the pool.
b. Fence or Other Wall May Serve as Barrier. An approved barrier shall consist of a properly
erected and maintained wall or fence at least forty-eight (48) inches in height, which entirely
surrounds the pool. Every such fence shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 03, Division 4. Every such wall or fence shall be located not less
than six (6) feet from the vertical, water-enclosing wall of the pool. All gates in such walls or
fences shall be self-enclosing and self-latching, and shall be at least forty-eight (48) inches in
height with latches placed at least forty-eight (48) inches above the ground level, or such gate
latch shall be made inaccessible to small children in some other manner approved by the
Inspection Department.
6. Compliance. All swimming pools existing at the time of passage of this Code of Ordinances not
satisfactorily fenced shall comply with the fencing requirements of this Section when water is
placed in the swimming pool.
7. Filter System Required. All swimming pools shall contain some filtration system to assure
proper circulation of the water therein and maintenance of the proper bacterial quality thereof.
8. Dirt Bottoms Prohibited. All swimming pools shall have the sides and bottom of a smooth finish,
and no sand or dirt bottom shall be permitted.
P. Satellite Earth Station.
1. Not more than one (1) satellite earth station may be allowed per individual recorded lot in
residential districts. In non-residential districts, the Zoning Administrator may approve additional
stations.
2. Any satellite dish mounting post shall only be located in the rear yard and at least six (6) feet from
any property line. No dish shall be placed in the front yard of any lot.
3. Satellite earth stations located in Residential Districts shall be ground mounted only.
4. Satellite earth stations may be wall or roof mounted in Agricultural, Business, Public, or Industrial
Districts only.
5. Height.
a. A ground mounted satellite dish may not exceed twelve (12) feet in height, as measured from
the ground to the highest point of the dish.
b. A roof mounted satellite dish may not exceed eight (8) feet in height above the surrounding
roofline as measured from the lowest point of the existing roofline.
6. All satellite earth stations shall be permanently mounted in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications for installation. All such installations shall meet a minimum wind load design
velocity of eighty (80) mph.
7. Electrical installations in connection with earth satellite receiving stations, including grounding of
the system, shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code, Wisconsin State
Electrical Code and the instructions of the manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter
requirements shall govern. All cable used to conduct current or signals from the satellite earth
station to the receivers shall be installed underground unless installation site conditions preclude
underground. If a satellite earth station is to be used by two (2) or more residential property
owners, all interconnecting electrical connections, cables and conduits must also be buried. The
location of all such underground lines, cables and conduits shall be shown on the application for a
permit. All satellite earth stations shall be grounded against direct lightning strikes.
8. No portable or trailer mounted satellite earth station shall be allowed, except for temporary
installation for on-site testing and demonstration purposes for periods not exceeding five (5) days.
However, such trial placement shall be in accordance with all provisions of this Section. Failure to
comply shall result in a citation being issued for violation of this Section. Any person making such
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 97
temporary placement shall give written notice to the Zoning Administrator of the date when such
placement shall begin and end.
9. No form of advertising or identification, sign or mural is allowed on the dish or framework other
than the customary manufacturer's identification plates.
10. Satellite earth stations shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission or reflection
of an electromagnetic radiation that would cause any harmful interference with the radio and/or
television broadcasting or reception on adjacent properties. In the event that harmful interference
is caused subsequent to its installation, the owner of the satellite earth station shall promptly take
steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with Federal Communications
Commission Regulations.
11. Compliance with Federal Regulations. The installation and use of every satellite earth station
shall be in conformity with the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and regulations
adopted thereunder.
12. The color of any satellite dish shall be such that it blends into its surroundings.
Q. Satellite Television Dish or Radio or Television Antenna Tower.
1. No satellite television dish or radio or television antenna tower shall be erected or installed within
the front yard. The rear setback and the side setback shall be that for the principal structure within
the respective zoning district. The exact location of an antenna tower exceeding three (3) feet in
height shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator, except that all receive-only
television antenna and satellite dishes exceeding three (3) feet in height shall be exempt from this
requirement.
2. No radio or television tower shall exceed a height of sixty (60) feet above the ground measured at
grade level. No tower may exceed height limitations as established by the AOZD Height
Limitations.
3. Radio or television antenna towers shall be erected and installed in accordance with the
Wisconsin State Electrical Code, National Electrical Safety Code and the instructions of the
manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter requirements shall govern.
4. The diameter of the satellite television dish shall not exceed ten (10) feet for the ground mounted
dish and six (6) feet for the roof mounted dish, except for stations used to provide community
antenna television services.
R. Short Term Vacation Rental.
1. The maximum number of overnight guests will be limited to two (2) times the number of
bedrooms rented plus one (1).
2. Events are not allowed to be hosted by transient guests on the premises. An event means a
gathering on the premises of more than three (3) un-registered transient guests. Events hosted
by the property owner are allowed, but must abide by all applicable city ordinances and polices,
including the prohibition on renting private residential property out for events.
3. Dwelling Requirements.
a. The dwelling must be connected to city sewer and water.
b. Rooms used for sleeping shall have egress windows and smoke detectors.
c. The guest(s) must have access during their entire stay to a full bathroom, including sink,
toilet, and tub or shower.
d. Accommodation of guests is not allowed in recreational vehicles, tents, accessory structures,
fish houses, or similar structures.
4. Parking.
a. All guest parking must be accommodated on improved surfaces on the premises. No onstreet
parking is allowed for guests.
b. At a minimum, parking shall be provided at the following rate:
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 98
i. One (1) space for each one to two (1-2) bedroom rental;
ii. Two (2) spaces for each three (3) bedroom rental;
iii. Spaces equal to the number of bedrooms minus one (1) for each four (4) and more than
four (4+) bedroom rental.
c. In short term vacation rentals where the property owner resides on the premise, additional
off-street parking for personal use must be provided at a rate of one (1) parking space per
two (2) bedrooms not dedicated to the guest use.
5. If not residing on the property, the property owner or a manager/representative must be located
within thirty (30) miles of the property. The property owner shall maintain with the City the name,
address, phone number, and email for the local contact or managing agent for the property.
6. A guest record must be maintained, including the name, address, phone number, and vehicle
license plate information for all guests. This record must be provided to the City within forty-eight
(48) hours of a request for the guest record.
7. The property owner must disclose in writing to their transient guests the following rules and
regulations. This disclosure shall be conspicuously displayed in the home:
a. The name, phone number and address of the owner, operating lessee or managing
agent/representative.
b. The maximum number of guests allowed at the property.
c. The maximum number of vehicles allowed at the property and where they are to be parked.
d. City nuisance ordinances requirement that noise levels be reduced between 10 p.m. and 8
a.m. and that this will be enforced by the Onalaska Police Department.
e. Property rules related to use of outdoor features, such as decks, patios, grills, recreational
fires, saunas and other recreational facilities.
8. All garbage must be kept in rubbish containers that are stored out of view of a public street.
9. No signage pertaining to the short term vacation rental is allowed on the property.
S. Sign.
1. All signs shall meet the requirements of Title 14 Sign Ordinance.
T. Telecommunications structures and towers
1. Mobile Service Support Structures and Facilities.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate by Conditional Use Permit (1) the
siting and construction of any new mobile service support structure and facilities; (2) with
regard to Class 1 collocation, the substantial modification of an existing support structure and
mobile services facilities; and (3) with regard to a Class 2 collocation, collocation on an
existing support structure which does not require the substantial modification of an existing
support structure and mobile services facilities. It is the intent of the City of Onalaska to
regulate Mobile Service Support Structures and Facilities as permitted by Sec. 66.04040,
Wis. Stats.
b. Authority. The City of Onalaska has the specific authority under Sec. 66.0404, Wis. Stats.
c. Definitions. The definitions contained in Sec. 66.0404(1) Wis. Stats. are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference.
i. Substantial Modification. The modification of a mobile service support structure,
including the mounting of an antenna on such a structure, that does any of the following:
1. For structures with an overall height of two hundred (200) feet or less, increases the
overall height of the structure by more than twenty (20) feet.
2. For structures with an overall height of more than two hundred (200) feet, increases
the overall height of the structure by ten percent (10%) or more.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 99
3. Measured at the level of the appurtenance added to the structure as a result of the
modification, increases the width of the support structure by twenty (20) feet or more,
unless a larger area is necessary for collocation.
4. Increases the square footage of an existing equipment compound to a total area of
more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
d. Siting and Construction of any New Mobile Services Support Structure and Facilities or the
Substantial Modification of an Existing Support Structure and Mobile Service Facilities (Class
1 Collocation).
i. Conditional Use Permit Required. A Conditional Use Permit is required for the siting
and construction of a new mobile services support structure and facility and/or substantial
modification of an existing support structure and mobile service facilities (Class 1
Collocation) and is subject to the conditions set forth in this ordinance as well as any
applicable site plan review and required permitting under the City Building Code Title 15.
ii. Applications for Conditional Use Permit. Applications shall be completed and filed
with the Zoning Administrator and shall include the information required under Sec.
66.0402(2) Wis. Stats.
iii. If an applicant submits an application for a permit to engage in an activity described in
this ordinance, which contains all of the required information the Zoning Administrator
shall consider the application complete. If the Zoning Administrator does not believe the
application is complete, applicant shall be notified in writing within ten (10) days of
receiving the application, that the application is not complete and outlining the required
information needed to complete the application. An applicant may resubmit an application
as often as necessary until it is complete.
iv. Referral to Plan Commission. After an application is complete, the matter shall be
referred to the City of Onalaska Plan Commission for review.
1. Within ninety (90) days of its receipt of a complete application, the Plan Commission
and Zoning Administrator shall complete all of the following or the applicant may
consider the application approved, except that the applicant and the City may agree
in writing to an extension of the ninety (90) day period:
a. Review the application to determine if it complies with all applicable aspects of
the political subdivision’s building code and subject to the limitations in this
section and the zoning ordinance.
b. Make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the application.
c. Notify the applicant in writing of its final decision.
d. If the decision is to disapprove the application, include with the written notification
substantial evidence which supports the decision.
2. The Plan Commission may deny an application if an applicant refuses to evaluate the
feasibility of collocation within the applicant’s search ring and provide the sworn
statement described above.
3. An applicant must provide the Plan Commission with proof that the support structure
complies with district setbacks or with an Engineering Certification showing that a
mobile service support structure, or an existing structure is designed to collapse
within a smaller area than the setback or fall zone area required including snow and
ice fall areas, then the Zoning Ordinance does not apply to such a structure unless
the Plan Commission or Zoning Department provides the applicant with substantial
evidence that the Engineering Certification is flawed.
v. Limitations. Conditional Use Permits for siting and construction of any new mobile
service support structure and facilities and land use permits for Class 1 Collocations shall
only be granted provided the following conditions exist:
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 100
1. If the location of the proposed mobile services support structure or mobile service
facility is on leased land, the lease agreement does not preclude the lessee from
entering into leases on the site with other provider(s) and there is no other lease
provision operating as a bar to collocation of other providers.
2. The applicant has obtained Federal Communications Commission (FCC) license
numbers and registration numbers if applicable.
3. The applicant and/or agent have copies of Findings of No Significant Impacts
(FONSI) statement from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or
Environmental Assessment or Environmental Impact Study (EIS) if applicable.
4. The applicant and/or agent have copies of the determination of “no hazard” from the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) including any aeronautical study determination
or other findings, if applicable.
5. The applicant and/or agent have plans indicating security measures (i.e. access,
fencing, lighting etc.)
6. For new mobile service support structures, the applicant has obtained a report
prepared by an engineer licensed by the State of Wisconsin certifying the structural
design of the tower and its ability to accommodate additional antennas and submits a
map identifying the fall zone of the mobile service facility, including ice and snow fall
zones
7. The applicant and/or agent have proof of liability coverage.
8. The applicant and/or agent have copies of an Affidavit of Notification indicating that
all operators and owners of airports located within five (5) miles of the proposed site
have been notified via certified mail and the applicant has complied with any airport
overlay zoning districts.
9. The facility of collocation is designed to promote site sharing, such that space is
reasonably available to collocators and such that telecommunication towers and
necessary appurtenances, including but not limited to parking areas, access road,
and utilities are shared by site users whenever possible.
e. Class 2 Collocation.
i. Conditional Use Permit Required. A Conditional Use Permit is required for collocation
on an existing support structure and mobile service facilities (Class 2 Collocation) and is
subject to all of the conditions for a Class 1 Collocation as well as those conditions listed
below.
ii. Applications for Conditional Use Permit. Applications shall be completed and filed with
the Zoning Administrator and shall include the following information.
1. The name and business address of and the contact individual for the applicant, for
the property owner, and for the owner of the proposed mobile service facility and for
the existing support structure.
2. A map detailing the location of the proposed or affected support structure.
3. A map detailing the location of the proposed mobile service facility and areas within
one thousand (1,000) feet of said facility.
iii. A Class 2 Collocation is subject to the same requirements for the issuance of building
and electrical permits to which any other type of commercial development or land use
development is subject.
iv. If an applicant submits to the Zoning Administrator an application for a Conditional Use
Permit to engage in an activity described in this ordinance, which contains all of the
information required under this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the
application complete. If any of the required information is not in the application, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing, within five (5) days of receiving
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 101
the application, that the application is not complete. The written notification shall specify
in detail the required information that was incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an
application as often as necessary until it is complete.
v. Within forty-five (45) days of its receipt of a complete application, the Plan Commission
and Zoning Administrator shall complete all of the following or the applicant may consider
the application complete, except that the applicant and City may agree in writing to an
extension of the forty-five (45) day period.
1. Make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the application.
2. Notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision.
3. If the application is approved, issue the applicant the relevant conditional use permit.
4. If the decision is to disapprove the application, include with the written notification
substantial evidence which supports the decision.
f. Information Report. The purpose of the report under this section is to provide the City with
accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications facility owners and
providers who offer or provide telecommunications services within the county or that own or
operate telecommunications facilities within the county, to assist the City in enforcement of
this subsection and to assist the City in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal
laws.
i. Information Report. All owners of new telecommunications towers shall submit to the
Zoning Administrator a Telecommunications Facility Information Report (the “Report”)
within forty-five (45) days of the following events:
1. Following Conditional Use Permit approval;
2. Receipt of a written request from the City of Onalaska Zoning Administrator; or
3. Any change in occupancy of the tower.
4. The Report shall include the tower owner name(s), address(es), phone number(s),
contact person(s)and proof of bond as security for removal. The tower owner shall
supply the tower height and current occupancy, if applicable, the number of
collocation positions designated, occupied or vacant. This information shall be
submitted on the City form provided and designed for such use and shall become
evidence of compliance.
g. Removal/Security for Removal. It is the policy of the City of Onalaska and this ordinance
that telecommunications towers be removed once they are no longer in use and are not a
functional part of providing telecommunications service, and that it is the telecommunications
provider’s responsibility to remove such telecommunications towers and restore sites to
original conditions or conditions approved by the City of Onalaska Zoning Administrator or
designee. Restoration shall include removal of any subsurface structure or foundation,
including concrete, used to support the telecommunications tower down to five (5) feet below
the surface. After a telecommunications tower is no longer in operation, the provider shall
have one hundred and eighty (180) days to effect removal and restoration unless weather
prohibits such efforts and an extension is granted by the Zoning Administrator as requested
by the telecommunications provider. Permittee shall record a document with the office of the
La Crosse County Register of Deeds showing the existence of any subsurface structure
remaining below grade. Such recording shall accurately set forth the location and describe
the remaining structure. The owner of any telecommunications tower shall provide to the City
of Onalaska, prior to the issuance of the Conditional Use Permit, a performance bond in an
amount based on a written estimate of a qualified remover of said types of structures or
Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000) whichever is less, to guarantee that the
telecommunications tower will be removed when no longer in operation. The City of Onalaska
will be named as obligee in the bond and must approve the bonding company. The City may
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 102
require an increase in the bond amount after five (5) year intervals to reflect increases in the
Consumer Price Index. The provider shall supply any increased bond within a reasonably
time, not exceeding sixty (60) days from the City’s request. A permittee may substitute a
letter of credit in the amount set forth above or in the alterative, a permittee with several sites
in the City may submit a master bond to cover all of said sites. A master bond or a letter of
credit, may in the City’s discretion, be in an amount sufficient to secure removal from one site
if the master bond or letter of credit provides for replenishing any amount use as the master
bond or letter of credit covers any other site in the City.
h. Structural Design and Environmental Standards.
i. Mobile Service Support Structure, Antenna and Facilities Requirements. All mobile
service facilities and mobile service support structures except exempt facilities as defined
in subsection (d) shall be designed to reduce the negative impact on the surrounding
environment by implementing the measures set forth below.
1. Mobile services support structures shall be construed of metal or other nonflammable
material, unless specifically permitted by the City to be otherwise.
2. Satellite dish and parabolic antennas shall be situated as close to the ground as
possible to reduce visual impact without compromising their functions.
3. Equipment compounds shall be constructed of non-reflective materials (visible
exterior surfaces only). Equipment compounds shall be designed to blend with
existing architecture in the area or shall be screened from sight by mature
landscaping, and shall be located or designed to minimize their visibility.
4. Mobile services facilities, support structures and antennas shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the State of Wisconsin Uniform Building Code,
National Electrical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, and
Uniform Fire Code, City of Onalaska Building Code, Electronic Industries Association
(EIA), American National Steel Institute Standards (ANSI), and American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) in effect at their time of manufacture. Mobile service
facilities and support structures shall not interfere with or obstruct existing or
proposed public safety, fire protection or Supervisory Controlled Automatic Data
Acquisition (SCADA) operation telecommunication facilities. Any actual interference
and/or obstruction shall be corrected by the applicant at no cost to the City.
ii. Site Development. A parcel intended for the location of new mobile service facilities,
mobile service support structures, and equipment compounds shall be located so as to
permit expansion for mobile service facilities to serve all potential collocators.
iii. Vegetation Protection and Facility Screening.
1. All mobile service facilities shall be installed in a manner as to minimize disturbance
to existing native vegetation and shall include suitable mature landscaping to screen
the facility, when required by the Plan Commission or Zoning Administrator. All
impacted vegetation (trees, shrubs, etc.) shall be replaced on site on a one-for-one
basis. For purposes of this section “mature landscaping” shall mean trees, shrubs or
other vegetation of a minimum initial height of five (5) feet that will provide the
appropriate level of visual screening immediately upon installation.
2. Upon project completion, the owner(s)/operator(s) of the facility shall be responsible
for maintenance and replacement of all required landscaping as long as a
telecommunication facility is maintained on the site.
iv. Fire Prevention. All mobile services facilities shall be designed and operated in
accordance with all applicable codes regarding fire protection.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 103
v. Noise and Traffic. All mobile service facilities shall be constructed and operated in such
a manner as to minimize the amount of disruption caused to nearby properties. To that
end the following measures shall be implemented for all mobile services facilities.
1. Noise producing construction activities shall take place only on weekdays (Monday
through Saturday, non-holidays) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
except in times of emergency repair, and
2. Backup generators, if present, shall be operated only during power outages and for
testing and maintenance purposes.
vi. Separation Requirements. Mobile service support structures shall be separated by a
minimum of two thousand six hundred and forty (2,640) feet, except that:
1. Two (2) mobile service support structures may be permitted to be located within one
hundred (100) feet of each other subject to approval by the City of Onalaska Plan
Commission.
2. Camouflaged mobile service support structures are exempt from the separation
requirement listed above.
vii. Abandonment. Any antenna, mobile service facility or mobile services support structure
that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered
abandoned. Upon application, the City of Onalaska Zoning Administrator may extend the
time limit to abandon one (1) time for an additional six (6) month period. Such extension
shall be based on the finding that the owner or permit holder is actively seeking tenants
for the site. After the expiration of the time periods established above, the following shall
apply:
1. The owner of such antenna, mobile service facility or mobile services support
structure shall remove said antenna, mobile service facility or mobile service support
structure, including all supporting equipment, building(s) and foundations to the depth
as otherwise herein required within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the
Zoning Administrator notifying the owner of such abandonment. If removal to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator does not occur within said ninety (90) days,
the City of Onalaska Zoning Administrator may order removal utilizing the established
bond as provided above and salvage said antenna, mobile services facility or mobile
service support structure, including all supporting equipment and building(s). If there
are two or more users of a single mobile services support structure, this provision
shall not become effective until all operations of the mobile service support structure
cease. If a bond has not been previously established or is not current, the City may
perform the work and assess the owner or permit holder of the mobile services
support structure.
2. The recipient of a conditional use permit allowing a mobile service support structure
and facility under this section, or the current owner or operator, shall notify the Zoning
Administrator within forty-five (45) days of the date when the mobile services facility
is no longer in operation.
viii. Penalty Provisions. Any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity that fails to
comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeiture as set
forth in Title 1 of the City Code, plus the applicable surcharges, assessments and costs
for each violation and/or revocation of the conditional use permit. Each day a violation
exists or continues constitutes a separate offense under this ordinance.
2. Radio Broadcast Services and Other Telecommunication Facilities and Structures.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate by conditional use permit the siting and
construction of any new Radio Broadcast Services facilities or other non-mobile service
telecommunication facilities. Radio Broadcast Services Facilities are defined as facilities for
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 104
the regular provision of a commercial or noncommercial service involving the transmission,
emission or reception of radio waves for the transmission of sound or images in which the
transmissions are intended for direct reception by the general public including antennas and
antenna support structures. Other Tower/Telecommunication Structures shall include any
ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure or combination thereof taller than fifteen (15)
feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose
of mounting an antenna, meteorological device or similar apparatus above grade.
b. Application.
i. Conditional Use Permit Required. A conditional use permit is required for:
1. The modification of a pre-existing facility or structure if the modification is inconsistent
with the original zoning permit,
2. The construction of any new radio broadcast service facility or structure or other
telecommunication facility or structure.
ii. Application. The Zoning Administrator will provide a Conditional Use Permit application
upon request. An applicant’s form will be processed upon completion and submittal of the
application to the Zoning Administrator.
1. A Radio Broadcast Service Facility or Other Telecommunication Structure is subject
to the same requirements for the issuance of building and electrical permits to which
any other type of commercial development or land use development is subject. If an
applicant submits to the Zoning Administrator an application for a Conditional Use
Permit to engage in an activity described in this ordinance, which contains all of the
information required under this ordinance, the Plan Commission shall consider the
application complete. If any of the required information is not in the application, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing within five (5) days of
receiving the application, that the application is not complete. The written notification
shall specify in detail the required information that was incomplete. An applicant may
resubmit an application as often as necessary until it is complete.
iii. Review. Within forty-five (45) days of its receipt of a complete application, the Plan
Commission shall complete all of the following or the applicant may consider the
application complete, except that the applicant and City may agree in writing to an
extension of the forty-five (45) day period.
1. Make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the application.
2. Notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision.
3. If the application is approved, issue the applicant the relevant conditional use permit.
4. If the decision is to disapprove the application, include with the written notification
substantial evidence which supports the decision.
5. The Plan Commission shall review the application to determine if it complies with all
applicable aspects of the City’s zoning ordinances, subject to the limitations in Sec.
66.0404, Wis. Stats.
c. Requirements. All of the conditions set forth above for a Class 2 Collocation shall remain for
a Radio Broadcast Service Structure or Facility and Other Telecommunication Structures.
Additionally, the following additional requirements shall be required in the interest of public
safety:
i. Lighting. Towers and antennas shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not
display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other federal or state authority for a particular tower. When incorporated
into the approved design of the tower or antenna, light figures used to illuminate ball
fields, parking lots or similar areas may be allowed with approval from the Plan
Commission.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.02.68
Page 105
ii. Signs and Advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or
equipment information signs is prohibited.
iii. Antennas Mounted on Roofs, Walls and Existing Towers. The placement of
telecommunication antennas on roofs, walls and existing towers may be approved by the
Plan Commission provided the antennas meet the requirements of this Code, after
submittal for a Conditional Use Permit and a report prepared by a qualified engineer
indicating the existing structure or tower’s suitability to accept the antenna, and the
proposed method of affixing the antenna to the structure. Complete details of all fixtures
and couplings and the precise point of attachment shall be indicated.
iv. Interference with Public Safety Telecommunications. No new or existing
telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. All
applications for new service shall be accompanied by an intermodulation study, which
provides a technical evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all
potential interference problems.
d. Abandonment. Any antenna, radio broadcast or telecommunication support structure that is
not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned.
Upon application, the City of Onalaska Zoning Administrator may extend the time limit to
abandon once for an additional six (6) month period as requested by the property owner.
Such extension shall be based on the finding that the owner or permit holder is actively
seeking tenants for the site. After the expiration of the time periods established above, the
following shall apply:
i. The owner of such antenna, radio broadcast or telecommunication facility or radio
broadcast or telecommunication support structure shall remove said antenna, facility or
service support structure, including all supporting equipment, building(s) and foundations
to the depth as otherwise herein required within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from
the Zoning Administrator notifying the owner of such abandonment. If removal to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator does not occur within said ninety (90) days, the
City of Onalaska Zoning Administrator may order removal utilizing the established bond
as provided above and salvage said antenna, facility or support structure, including all
supporting equipment and building(s). If there are two or more users of a single services
support structure, this provision shall not become effective until all operations of the
support structure cease. If a bond has not been previously established or is not current,
the City may perform the work and assess the owner or permit holder of the mobile
services support structure.
ii. The recipient of a Conditional Use Permit allowing a mobile service support structure and
facility under this section, or the current owner or operator, shall notify the Zoning
Administrator within forty-five (45) days of the date when the mobile services facility is no
longer in operation.
e. Penalty Provisions. Any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity that fails to
comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeiture as set
forth in Title 1 of the City Code and/or revocation of the conditional use permit, plus the
applicable surcharges, assessments and costs for each violation. Each day a violation exists
or continues constitutes a separate offense under this ordinance.
U. Temporary Tent, Canopy, or Similar Membrane Material Structure.
1. For all properties zoned R-1 and R-2 Districts, such structure(s), including, but not limited to tents,
canopies, or similar membrane-material structures, that are designed in a manner for temporary
use, are allowed to be installed for up to one hundred and eighty (180) days in a calendar year
without a building permit.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.12
Page 106
2. All such structures shall conform to the setbacks set forth for accessory structures.
3. All such structures shall conform to the structure strength (wind load, snow load, etc.) and fire
safety standards found in the International Residential Code as adopted by Wisconsin State
Statutes.
Chapter 03 General Development Standards
Performance Standards
A. Applicability. No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to
create any dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard,
noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution, heat, cold, dampness, electrical or
other substance, condition or element in such a manner or in such amount as to adversely affect the
surrounding area or adjoining premises (referred to herein as "dangerous or objectionable elements").
For proposed new uses where there is a question about whether there will be compliance with the
performance standards, the applicant shall submit a plan of the proposed construction or
development, including a description of the proposed machinery, processes, products and
specifications for the mechanisms and techniques to be used in restricting the emission of dangerous
and objectionable elements.
13.03.12 General Performance Standards
A. Traffic Visibility. (See Figure 13.03.12-1)
1. No obstructions such as structures, parking or vegetation shall be permitted in any district
between the heights of two and one-half (2½) feet and ten (10) feet above the plane through the
mean curb grades within a triangular space at the street corner of a corner lot or at the
intersection of a public alley with a street. Such space shall be determined by measuring twenty
(20) feet each way from the corner lot at the street intersection on each street lot line, or, in the
case of an alley, by measuring ten (10) feet along the street line and ten (10) feet along the alley
lot line and forming a triangle by striking an imaginary line between said points of measurement.
Figure 13.03.12-1 Traffic Visibility
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.12
Page 107
B. Noise.
1. All operations and activities within the City must conform to the City’s Noise Ordinance as set
forth in Title 11.
C. Vibration.
1. No operation or activity shall transmit any physical vibration that is above the vibration perception
threshold of an individual at or beyond the property line of the source. Vibration perception
threshold means the minimum ground or structure borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a
normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation
by touch or visual observation of moving objects.
2. Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user and vibrations from temporary
construction or maintenance activities shall be exempt from the above standard.
D. External Lighting.
1. External lighting installations shall not be permitted closer than three (3) feet to an abutting parcel
line and be adequately shielded and hooded so that glare or illumination does not exceed one (1)
foot-candle measured at the lot line.
2. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residential
properties and public streets in such a way as not to create a nuisance. However, in no case shall
such lighting exceed one (1) foot-candles measured at the lot line.
3. Where not specifically otherwise regulated, light poles shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height.
4. No operation or activity shall produce any intense glare or lighting with the source directly visible
beyond the boundary of an Industrial or Commercial District.
E. Odor.
1. No operation or activity shall emit any substance or combination of substances in such quantities
that create an objectionable odor as defined in Chapter NR 429.03 Wis. Adm. Code as may be
amended.
F. Particulate Emissions.
1. No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direct or portable source any
matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in Chapter NR 415 Wis.
Adm. Code as may be amended.
G. Visible Emissions.
1. No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direct or portable source any
matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in Chapter NR 431 Wis.
Adm. Code as may be amended.
H. Hazardous Pollutants.
1. No operation or activity shall emit any hazardous substances in such a quantity, concentration or
duration as to be injurious to human health or property, and all emissions of hazardous
substances shall not exceed the limitations established in Chapter NR 445 Wis. Adm. Code as
may be amended.
I. Fire and Explosion Hazard.
1. All activities involving and all storage of flammable and explosive materials shall be provided at
any point with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate
firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standards in the industry. Burning of
waste materials in open fire shall be prohibited. The relevant provisions of state and local laws
and regulations shall also apply.
J. Liquid or Solid Wastes.
1. No discharge at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system or stream or into
the ground, except in accord with standards approved by the Department of Health of the state or
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.21
Page 108
standards equivalent to those approved by such Department for similar uses of any materials of
such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply or otherwise cause the
emission of dangerous or offensive elements.
K. Drainage Designs.
1. Runoff water from parking lots, roofs and driveways shall not be allowed to cross sidewalks or to
directly run onto private property that is not a part of the site unless easements have been
obtained. Surface runoff waters shall be directed into municipal facilities; where municipal
facilities are not available, a drywell or drainage area owned or controlled by the owner or
developer shall be provided.
Parking and Circulation
13.03.21 Parking Requirements
A. A Site Plan Permit application, including layout of parking spaces and water drainage, of any parking
area for more than five (5) vehicles shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for approval prior
to commencement of construction. Requests for said parking lots shall be accompanied with detailed
plans on landscaping, parking layout, drainage provisions and driveway locations.
B. In all districts, there shall be provided at the time any use or building is erected, enlarged, extended,
or increased off-street parking stalls for all vehicles in accordance with the following:
1. Access. Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each parking space.
2. Minimum Standards.
a. The size of each parking space shall be not less than one hundred and sixty-two (162)
square feet exclusive of the space required for ingress and egress, each stall being a
minimum of nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet in depth; however, handicap parking
stalls shall meet ADA requirements.
b. Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for one (1) way traffic shall be as follows:
eleven (11) feet for thirty degree (30°) parking; and twenty (20) feet for ninety degree (90°)
parking.
c. Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for two (2) way traffic shall be twenty-four
(24) feet.
d. No parking area of more than two (2) spaces shall be designed as to require any vehicle to
back into a public street.
e. Tandem parking (one (1) vehicle behind another) layouts are not permitted except for singlefamily
and two-family dwellings.
f. The City may permit compact parking stalls in the D-PUD overlay district, but said stalls shall
not be less than eighty (80) square feet total or eight (8) feet by ten (10) feet.
3. Location.
a. Off-street parking shall be on the same lot as the principal use except where off-lot parking is
provided by an agreement with a neighboring owner.
b. Off-street parking is permitted in all yards of residential districts, but shall not be closer than
three (3) feet to any lot line. Off-street parking in the R-1, R-2 and RMMH Districts shall only
be permitted in the driveway or on an approved hard surface, including concrete, asphalt or
gravel.
c. Off-street parking is permitted in all yards of R-3, R-4 and non-residential districts shall not be
closer than five (5) feet to a non-residential side lot line, right-of-way line or rear lot line and
shall be permitted in driveways or on approved hard surfaces, including concrete or asphalt.
4. Surfacing. All off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with a dustless all weather material
capable of carrying a wheel load of four thousand (4,000) pounds, which is normally two (2)
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.21
Page 109
inches of bituminous concrete on a four (4) inch base or five (5) inches of concrete will meet this
requirement. Any parking area for more than five (5) vehicles shall have the aisles and spaces
clearly marked for handicapped and customer/employee parking. Surfacing shall be completed
before an Occupancy Permit is issued, except that between November 1st and April 1st the
property owner and City may enter into an agreement that required surfacing be completed no
later than June 1st.
5. Landscaping. All plans for such proposed parking areas, at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator, shall include a topographic survey or grading plan, which shows existing and
proposed grades and location of improvements. All off-street parking areas are subject to
landscaping standards in Subsection 13.03.31E.
6. Curbs. Curbs or barriers shall be installed a minimum of four (4) feet from a property line so as to
prevent the parked vehicles from extending over any lot lines.
7. Number of Spaces. The minimum number of off-parking spaces required are shown in the
following table:
Table 13.03.21-1 Off-Street Parking Spaces Required
Use Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces Required
Residential
Dwelling, single-family 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, manufactured or mobile home 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, two-family 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, zero lot line 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, attached townhouses or row
houses
1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, apartment mixed use 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, live/work 1 space per dwelling unit
Dwelling, apartment 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, senior independent living 0.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Group home for adults 1 space per every 5 beds plus 1 space per every
3 employees
Group home for foster children 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Senior care facility 1 space per every 5 beds plus 1 space per every
3 employees
Hotel or motel 1 space for each guest room, plus 1 space per
every 3 employees
Public, Social, Healthcare
Child care center, licensed group 1 space per employee on the maximum work
shift, plus 1 space per every 10 children
Clinic, including medical, dental, or
therapeutic
1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Club, lodge, or meeting place of a noncommercial
nature
1 space per every 4 persons of the maximum
building occupancy
Correctional facility 1 space per employee on maximum work shift,
plus 1 space per every 25 inmates
Day care center, adult 1 space per employee on the maximum work
shift, plus 1 space per every 5 patients
Diagnostic or medical, research or scientific
laboratory
1 space per 300 square feet of usable floor area
Funeral home, mortuary 1 space per 50 square feet of floor area in parlors
or assembly rooms
Hospital 1 space per every 5 beds plus 1 space per every
3 employees
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.21
Page 110
Inpatient nursing, supervision, and other
rehabilitative services
1 space per every 5 beds plus 1 space per every
3 employees
Municipal social, cultural, or recreational
facility
1 space per every 4 persons of the maximum
building occupancy
Municipal, county, state or federal
administrative or services building
1 space per 300 square feet of usable floor area
Outpatient health care center 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Place of worship 1 space per every 5 seats
School, college/university/trade/business 1 space per employee, plus 5 spaces per classroom
School, elementary 1 space per employee
School, secondary 1 space per employee, plus 5 spaces per classroom
Social assistance, welfare, or charitable
services
1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Commercial
Animal/veterinary clinic or hospital 1 space per each examination and treatment room,
plus 1 space per employee on the maximum work
shift
Animal boarding, shelter or daycare center 1 space per 600 square feet of gross floor area
Automobile fueling, washing and service
station
1 space per 2 gas pumps
Automobile repair and service, minor 2 spaces per service bay, plus 1 per each employee
Automobile repair and service, major 2 spaces per service bay, plus 1 per each employee
Automobile sales, leasing and service 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for
indoor display area
Bar or drinking place, brewpub 1 space per 75 square feet of gross floor area
Office building/Professional service/Business
incubator/ Financial institutions & banks
and Payday etc.
1.5 spaces per every 2 employees or 1 space per
300 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater
Restaurant 1 space per 4 seats provided for patron use
Retail with residential above street level 1 space per 250 square feet of retail gross floor
area, plus 1 space per residential unit
Retail with office above street level 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area, plus
1.5 spaces per every 2 employees or 1 space per
300 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater
Retail store, low intensity 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Retail store, medium intensity 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Retail store, high intensity 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Contractor/Trade supply store 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Shopping center, community 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Shopping center, regional 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Standalone store 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Storage facility, personal 1 space per 1,000 square feet of storage space
Studio or gallery 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Industrial
Brewery, winery or distillery 1.5 spaces per every 2 employees on the
maximum work shift
Construction contractor yard 1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area of
office, sales, or display area, plus 1 space per
5,000 square feet of storage area
Makerspace 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Manufacturing, heavy 1.5 space per every 2 employees on the
maximum work shift
Manufacturing, light 1.5 spaces per every 2 employees on the
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.21
Page 111
maximum work shift
Outside storage and manufacturing area 1.5 spaces per every 2 employees on the
maximum work shift
Printing and publishing, large scale 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Scrap or salvage storage yard 1 space per employee of the maximum work shift,
plus 3 visitor spaces
Storage and sale of machinery and equipment 1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area
for office, sales, and indoor display/storage area,
plus 1 space per 2,000 square feet for outdoor
display/storage area
Warehouse or distribution facility 1.5 spaces per 2 employees on the maximum
work shift
Wholesale trade establishment 1 space per every 2 employees
Arts, Entertainment, Recreation
Active park or playground None required
Adult oriented entertainment business 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Indoor recreational facility, commercial or
public
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Outdoor recreational facility, commercial 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Outdoor recreational facility, public 1 space per every 4 persons of the maximum
building occupancy
Theater, dance or music performance facility 1 space per every 5 seats or spaces equal to
20% of capacity in persons, whichever is greater
Wellness, fitness & exercise facility 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Natural Resources, Agriculture
Arboretum 1 space per 5,000 square feet of lot area
Commercial greenhouse or nursery 1 space per 250 square feet of retail gross floor
area, plus 1 space per 2,000 square feet of
outdoor display area
Transportation
Ambulance or medical carrier service 1 space per every 2 employees
Freight rail yard 1 space per every 2 employees
Freight terminal or transshipment facility 1 space per every 2 employees
Public passenger transportation terminal (air,
bus or rail)
1 space per 200 square feet of waiting area
Utilities
Essential public services 1 space per employee of maximum work shift
Municipal earth or sanitary landfill operation 1 space per every 2 employees
Waste collection, storage or processing (sewer,
solid, hazardous)
1 space per 500 square feet gross floor area
8. Uses Not Listed. In the case of structures or uses not mentioned, the provision for a use which is
similar, as determined by the Zoning Administrator or their designee, shall apply. Floor space or
area shall mean the gross floor area inside the exterior walls, where floor space is indicated
above as a basis for determining the amount of off-street parking spaces required.
9. Combined Uses. Combinations of any of the above uses shall provide the total of the number of
spaces required for each individual use.
10. Shared Parking. Two (2) or more uses may provide required off-street parking spaces in a
common parking facility less than the sum of the spaces required for each use individually,
provided such uses are not operated during the same hours. The following conditions must be
met for any joint use:
a. The proposed joint parking space is within five hundred (500) feet of the use it will serve.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.31
Page 112
b. The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of
the two (2) buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed.
c. A properly drawn legal instrument approved by the Common Council, executed by the parties
concerned, for joint use of off-street parking facilities shall be filed with the City Clerk. Said
instrument may be a three (3) party agreement, including the City and all private parties
involved. Such instrument shall first be approved by the City Attorney.
11. Handicapped Parking Requirements. In addition to any other requirements relating to parking
spaces contained in these Ordinances, handicapped parking must conform to ADA and Wis.
Adm. Code requirements.
12. Changes in Buildings or Use. Whenever a building or use is changed, structurally altered or
enlarged to create a need for an increase of twenty-five percent (25%) or more in the number of
existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or
change. Whenever a building or use is enlarged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more in the
floor area, said building or use shall then comply with the parking requirements set forth in the
district in which it is located.
13. Off-Lot Parking. Except in the D-PUD Overlay District, required off-street parking spaces shall
be located on the same lot with the principal use, or when this requirement cannot be met, such
parking spaces may be located off the lot provided the parking spaces are located in the same
district and not over five hundred (500) feet from the principal use. In cases where off-street
parking facilities are permitted on land other than the same lot as the principal use, such facilities
shall be in the same possession as the lot occupied by the use to which the parking facilities are
necessary or a written agreement between property owners is on file with the City. Every change
of use or property ownership shall require a new written agreement to be filed with the City and
recorded in the office of the La Crosse County Register of Deeds.
a. Off-lot parking spaces for residential uses shall be within two hundred (200) feet of the
principal entrance or the entrance for the individual occupants for whom the spaces are
reserved while the farthest portions of a parking lot for all other uses shall be within five
hundred (500) feet of the entrance of the establishment.
b. Accessory parking may be located in residential districts provided that said lots or property
are immediately adjacent to a business or industrial zoning district.
c. All off-street parking lots shall be no closer than five (5) feet to a non-residential side lot line,
right-of-way line, or rear lot line.
14. Signs. Signs located in parking areas necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement shall
be permitted in addition to others as regulated by Title 14 Sign Ordinance.
15. Lighting. Lighting to illuminate off-street parking areas shall follow the provisions of Section
13.03.12D.
16. Reduction of Parking Areas. Off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced in number unless
said number exceeds the requirement set forth herein.
Landscaping
13.03.31 General
A. All open areas of a lot not used for buildings, parking, circulations, patios or storage must be
landscaped with a combination of canopy trees, ornamental trees, evergreen trees, shrubs, flowers,
sod, ground cover, and other site design features to ensure soil stabilization. This requirement shall
not apply to undisturbed areas retained in a natural state.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.31
Page 113
B. Landscape plans shall be submitted for all site and subdivision related applications where exterior
construction and development activity will occur, except for the construction of an individual singlefamily
or two-family dwelling.
C. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect for planned unit
developments or development where there is greater than one (1) acre of site disturbance.
D. The following minimum number of plant materials shall be provided:
1. All residential one and two-family developments shall require two (2) canopy trees per dwelling
unit installed in the City right-of-way.
2. All multi-family, mixed-use, and non-residential uses shall provide:
a. One (1) canopy or evergreen tree per 25 linear feet of street frontage.
b. All structures must have foundation plantings consisting of shrubs, perennials, and native
grasses.
c. All additions, expansions, or additional structures shall require an additional two (2) shrubs
per 1,000 square feet of new construction.
E. Off-Street Parking Area Landscaping. (See Figure 13.03.31-1)
1. All off-street parking areas containing more than fifty (50) stalls or two (2) or more drive aisles
must include landscaped, interior parking lot islands as follows:
a. Islands are required at the end of each row of cars, at vehicle circulation aisles or driveways,
or every fifteen (15) stalls, whichever is less.
b. Islands shall be provided to separate pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
c. Islands shall contain trees, shrubs, perennials, and native grasses.
d. Islands shall be bounded by a raised concrete curb or approved equivalent and shall contain
mulch to retain soil moisture, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Department.
e. Turf grass is permitted within landscaped areas located around the periphery of a parking lot.
2. All open, off-street parking areas shall have a minimum of one (1) square foot of landscaping per
ten (10) square feet of parking using trees, shrubs, or ground cover plants. The preservation of
existing trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation in the parking area may be included in the
calculation of the required minimum landscape area.
Figure 13.03.31-1 Off-Street Parking Area Landscaping
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.41
Page 114
F. All plant materials must:
1. Meet the minimum standards set by the American National Standards Institute in ANSI Z60.1
American Standard for Nursery Stock.
2. Landscape species shall be indigenous or proven adaptable to the climate, but shall not be
invasive species.
3. Landscape materials shall be tolerant of specific site conditions, including but not limited to heat,
drought, and salt.
4. Existing healthy plant material may be utilized to satisfy landscaping requirements, provided it
meets the minimum plant size specified in this Division.
G. Not more than thirty percent (30%) of the required number of trees shall be of the same species.
H. Trees and shrubs can be clustered and do not need to be evenly spaced. It is preferable that trees be
located between the sidewalk and the curb, within the landscaped area of a boulevard or in tree wells
installed in pavement or concrete. If placement of street trees within the right-of-way will interfere with
utility lines or if the boulevard is less than five (5) feet, trees may be planted within the front yard
setback adjacent to the sidewalk.
I. The minimum size of plantings shall be as follows:
1. Canopy trees: two and a half (2.5)-inch caliper;
2. Ornamental trees: one and a half (1.5)-inch caliper;
3. Evergreen trees: six (6)-foot height; and
4. Deciduous or evergreen shrubs: five (5) gallon pot.
J. Mulch shall consist of shredded bark, chipped wood, or stone installed at a minimum depth of two (2)
inches. If stone is used it shall be spread over a permeable weed barrier fabric. All required plant
materials shall be planted prior to issuing a Certificate of Occupancy. In the event that the project is
completed during a time of year when planting is impractical, a security meeting the requirements of
and in the amount of the remaining improvements will be required. In such case that a performance
guarantee is required, all landscaping shall be completed within one (1) year after the Certificate of
Occupancy has been issued.
K. The continued maintenance of all required landscaping materials in a live and healthy state is a
required responsibility of the owner and tenant of the property. Plantings which have died shall be
promptly replaced in accordance with the landscape plan approved for the site. This requirement shall
run with the land and be binding upon all future property owners. Failure to comply with this
maintenance requirement shall be a violation of this Section.
L. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for all projects requiring approval of a landscape plan, the
developer, contractor, or property owner shall deposit a security with the City to guarantee
compliance with and to indemnify the City for any expenses incurred in enforcing the requirements of
this Section. The landscaping security for all uses, which does not include one or two family
dwellings, shall be in a form approved by the Planning Department and shall be equal to one hundred
and twenty-five percent (125%) of the estimated cost necessary to furnish and plant the required
landscaping and any ancillary screening improvements such as fencing. The estimated cost shall be
subject to approval by the Planning Department.
Fences and Hedges
13.03.41 General
A. For the purpose of this Section, the term “fence” shall include any enclosed barrier consisting of
wood, vinyl, composite, stone or metal intended to prevent ingress or egress.
B. No fence shall be constructed of unsightly or dangerous materials which would constitute a nuisance.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.41
Page 115
C. Property owners shall locate fences so that each side of the fence may be properly maintained by the
owner of the fence while on said owner’s property.
D. Fence shall be limited to the following heights in the street, rear, and side year as designated in
Figure 13.03.41-1:
1. Residential Zoning Districts.
a. Fences shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet in rear and side yards.
b. Fences shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet in that portion of the street yard located in
front of the home. For purposes of corner lots, the following shall apply:
i. No fences are allowed in the vision triangle;
ii. That portion of the yard facing the non-addressed street and beginning at the rear most
corner of the residence is not considered a street yard but rather shall be considered a
side yard for fencing purposes. The side yard fence may not exceed a height of six (6)
feet.
Figure 13.03.41-1 Yard Designation
2. Non-Residential Zoning Districts.
a. Fence heights for street yard(s) shall be determined through Site Plan review and/or review
by the Planning Department.
b. Fence heights for rear and side yards in non-residential zoning districts may not exceed eight
(8) feet in height.
3. Public Zoning Districts.
a. Fence heights for street yard(s) shall be determined through Site Plan review and/or review
by the Planning Department.
b. Fences may not exceed six (6) feet in height in the rear or side yard, except as needed for
public safety purposes, such as a public outdoor swimming pool or tennis courts.
4. Fence heights may be measured from a point up to three (3) inches above ground elevation to
the top of fence.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.42
Page 116
5. In the event that a fence is placed on top of a retaining wall or similar structure and shares a
vertical support system, the height of the fence shall include the height of both structures. If the
fence and the retaining wall have independent vertical support structures, the fence and retaining
wall heights may be measured separately.
E. Fences must meet the following setbacks:
1. Fences in residential districts may be placed up to the lot line in rear and side yards.
2. Fences in residential districts shall not be closer than three (3) feet to any public right-of-way.
3. Fences in all non-residential zoning districts adjacent to public rights-of-way shall be set back a
minimum of three (3) feet or comply with the specified zoning district street yard setback;
whichever is less. Fences may be placed up to the lot line in rear and side yards.
13.03.42 Prohibited Fences.
A. No fence shall be constructed which is in a dangerous condition, or which conducts electricity or is
designed to electrically shock or which uses barbed wire, provided, however, that barbed wire may be
used in industrially zoned areas if the devices securing the barbed wire to the fence are ten (10) feet
above the ground or height and project toward the fenced property and away from any public area.
13.03.43 Fences to be Repaired.
A. All fences shall be maintained and kept safe and in a state of good repair, and the finished side or
decorative side of a fence shall face adjoining property.
13.03.44 Temporary Fences.
A. Fences erected for the protection of planting or to warn of construction hazard, or for similar
purposes, shall be clearly visible or marked with colored streamers or other such warning devices at
four (4) foot intervals. Such fences shall comply with the setback requirements set forth in this
Division. Temporary fences shall not be erected for more than forty-five (45) days.
13.03.45 Nonconforming Fences.
A. Any fence existing on the effective date of this Code of Ordinances and not in conformance with this
Division may be maintained, but no alteration, modification or improvement of said fence shall occur,
unless installed in conformance with this Division.
Screens and Buffers
13.03.51 General
A. Screening and buffering shall be used to provide visual and noise separation of more intensive uses
from less intensive uses.
B. Screening shall be provided alongside and rear property boundaries of business, mixed-use or
industrial districts abutting residential uses. Screening for new construction shall consist of the
following:
1. The buffer area abutting the residential use must meet the width shown in Table 13.03.51-1
below:
Table 13.03.51-1 Buffer Requirements
Zoning District of Subject Property Buffer Width
R-3 10 feet
R-4 10 feet
Mixed Use 10 feet
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.52
Page 117
Business 15 feet
Public 15 feet
Industrial 20 feet
2. The buffer area must contain a solid wall, solid commercial-grade fence, or hedge with yearround
foliage, between six (6) and eight (8) feet in height. Screening within the front yard or
corner side yard is limited to four (4) feet in height. Height of screening shall be measured from
the natural or approved grade.
3. If the buffer area contains a hedge, the hedge shall be landscaped with at least two staggered
rows of evergreen trees with trees in each row spaced at a maximum of twelve (12) feet.
4. The buffer area may be interrupted for necessary pedestrian or vehicular access.
5. Screen plantings shall be permanently maintained by the owner of the property, and any plant
materials which do not live shall be replaced within six (6) months.
13.03.52 Site Elements to be Screened
A. The following site elements shall be screened in compatibility with the design elements, materials,
and colors used elsewhere on the site as follows:
1. Refuse Disposal Areas. All refuse and recycling containers in all commercial, industrial, multifamily,
or mixed use zoning areas shall be screened on four (4) sides (including a gate for
access) by a solid, commercial-grade fence, wall, or equivalent material that is architecturally
compatible with the principal structure and has a height of between six (6) feet and eight (8) feet.
a. Refuse enclosures shall be subject to the following:
i. A three (3) foot setback is required from any lot line;
ii. Shall include a durable gate system that remains closed when not in use; and
iii. Shall allow for easy access by refuse and recycling contractors.
2. Outdoor Storage Areas. Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from abutting residential uses
with a building wall or solid commercial-grade fence, wall, year-round hedge, or equivalent
material, with a minimum height of six (6) feet and not greater than eight (8) feet. Screening along
district boundaries, where present, may provide all or part of the required screening.
3. Loading Areas. Loading areas shall be screened from abutting residential uses and from street
view to the extent feasible by a building wall or solid commercial-grade wood, vinyl, or equivalent
material fence, with a minimum height of six (6) feet and not greater than eight (8) feet. Screening
along district boundaries, where present, may provide all or part of the required screening.
4. Mechanical Equipment. All rooftop and ground level mechanical equipment and utilities shall be
fully screened from view from any street or residential district, as viewed from six (6) feet above
ground level. Screening may consist of a building wall or fence and/or landscaping as approved
by the Zoning Administrator.
5. Off-Street Parking Areas. Those parking areas for five (5) or more vehicles if adjoining a
residential use shall be screened from such use by a solid wall, fence, evergreen planting of
equivalent visual density or other effective means, built and maintained at a minimum height of
five (5) feet. Where a solidly constructed decorative fence is provided along the interior lot line,
the minimum setback for the parking area shall be five (5) feet from said lot line. Said fence shall
be located a minimum of one (1) foot from the said lot line.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.61
Page 118
Tree Protection and Restoration
13.03.61 Applicability
A. A Tree Preservation Plan is required on all plats, commercial sites, and certified survey maps (CSMs)
over one and a half (1.5) acres in size.
B. If approved by the Planning Department, the following are allowed exemptions to tree protection and
restoration requirements:
1. Trees specifically managed for harvest, planted in rows.
2. Tree removal related to city public improvements projects or repairs.
3. Emergency removal of a tree or trees to protect public health.
C. When a Tree Preservation Plan is required, all trees meeting the following requirements shall be
inventoried and considered specimen trees:
1. All deciduous trees measuring a minimum of twelve (12) inches at tree diameter-at-breast-height.
2. All coniferous trees measuring a minimum of eight (8) inches at tree diameter-at-breast-height.
13.03.62 Process
A. A Tree Preservation Plan shall be prepared and submitted concurrently with land use and subdivision
applications for the project. The Tree Preservation Plan must be approved by City planning staff prior
to grading or construction commencing. The Tree Preservation Plan shall include the following items:
1. The name(s) and address(es) of property owners and developers.
2. Delineation of the buildings, structures, or impervious surfaces situated thereon or contemplated
to be built thereon.
3. Delineation of all areas to be graded and limits of land disturbance.
4. Size, species and location of all specimen trees located within the area to be developed. Where
conditions warrant generalization of the tree inventory due to density, such as a wooded site, the
City will accept a plan where information is collected on randomly selected trees to obtain overall
condition, size, and species characteristics of the area.
5. Location of all specimen trees on all individual lots.
6. Measures to protect specimen trees.
7. Identification of all specimen trees proposed on the plan to be removed within the construction
area.
8. Size, species, and location of all replacement trees to be planted on the property in accordance
with the Tree Replacement Requirements.
9. Signature of person preparing the plan.
B. An on-site tree protection pre-construction review shall be conducted with the erosion control review
to evaluate the proposed design of the project and potential tree protection and mitigation efforts.
C. All sites shall be staked, as depicted in the approved grading plan, before grading is to commence.
Applicable City staff shall inspect the construction site prior to the beginning of the grading. No
encroaching, grading, trenching, filling, compaction, or change in soil chemistry shall occur within the
fenced areas protecting the root zone of the trees to be saved.
D. After grading, construction, and restoration has been completed, a forester, landscape architect, or
landscaping firm retained by the developer, shall:
1. Certify in writing to the City that the Tree Preservation Plan was followed.
2. Certify in writing to the City that the tree protection measures were installed.
3. Indicate on an updated Tree Preservation Plan (As-Developed) which specimen remain and
which have been destroyed or damaged.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.63
Page 119
4. Submit a plan for City Planning Department review and approval identifying where replacement
trees, if required, will be integrated into the approved landscape plan, or another plan, as required
by the City.
13.03.63 Protection Measures
A. Measures proposed to protect specimen trees shall include, but are not limited to:
1. Installation of snow fencing, silt fence, or polyethylene laminate safety netting placed outside the
drip line, or radius determined by the City, of specimen or landmark trees to be preserved.
2. Installation of retaining walls or tree wells to preserve trees.
3. Placement of utilities in common trenches outside of the drip line of specimen or historic trees or
the use of tunneling installation.
4. Use of tree root aeration, fertilization, and/or irrigation systems.
5. Prevention of changes in soil chemistry due to concrete washout and leakage or spillage of toxic
materials such as fuels or paints.
6. Therapeutic pruning of diseased tree branches or damaged and exposed root systems.
7. Installation of root severing protection barriers along critical root zones.
8. Designation of areas for soil and equipment storage to prevent soil compaction in critical root
zones.
13.03.64 Tree Removal
A. Specimen tree removal shall be in accordance with the City-approved Tree Preservation Plan.
B. The Tree Preservation Plan shall remove no more than eighty percent (80%) of the total number of
specimen trees on developable area with less than thirty percent (30%) slope which were existing
prior to submission of the preliminary plat, commercial sites or CSM’s as a result of the following
construction activities:
1. Site grading;
2. Installation of public utilities, including sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, natural gas, electrical
service, and cable TV;
3. Construction of public streets;
4. Construction/grading of drainage ways;
5. Filling of any area; and/or
6. Any other activity within the construction area.
C. The Tree Preservation Plan shall not show clear-cutting of developable areas with a greater than
thirty percent (30%) slope. The area may only be selectively cut based on the recommendations of a
forester.
D. Where practical difficulties or practical hardships result from strict compliance with the provisions of
this paragraph, City Planning Department may permit the removal of up to an additional five percent
(5%) of the specimen trees with approval by the Plan Commission.
E. Where extraordinary topographic circumstances exist or preferred drainage alternatives, as designed
by the developer and approved by the City, warrant the removal of trees above the twenty percent
(20%) tree preservation requirement, the Plan Commission may permit the developer to replant trees
at a rate of one (1) inch tree diameter-at-breast-height for every four (4) inches removed in order to
satisfy the amount reduced. The City reserves the right to require additional preservation based on
the unique characteristics of each site.
13.03.65 Tree Replacement Requirements
A. Developers will be required to replace all specimen trees that were indicated on the Tree
Preservation Plan to be saved, but which were ultimately destroyed or damaged. If a specimen tree
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.03.65
Page 120
dies of natural causes within one (1) year of the completion of grading or land disturbance activity, the
developer shall be required to replace with one (1)-inch tree diameter-at-breast-height for every four
(4) inches removed.
B. These replacement trees shall be in addition to any other landscape requirements of the City and
meet the following requirements:
1. Replacement trees shall be of a species similar to the trees that were lost or removed.
2. When ten (10) or more replacement trees are required, not more than thirty percent (30%) shall
be the same species without approval from the Planning Department.
3. Replacement trees will be required to be planted within one (1) year after the completion of
grading or land disturbance activity.
4. Replacement trees shall consist of stock from a state licensed grower/distributor.
5. Replacement trees shall be considered specimen trees in any future Tree Preservation Plan.
6. Replacement trees shall be planted on the subject property in appropriate soil types and in a
space large enough to accommodate the natural growth of the planted species. If a site cannot
accommodate the required replacement trees, those remaining to be planted shall be located on
other property owned by the developer within the City or on property owned by the City.
C. The developer shall be responsible to restore any replacement tree that is not alive and healthy, one
(1) year after the date that the last replacement tree has been planted.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.04.11
Page 121
Chapter 04 Subdivision Standards
Basic Subdivision Requirements
13.04.11 Compliance
A. No person shall divide any land located within the jurisdictional limits of these regulations which
results in a subdivision, land division or a replat as defined herein; no such subdivision, land division,
minor land division or replat shall be entitled to record; and no street shall be laid out or
improvements made to land without compliance with all requirements of this Title and the following:
1. The provisions of Chapter 236 and Chapter 83, as may be amended.
2. The rules of the Division of Health, Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services,
contained in Wis. Adm. Code Chapter 385, as may be amended, for subdivisions not served by
public sewer.
3. The rules of the Division of Highways, Wisconsin Department of Transportation contained in Wis.
Adm. Code Chapter Trans 233, as may be amended, for subdivisions, which abut a state trunk
highway or connecting street.
4. The rules of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources contained in the Wis. Adm. Code
for Floodplain and Stormwater Management, as may be amended.
5. Comprehensive Plans, park system plans, outdoor recreation plans or similar such plans
prepared by state, regional, county or municipal agencies duly adopted by the Common Council.
6. All applicable local and county regulations, including zoning, sanitary, building and official
mapping Ordinances.
7. All applicable regulations and standards established in the Public Works, Public Utilities, and
Parks and Recreation Titles of this Code of Ordinances.
8. All applicable rules contained in the Wis. Adm. Code not listed in this Subsection.
13.04.12 Jurisdiction
A. Jurisdiction of these regulations shall include all lands within the corporate limits of the City of
Onalaska.
B. Plats and Certified Survey Maps within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the City are
subject to this Chapter pursuant to Sec. 236.45(3), Wis. Stats., as may be amended.
C. The provisions of this Chapter, as they apply to divisions of tracts of land into less than five (5)
parcels, shall not apply to:
1. Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order; or
2. Leases for a term not to exceed ten (10) years, mortgages or easements.
13.04.13 Certified Survey
A. Any division of land other than a subdivision as defined in Section 236.02(12), Wis. Stats., as may be
amended, shall be surveyed and a Certified Survey Map prepared as provided in Sec. 236.34, Wis.
Stats., as may be amended.
Subdivision Design Standards
13.04.21 Land Suitability
A. Suitability. No land shall be subdivided for residential, commercial or industrial use which is held
unsuitable for such use by the Plan Commission for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse
soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health,
safety, or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community. The Plan
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.04.22
Page 122
Commission, in applying the provisions of this Section, shall in writing recite the particular facts upon
which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for residential use and afford the subdivider
an opportunity to present evidence regarding such unsuitability if they so desire. Thereafter the Plan
Commission may affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
B. Existing Flora. The subdivider shall make every effort to protect and retain all existing trees,
shrubbery, vines, and grasses not actually lying in public roadways, drainage ways, building
foundation sites, private driveways, soil absorption waste disposal areas, paths, and trails. Such trees
are to be protected and preserved during construction in accordance with sound conservation
practices, possibly including the preservation of trees by well islands or retaining walls whenever
abutting grades are altered, pursuant to a landscaping plan filed by the subdivider.
13.04.22 Highway Access
A. No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights-of-way of expressways,
nor to any controlled access arterial street without permission of the highway agency that has access
control jurisdiction. No direct public or private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed
rights-of-way of freeways, interstate highways and their interchanges or turning lanes nor to
intersecting or interchanging streets within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of the most remote end of the
taper of the turning lanes (such as exit and entrance ramps).
B. Access barriers, such as curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping or other topographic barriers shall be
erected to prevent unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the above specified streets or
highways.
C. Temporary access to the above rights-of-way may be granted by the City Engineer after review and
recommendation by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be temporary,
revocable and subject to any conditions required and shall be issued for a period not to exceed
twelve (12) months.
13.04.23 Blocks
A. Length; Arrangement. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be appropriate for the
topography and the type of development contemplated, but block length in residential areas shall not
exceed twelve hundred (1,200) feet nor have less than sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of
lots of appropriate depth between street lines. As a general rule, blocks shall not be less than five
hundred (500) feet in length. Blocks shall be so designated as to provide two (2) tiers of lots, unless it
adjoins a railroad, major thoroughfare, river or park where it may have a single tier of lots.
B. Pedestrian Pathways. Pedestrian pathway easements not less than ten (10) feet wide, may be
required by the Plan Commission, through the center of a block more than nine hundred (900) feet
long, where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping
centers, employment, transportation and other community facilities.
13.04.24 Lots
A. Lot Design Standards.
1. Size.
a. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of topography of
the subdivision, the type of sewerage or septic system to be utilized, and for the type of
development contemplated, provided that no lot shall be smaller in area than the minimum lot
size for the appropriate zone as established by this Title.
b. Lot dimensions, shape and size shall provide for conformance to the requirements of this
Title for the permitted land use(s) without the need for the granting of variances by the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.04.24
Page 123
2. Commercial Lots. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial
purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off street service and parking facilities required by
the type of use and development contemplated, as required by this Title.
3. Access to Public Streets. Every lot shall front or abut on a public street in a manner that meets
the standards specified in Section 13.02.24.
4. Side Lots. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to or radial to abutting street lines.
Lot lines shall follow City boundary lines.
5. Double and Reversed Frontage Lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be
avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
6. Natural Features. In the subdividing of any land, regard shall be shown for all natural features,
such as tree growth, water courses, historic spots or similar conditions which, if preserved, will
add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
7. Land Remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger
tract must be added to adjacent lots.
8. Large Lots. In case a tract is divided and results in parcels of more than twice the minimum lot
size provided for by this Title for the zoning district in which the land is located, such parcels shall
be so arranged to permit redividing into parcels in accordance with this Chapter and with this
Title.
9. Trunk Highway Proximity.
a. All lots adjacent to state trunk and federal highways shall be platted with additional depth
necessary to provide for a building setback line not less than fifty (50) feet from the nearest
right of way line or one hundred ten (110) feet from the centerline, whichever is more
restrictive (Ref. Wis. Adm. Code Trans 233). The subdivider may appeal this requirement to
the City Engineer. Upon written request of the City Engineer; the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation is hereby authorized to then determine building setback requirements equal to
or less than those required above in all land divisions (including certified surveys) adjacent to
state and federal highways in accordance with the authority granted in the Wis. Adm. Code.
The required building setback line and additional lot depth shall be platted so as to
accommodate such required building setbacks.
b. When lots within the proposed subdivision back upon the right-of-way of an existing or
proposed limited access highway or a railroad, a planting strip of at least thirty (30) feet in
depth shall be provided adjacent to the highway or railroad within the aforementioned fifty
(50) foot building setback. This strip shall be part of the platted lots but shall have the
following restriction stated on the face of the plat: “This strip reserved for the planting of trees
and shrubs, the building of structures her on prohibited.”
10. Easement Allowance. Lots containing pedestrian or drainage easements may be platted to
include additional width in allowance for the easement.
11. In order to protect the property owner from possible damage due to change in the existing grade
of adjoining lands and to aid in preserving and protecting the natural beauty and character of the
landscape, no change in the existing topography of any land shall be made which would result in
increasing any portion of the slope to a ratio greater than one and one half (1 1/2) horizontal to
one (1) vertical, within a distance of twenty (20) feet from the property line, except with the written
consent of the owner of the abutting property and with the approval of the Plan Commission, or
which would alter the existing drainage or topography in any way as to adversely affect the
adjoining property. In no case shall any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the
material involved, and all slopes shall be protected against erosion.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.04.25
Page 124
13.04.25 Partition Fences
1. When the land included in a subdivision plat or certified map abuts upon or is adjacent to land used
for farming or grazing purposes, the subdivider shall erect, keep, and maintain partition fences,
satisfying the requirements of the Wis. Stats. for a legal and sufficient fence, between such land and
the adjacent land. A covenant binding the developer, its grantees, heirs, successors, and assigns to
erect and maintain such fences, without cost to the adjoining property owners, so long as the land is
used for farming or grazing purposes, shall be included upon the face of the Final Plat or Certified
Survey Map.
13.04.26 Sidewalks/Multi-Modal Paths
A. The subdivider shall construct a sidewalk on one (1) side of all frontage streets and both sides of all
arterial and collector streets within the subdivision. The Plan Commission may require the
construction of sidewalks on local streets to promote pedestrian accessibility within five hundred (500)
feet of all residences. The construction of all sidewalks shall be in accordance with plans and
standard specifications approved by the City Engineer.
B. Wider than standard sidewalks may be required by the Plan Commission in the vicinity of schools,
commercial areas and other places of public assemblage; and the Plan Commission may require the
construction of sidewalks in locations other than required under the preceding provisions of this
Section if such walks are necessary, in their opinion, for safe and adequate pedestrian circulation.
C. All sidewalks shall be installed prior to the issuance of an Occupancy Permit for any lot within a
subdivision; but in no event, not later than one (1) year from acceptance of the Final Plat. If the
sidewalk is not installed within one (1) year from the acceptance of the Final Plat, the City may order
the sidewalk installed.
D. Multi-modal paths, where required, shall be eight (8) feet wide minimum, bituminous paving meeting
City standards/requirements for sub-base construction and pavement.
Required Improvements
13.04.31 General Requirements
A. In accordance with the authority granted by Sec. 236.13 of the Wis. Stats., as may be amended, the
Common Council of the City of Onalaska hereby requires that, as a condition of Final Plat or Certified
Survey Map approval, the subdivider agrees to make and install all public improvements required by
this or other Titles of the Code of Ordinances or the subdivider shall provide the City with security to
ensure that the subdivider will make the required improvements. As a further condition of approval,
the Common Council hereby requires that the subdivider be responsible for the cost of any necessary
alterations of any existing utilities, which, by virtue of the platting or Certified Survey Map, fall within
the public right of way.
B. Special requirements for non-residential subdivisions may be imposed by the Common Council, upon
the recommendation of the City Engineer, with respect to the installation of public utilities, including
water, sewer and storm water drainage.
C. As a condition for the acceptance of dedication of public rights of way, the City requires that the public
ways have been previously provided with all necessary facilities constructed to City specifications,
including, but not limited to, sewerage, storm drainage, water mains and services, grading and
improvement of the streets and other public ways, sidewalks, street lighting, traffic control and such
other facilities required by the Common Council or that a specific portion of the costs be paid in
advance as provided in Sec. 66.0709(2), Wis. Stats. as may be amended:
1. The required public improvements shall be installed by the subdivider at their cost; or
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.04.32
Page 125
2. The subdivider may petition the City for the installation of the required improvements by City
contract. The petition must be received by the City prior to September 1 of the year preceding the
required installation so that the petition may be considered for inclusion in the City Capital
Improvements Project budget. If the Common Council elects to install the petitioned
improvements, it shall establish special assessments for the recovery of the costs. The special
assessments due from the subdivider for the portion of the petitioned improvements necessary to
serve the proposed land division shall be due to the City, together with interest, within six (6)
months of the date of City acceptance of the improvements.
D. Required improvements shall be installed in accordance with the engineering standards and
specifications which have been adopted by the Common Council. Where standards and
specifications have not been adopted, the improvements shall be made in accordance with good
engineering practices, approved prior to the start of construction by the City Engineer. When new or
revised standards and/or specifications have been adopted by the City, work on public improvements
not begun within one (1) year of the date of Final Plat adoption shall be made to the new or revised
standards and/or specifications. The City Engineer shall review and approve the construction plans,
specifications and calculations for the construction of the required public improvements.
E. Project Manager. The subdivider shall designate a project manager who shall be readily available on
the project site during the construction of the required public improvements. The project manager
shall be granted authority on behalf of the subdivider to make decisions related to the construction of
the required public improvements as they may arise during the course of the construction. The project
manager shall also be responsible for the scheduling and coordination of the required work to
construct the required improvements. Correspondence with or verbal orders to the designated project
manager shall have the same authority as with the subdivider directly.
13.04.32 Other Utilities
A. The subdivider shall cause gas, electric power, cable television and telephone facilities to be installed
in such a manner as to make adequate service available to each lot in the subdivision, certified
survey or land division. All new electrical distribution television cables and telephone lines from which
lots are individually served shall be underground unless the Plan Commission specifically allows
overhead poles for the following reasons: Topography, soil, water table, solid rock, boulders, or other
physical conditions would make underground installation unreasonable or impractical; or,
B. The lots to be served by said facilities can be served directly from existing overhead facilities.
C. Plans indicating the proposed location of all gas, electrical power, cable television and telephone
distribution and transmission lines required to service the plat shall be approved by the City Engineer.
Dedications
13.04.41 General Provisions
A. Dedication Requirement. In order that adequate open spaces and sites for public uses may be
properly located and reserved and in order that the cost of providing public areas, such as but not
limited to, parks, recreation areas and public schools may be equitably apportioned on the basis of
additional need created by the subdivision development, each applicant shall be required to dedicate
land or fees in lieu of land for park or other public uses.
B. General Design. In the design of a subdivision, land division, planned unit development or
development project, provision shall be made for suitable sites of adequate area for schools, parks,
playgrounds, open spaces, drainage ways and other public purposes. Such sites are to be shown on
the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat, and shall comply with the Comprehensive Plan or component of
said Plan. Consideration shall be given to the preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.04.42
Page 126
trees, marshes, lakes, ponds, streams, watercourses, watersheds, ravines and woodlands, prairie
and wetlands, and plant and animal communities.
13.04.42 Land Dedication.
A. Dedication Calculation.
1. Whenever a proposed playground, park or public recreation area designated in the
Comprehensive Plan, Comprehensive Plan Component or on the Official Map is embraced, all or
in part, in a tract of land to be subdivided, these proposed public lands shall be made part of the
plat and shall be dedicated to the public by the applicant at the rate of one (1) acre for each forty
(40) proposed dwelling units, but said dedication shall not be less than two (2) acres.
2. If no playground, park or other public recreation area has been proposed as of the date of the
application of an applicant, the City may condition approval of the Final Plat or Certified Survey
Map on the dedication of land for public facilities, so long as said dedication is rationally related to
a need for the land dedication, easement, or other public improvement resulting from the
subdivision.
B. Unknown Number of Dwelling Units. Where the plat does not specify the number of dwelling units
to be constructed, the land dedication shall be based upon the maximum number of units permitted
by the Zoning Disctricts Chapter and this Chapter.
C. Deeded to the City. Land dedicated for public purposes shall be deeded to the City at the time the
Final Plat is approved.
D. Access to Dedicated Land. All dedicated land shall have frontage on a public street and shall have
unrestricted public access.
E. Utility Extensions. The applicant shall install or provide for installation of water and sanitary sewer
lines to the property line of all dedicated land, where such services are to be provided to the adjacent
properties.
F. Reservation of Additional Land.
1. When public parks and sites for other public areas as shown on the Comprehensive Plan or
Comprehensive Plan component lie within the proposed area for development and are greater in
area than required for dedication, the applicant shall reserve for acquisition by the City, through
agreement, purchase or condemnation, the remaining greater public area for a period of one (1)
year after Final Plat approval unless extended by mutual agreement.
13.04.43 Development of Park Area.
A. When parklands are dedicated, the applicant is required to:
1. Properly grade and contour for proper drainage;
2. Provide surface contour suitable for anticipated use of area; and
3. Cover areas to be seeded with a minimum of six (6) inches of quality topsoil, seed as specified by
the City Engineer, fertilized with 16 6 6 at a rate of seven (7) pounds per one thousand (1,000)
square feet, and mulched. The topsoil furnished for the park site shall consist of the natural loam,
silt loam, silty clay loam or clay loam humus¬ bearing soils adapted to the sustenance of plant
life, and such topsoil shall be neither excessively acid nor excessively alkaline. Fine grading and
seeding must occur within one (1) year following issuance of the first building permit within that
land division unless otherwise authorized by the City Engineer. The improved area shall not be
deemed officially accepted until a uniform grass cover to a two (2) inch height has been
established. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the area until the City
accepts the dedication.
4. The dedicator and developer of parkland shall be responsible for the cost and installation of all
public sidewalks abutting dedicated parkland.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.04.44
Page 127
B. A neighborhood park area shall be provided by the applicant with a standard residential water service
unless located directly adjacent to a fire hydrant. A community park area shall be provided by the
developer with a minimum six (6) inch water service or at least one (1) fire hydrant, and at least one
(1) four (4) inch sanitary sewer lateral, all located at the street property line. The Common Council
may require certification of compliance by applicable City staff. The cost of such report shall be paid
by the applicant.
C. Development of parklands is to be completed as soon as twenty percent (20%) of the planned lots in
the subdivision are sold or developed, as determined by the Common Council.
D. If the applicant fails to satisfy the requirements of this Section, the Common Council may contract
said completion and bill such costs to the applicant, following written notice to the applicant of
noncompliance. Failure to pay such costs may result in the immediate withholding of all building
permits until such costs are paid.
13.04.44 Park Development Fees
A. Introduction and Purpose. Pursuant to the authority of Sec. 236.45, Wis. Stats., the local
development fees enabling legislation, the purpose of this Section is to establish the mechanism for
the imposition of park development fees to finance the capital costs of acquiring, establishing,
upgrading, expanding, and constructing public park facilities which are necessary to accommodate
future growth and land development. This Section is intended to assure that new development bears
a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide public park facilities
within the City of Onalaska and its service areas, as they are required to serve the needs arising out
of land development.
B. Park Development Fee Revenue Administration.
1. Revenues from park development fees shall be placed in one (1) or more segregated, interest
bearing accounts and shall be accounted for separately from other City general and utility funds.
Park development fee revenues and interest earned thereon may be expended only for capital
costs for which the impact fees were imposed.
2. Park development fee revenues imposed and collected, but not used, shall be refunded on a
prorated proportional basis, as determined by the Common Council, to the current record owner
or owners of the property with respect to which the development fees were imposed.
C. Use of Park Development Fees. Funds collected from park development fees shall be used solely
for the purpose of paying the proportionate costs of providing public facilities for parks that become
necessary due to land development. These costs may include the costs of debt service on bonds or
similar debt instruments when the debt has been incurred for the purpose of proceeding with
designated public facilities projects prior to the collection of all anticipated impact fees for that project.
D. Payment of Park Development Fees.
1. All required park development fees are hereby imposed on all developments, redevelopments,
rezoning and land divisions within the City of Onalaska or any development subarea thereof. Park
development fees shall be calculated at the time of plat, zoning approval, or the annexation of
undeveloped properties.
2. In the case of all undeveloped property, fees shall be paid within fourteen (14) days of the
issuance of the first building or occupancy permit.
3. Annexations:
a. Any property or parcel of undeveloped land annexed by the City of Onalaska is subject to the
payment of park development fees under the conditions set forth in this Section.
Undeveloped properties annexed are benefited by the availability of City parks.
4. If any portion of the park development fees are not timely paid, all building and occupancy
permits shall be suspended until such time as the park development fees are paid in full.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.04.44
Page 128
E. Appeals.
1. The developer or property owner upon whom a park development fee is imposed may contest the
amount, collection or use of a development fee as specified herein. An appeal to contest the
amount, collection or use of a development fee may be commenced within thirty (30) days of
application for a rezoning, subdivisions or a building permit. An appeal to contest the use of a
development fee shall be commenced not later than thirty (30) days prior to the award of any
public contract for expenditure of the fee revenues.
2. It shall be a condition precedent to the commencement of such an appeal that the park
development fee from which the developer or property owner appeals shall be paid as and when
the fee becomes due and payable, and upon default in making any such payment, such appeal
may be dismissed.
3. The appellant shall pay the required filing fee set forth in the City’s fee schedule at the time of
filing of the appeal.
4. An appeal is commenced by filing a written complaint with the City Clerk. The complaint shall
specify the impact fee amount or collection objected to and the basis for the objection. The
appeal shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the Plan Commission at a regular meeting.
The Plan Commission shall take evidence and testimony on the matter, including reports from
City staff and consultants, and shall make its recommendation to the Common Council based
upon the standards set forth in Sec. 66.0617, Wis. Stats.
5. The Common Council shall consider the appeal, review the record made before the Plan
Commission and the recommendation of the Planning Commission and decide the appeal, based
upon the standards for impact fees in Sec. 66.0617, Wis. Stats. If the Common Council
determines that the appeal has merit, it shall determine appropriate remedies. The remedies may
include: reallocation of the proceeds of the challenged impact fee to accomplish the purposes for
which the fee was collected, refunding the development fee in full or in part; whether interest
collected by the City thereon shall be returned; granting the appellant the opportunity to make the
development fee payments in installments; or such other remedies as it deems appropriate by the
City in a particular case. The decision of the Common Council is final.
F. Fees
1. Residential = $922.21 per unit.
2. Commercial = $638.47/acre
a. Low cost housing. As provided by Sec. 66.0617(7) Wis. Stats., the Common Council may, on
a case by case basis, provide for an exemption from or a reduction in the amount of the park
development fees. However, no amount of park fees may be shifted to any other
development in the land development in which the low cost housing is located or to any other
land development in the City.
G. Park Development Fees When Land is Dedicated.
1. The basis for the imposition of park development fees in conjunction with land dedication is the
facilities needs assessment report and its attachments, “Parks Needs Assessment” which is on
file in the office of the City Clerk.
2. The park development fees are based on a number of anticipated service units to determine
impact on the City’s Park System. A residential unit is assumed to be equivalent to an average
residential household with 2.6 people per household as provided in the Comprehensive Plan. The
service unit assessment utilizes a park needs ratio to determine the fee based on national
standards for parkland per capita.
3. The property owner/developer shall be charged a park development fee when dedicating land.
4. The park development fee shall be payable by the property owner or developer prior to issuance
of a building permit.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.11
Page 129
Chapter 05 Administration and Procedures
General Provisions
13.05.11 Summary Table
A. Table 13.05.11-1 summarizes the review process for the various types of development applications
processed under this Code.
Table 13.05.11-1 Development Procedures Summary Table
Type of Application
Pre-
Application
Meeting with
Staff
R-required
S-suggested
Public
Hearing
Required
Administrative
Plan Commission
Common Council
Board of Zoning
Appeals
Historic Preservation
Commission
Final Action
Y-Yes
Blank-No
R-Review, D -Decision, A-Appeal
PH - Public Hearing
Site Related
Site Plan Permit R D
Site Plan Permit &
Conditions of
Approval
Conditional Use Permit S
Yes
D
PH
Resolution with
Conditions of
Approval
Variance R Yes
D
PH
Board of Zoning
Decision
Appeal of UDC
Interpretation
D
Board of Zoning
Decision
Establishment of a
Planned Unit
Development (PUD) or
Downtown – Planned
Unit Development (DPUD)
R Yes
R
PH
D
Conditions of
Approval
Minor Amendment to
PUD, D-PUD, or PCID
R D
Conditions of
Approval
Major Amendment to
PUD, D-PUD, or PCID
R Yes
R
PH
D
Conditions of
Approval
Historic Preservation
Certificate of
Appropriateness
S D
Certificate of
Appropriateness
Subdivision Related
Minor Subdivision/
Metes and Bounds Lot
line adjustment
S D
Signed Certified
Survey Map
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.12
Page 130
Type of Application
Pre-
Application
Meeting with
Staff
R-required
S-suggested
Public
Hearing
Required
Administrative
Plan Commission
Common Council
Board of Zoning
Appeals
Historic Preservation
Commission
Final Action
Minor Subdivision/
Metes and Bounds
Land division
S R D
Conditions of
Approval & Signed
Certified Survey
Map
Major Subdivision -
Preliminary Plat
R R D
Conditions of
Approval
Major Subdivision - Final
Plat
R D
Conditions of
Approval & Signed
Final Plat
Extraterritorial Plat
Review
R
R
D
Conditions of
Approval. (No
appeals.)
Ordinance Amendment
Text Amendment S Yes
R
PH
D
Ordinance
Map Amendment R Yes
R
PH
D
Ordinance &
Conditions of
Approval
Establishment of a
Medical Campus District
R Yes
R
PH
D
Ordinance &
Conditions of
Approval
Minor Amendment to
Medical Campus District
S D
Conditions of
Approval
Major Amendment to
Medical Campus District
R Yes
R
PH
D
Conditions of
Approval
Annexation R Yes
R
PH
D
Ordinance &
Conditions of
Approval
13.05.12 Common Procedures and Requirements
A. Applicability. The requirements of this Chapter shall apply to all development applications and
procedures subject to development review under this Code unless otherwise stated.
B. Permits Required.
1. Property owners or their agents are required to obtain all required local, state, and federal permits
prior to initiating any activities on their site.
2. Property owners or their agents that have property in state designated archeologically sensitive
areas shall be required to obtain required permits from the State of Wisconsin prior to obtaining
permits from the Inspection Department.
C. Authority to File Applications.
1. Development review applications for an individual property may be initiated by:
a. The owner of the property that is the subject of the application; or
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.12
Page 131
b. An agent authorized by the owner of the property that is the subject of the application, which
may include a lessee of the property. Evidence of such authorization shall be the signature of
the property owner.
c. If the property subject to an application is under more than one (1) ownership, all owners or
their authorized agents shall join in filing the application.
2. The Plan Commission and Common Council may initiate text and map amendments to the UDC.
If the subject of the amendment is a specific site or project, the Plan Commission or Common
Council may initiate amendments with or without application from the owner.
D. Pre-application Meetings.
1. Pre-application meetings are required or recommended based on development application type
as identified in Table 13.05.11-1.
2. A pre-application meeting is an informal discussion between a potential applicant and applicable
City staff regarding a possible project subject to this Title. The Zoning Administrator shall
determine which City staff shall attend the pre-application meeting.
3. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to assist the applicant in identifying the type of
approvals needed, the potential review criteria, and the information to be contained in the
application(s).
4. Discussions that occur during pre-application meetings are not binding on the City and do not
constitute official assurances or representations on the City.
E. Application Materials and Fees.
1. The Planning Department shall develop and amend a UDC Application Manual as needed.
2. Each application for a permit or approval, or for an amendment of a permit or approval, shall
include all those application materials listed in the UDC Application Manual.
3. The City may reject an application not meeting the requirements of this Code or where the
required fee or escrow has not been paid.
4. The Common Council shall approve and adjust as needed the fees to accompany applications
submitted under the UDC through the adoption of a fee schedule.
5. No application shall be processed until the established fee has been paid.
6. Application fees are not refundable, except where the Planning Department has determined that
an application was accepted in error or when the fee paid exceeds the amount due, in which case
the overpayment shall be refunded to the applicant.
F. Coordination of Applications.
1. Depending on the requirements of this Title, multiple applications may be required.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall determine the order of application review based on the City Code,
including this Title and state requirements. Where possible, applications will be reviewed in
tandem.
G. Technical Assistance.
1. In making its decision, the City may determine that technical assistance is needed. The City may
request assistance from any source that is qualified to provide it. The applicant shall be
responsible for the cost of such technical assistance.
H. Withdrawal of Applications.
1. Any request for withdrawal of an application shall be submitted in writing to the Planning
Department.
2. In all cases where the applicant has requested withdrawal of an application, the associated fee
paid and any costs incurred by the City in the processing of an application shall not be refunded.
I. Successive Applications.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.12
Page 132
1. No application which has been denied wholly or in part may be resubmitted for at least one (1)
year from the date of its denial, unless substantial changes have been made which warrant
reconsideration, as determined by Planning Department.
J. Public Hearings and Notices.
1. Public hearings as required by this Title shall be conducted pursuant to the rules established for
each of the bodies, the Onalaska Code, and in compliance with state law.
2. Development applications requiring a public hearing are identified in Table 13.05.11-1. Applicants
are advised that development applications requiring a public hearing will need additional time for
processing as the state requires a minimum number of days for notice to be available before the
public hearing can occur.
3. All public hearings shall be open to the public.
K. Appeals.
1. Plan Commission.
a. Any party in interest aggrieved by a decision of the Plan Commission may appeal to the
Common Council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days after the date of the
decision accompanied by a statement as to the facts of the case under appeal, any additional
documents or exhibits the appellant believes are required, and a statement as to the relief
requested. A party in interest shall be defined as a person upon whom a decision made by
the Plan Commission has made a tangible impact. The party shall establish the tangible
impact in the appeal application. Such request for appeal shall be signed by the applicant or
by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the land area immediately adjacent
extending one hundred (100) feet therefrom or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or
more of the land directly opposite thereto extending one hundred (100) feet from the street
frontage of such opposite land.
b. The date of receipt of the decision shall not be counted in determining the time for filing of the
appeal. Sundays and holidays shall be counted, except if the last day falls on a Saturday,
Sunday or legal holiday, the time for filing shall be extended to the next secular day.
c. An appeal shall stay enforcement of the decision of the Commission unless the Commission
has determined that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property.
d. The Common Council shall hear and decide the appeal not more than forty-five (45) days
after it is filed, unless in the judgment of the Common Council a good and sufficient reason
exists for postponement of the hearing or decision or both, in which case a postponement
may be made.
e. The Planning Department shall cause notice of the appeal hearing to be mailed to the
appellant, to any person who has requested in writing for such notice to be sent, and as
required by the public hearing provisions of Table 13.05.11-1.
f. At the appeal hearing, the appellant, and their agent or attorney, shall be given an opportunity
to be heard and to show why the decision of the Plan Commission should be overruled or
amended. A representative of the Plan Commission, as well as applicable City staff shall be
given an equal opportunity to be heard. After the close of the appeal hearing, the Common
Council shall deliberate and may make motion(s) and take action adopting findings and an
order affirming, amending or overruling the decision of the Plan Commission, or defer a
decision on the matter to a subsequent meeting.
2. Appeals of Board of Zoning Appeals Decisions.
a. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may seek relief
therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of the state.
b. The applicant or appellant may elect to have the appeal or application handled as a
contested case. The appeal or application form shall explain that a contested case includes
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.21
Page 133
the right of all parties to cross examine witnesses, to object to improper evidence and to have
a record of the proceedings made by a court reporter or qualified stenographer or by tape
recording. Election to have the matter treated as a contested case must be made in writing at
the time of filing of the appeal or application.
3. Appeals of Common Council Decisions.
a. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Common Council may seek relief therefrom in any
court of competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of the state.
Site Related
13.05.21 Site Plan Permit
A. Applicability.
1. No new structure, new use of land, water or air or change in the use of land, water or air shall
hereafter be permitted and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a Site Plan Permit.
2. A Site Plan Permit shall be required for all residential developments with three (3) or more units
and any non-residential project.
3. A Site Plan Permit shall be required for new manufactured and mobile home communities and
expansions of existing manufactured and mobile home communities within the R-MMH
Manufactured and Mobile Home District.
B. Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is required
prior to submitting a Site Plan Permit application.
C. Submission. The application for a Site Plan Permit shall be filed pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and
refer them to applicable City staff for review.
2. Administrative Review. When the application is reviewed by the Planning Department, the
application will be granted, denied or referred for additional review and/or request for more
information.
3. Plan Commission Review. Under certain circumstances, the Zoning Administrator may refer
Site Plan Permit applications to the Plan Commission for review within forty-five (45) days of
receipt of the completed application. If the application is referred to the Plan Commission, the
Plan Commission shall review the application along with the Zoning Administrator's preliminary
findings, and may refer the application and plans to any expert consultants to advise whether the
application and plans meet all the requirements applicable thereto in this Title. Within forty-five
(45) days of its receipt of the application, the Plan Commission shall authorize the Zoning
Administrator to issue, refuse, or refer for additional review for more information, the Site Plan
Permit.
4. Criteria for Review. In acting on any Site Plan, the Zoning Administrator or Plan Commission, if
involved, shall consider the following:
a. The appropriateness of the Site Plan and buildings in relation to the physical character of the
site and the usage of adjoining land areas.
b. The layout of the site with regard to entrances and exits to public streets; adequacy and
improvement of areas for parking and for loading and unloading and shall, in this connection,
satisfy itself that the traffic pattern generated by the proposed construction or use shall be
developed in a manner consistent with the safety of residents and the community. The
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.22
Page 134
applicant shall so design the construction or use as to minimize any traffic hazard created
thereby.
c. The adequacy of the proposed water supply, drainage facilities and sanitary and waste
disposal.
d. The landscaping and appearance of the completed site. The Zoning Administrator or Plan
Commission, if involved, may require that those portions of all front, rear and side yards not
used for off-street parking shall be attractively planted with trees, shrubs, plants or grass
lawns and that the site be effectively screened so as not to impair the value of adjacent
properties nor impair the intent or purposes of this Section.
e. Before granting any site approval, the Zoning Administrator or Plan Commission, if involved,
may, besides obtaining advice from consultants, secure such advice as may be deemed
necessary from the Director of Public Works or other municipal officials, with special attention
to the effect of such approval upon existing municipal services and utilities. Should additional
facilities be needed, the Zoning Administrator or Plan Commission, if involved, shall forward
its recommendations to the Common Council and shall not issue final approval until the
Common Council has entered into an agreement with the applicant regarding the
development of such facilities.
5. Issuance of Permit.
a. A Permit shall expire in twelve (12) months unless substantial work has commenced or in
twenty-four (24) months after the issuance of the Permit if the structure for which a Permit is
issued is not substantially completed. In the event of expiration, the applicant shall reapply for
a Site Plan Permit before commencing work on the structure.
b. Any Permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this Title shall be null and void.
13.05.22 Conditional Use Permit
A. Applicability.
1. The development and execution of this Title is based upon the division of the City into districts,
within which districts the use of land and buildings, and bulk and location of buildings and
structures in relation to the land, are mutually compatible and substantially uniform. However,
there are certain uses which may, but do not necessarily have significant adverse effects on the
environment, overburden public services, change the desired character of an area, create a major
nuisance or have an impact on the use of neighboring land or facilities. Such uses, nevertheless,
may be necessary or desirable to be allowed in a particular district provided that additional
measures and conditions are taken to mitigate the impact of the proposed development. Such
uses are classified as conditional uses. No inherent right exists to receive a Conditional Use
Permit and such authorizations are approved under a specific set of circumstances and
conditions.
B. Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is suggested
prior to submitting a Conditional Use Permit application.
C. Submission. The application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be filed pursuant to Subsection
13.05.12D.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and refer them to the Plan
Commission for review.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the highway agency of any development within five
hundred (500) feet of the existing or proposed rights of way of freeways, expressways and
within one half (1/2) mile of their existing or proposed interchange or turning lane rights of
way.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.22
Page 135
2. Hearing on Application. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with
Subsection 13.05.12I and Table 13.05.11-1 .
3. Criteria for Review. A proposal for a conditional use will be reviewed against the following
criteria:
a. Compliance. The proposed conditional use shall comply with all regulations of the applicable
zoning district and any applicable regulations set forth in the Onalaska Code and State and
Federal laws.
b. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. The relationship of the proposed use to the goals,
objectives, and policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
c. Compatibility. The proposed conditional use shall be compatible with the character of the
neighborhood within the immediate area in which it is located, considering existing and
proposed site landscaping and screening.
d. Adequate measures shall be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize
traffic hazards and congestion.
e. The proposed use shall not be noxious or offensive to the surrounding neighborhood through
vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke, or gas.
f. The proposed use shall not injure the use and enjoyment of the property in the immediate
vicinity for existing permitted uses or diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.
g. That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the proposed conditional use will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare.
h. That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
i. That the proposed use does not violate floodplain regulations governing the site.
j. That the public interest and welfare supporting the proposed use shall be sufficient to
outweigh the individual interests that are adversely affected by the establishment of the
proposed uses.
4. Decision.
a. The Plan Commission may approve, approve with reasonable conditions, or deny the
application and may authorize the Zoning Administrator to issue a Conditional Use Permit.
The Plan Commission may impose additional conditions as deemed necessary to protect the
public interest and welfare of the City, provided they are reasonable and may include, but not
be limited to:
i. Financing and availability of adequate public facilities or services;
ii. Dedication of land;
iii. Reservation of land;
iv. Creation of restrictive covenants or easements;
v. Special setbacks;
vi. Yard requirements;
vii. Increased screening or landscaping requirements;
viii. Development phasing;
ix. Standards pertaining to traffic, circulation, noise, lighting, emissions, hours of operation,
and protection of environmentally sensitive areas;
x. Provision of stormwater management and erosion and sediment control;
xi. Require that a performance guarantee be posted by the applicant to ensure compliance
with conditions; and
xii. Require that a development agreement be entered into by the applicant.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.22
Page 136
b. In the instance of the granting of a conditional use, the Plan Commission in its findings shall
further specify the reason(s) or factors, which resulted in issuing the conditions of the
conditional use. Such Plan Commission decision and the resulting Conditional Use Permit,
shall specify the name of the permittee and the location and legal description of the affected
premises.
c. If a conditional use is approved, the Plan Commission may determine if the conditional use is
transferable to future owners.
d. For an existing and currently valid conditional use that is no longer allowed as a conditional
use in the zoning district in which it is located, the provisions of Section 13.01.26 shall apply.
e. Denial of Application for Conditional Use Permit. When a decision of denial of a Conditional
Use Application is made, the Plan Commission shall furnish the applicant, in writing when so
requested, those standards that are not met and enumerate the reasons the Plan
Commission used in determining that each standard was not met. A new application for the
same conditional use will not be considered by the Plan Commission for a period of twelve
(12) months except on grounds of new evidence as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
E. Issuance of Permit
1. A certified copy of the authorizing resolution, containing identifiable description and any specific
requirements of approval, shall be recorded by the City of Onalaska with the Office of the La
Crosse County Register of Deeds for the subject property.
2. A copy of a decision granting a Conditional Use Permit in a floodplain or shoreland district shall
be mailed to the district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
3. Conditional Use Permit Term
a. Where the Plan Commission has approved an application for a conditional use, such
approval shall become null and void within twelve (12) months of the date of the Plan
Commission's action unless the use is commenced, construction is underway or the current
owner possesses a valid building permit under which construction is commenced within six
(6) months of the date of permit issuance and which shall not be renewed unless construction
has commenced and is being diligently prosecuted. The Plan Commission may extend such
permit for a period of ninety (90) days for justifiable cause.
b. Any use, for which a Conditional Use Permit has been issued, upon its cessation or
abandonment for a period of twelve (12) months, will be deemed to have been terminated
and any future use shall be in conformity with this ordinance, unless granted a one (1) year
extension by the Plan Commission.
4. Amending a Conditional Use Permit
a. Amendments, modifications, alterations or expansions of a previously approved Conditional
Use Permit shall require application review in the same manner as a new application.
5. Complaints Regarding Conditional Uses.
a. The Plan Commission shall retain continuing jurisdiction over all conditional uses for the
purpose of resolving complaints against all previously approved conditional uses. Such
authority shall be in addition to the enforcement authority of the Zoning Administrator or their
designee to order the removal or discontinuance of any unauthorized alterations of an
approved conditional use, and the elimination, removal or discontinuance of any violation of a
condition imposed prior to or after approval or violation of any other provision of this Code.
b. Upon written complaint by any citizen or official, applicable City staff shall determine whether
the complaints are substantial and related to the conditions imposed on the use. If so
determined, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing at which time the complainant,
property owner, and any other such person who attends shall be heard.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.23
Page 137
c. The Plan Commission may, in order to bring the subject conditional use into compliance with
the standards set forth in Section 13.05.22 or conditions previously imposed by the Plan
Commission, modify existing conditions upon such use and impose additional reasonable
conditions.
d. In the event that no reasonable modification of such conditional use can be made or the
applicant does not make modifications required within a reasonable timeframe, the Plan
Commission may revoke the subject conditional approval and direct the Zoning Administrator
and the City Attorney to seek elimination of the subject use.
e. Following any such hearing, the decision of the Plan Commission shall be furnished to the
current owner of the conditional use in writing stating the reasons therefore.
13.05.23 Variance
A. Applicability.
1. A request for a Variance may be made when an aggrieved party can submit proof that strict
adherence to the provisions of this Title would cause them undue hardship or create conditions
causing greater harmful effects than the initial condition.
2. A Variance granted to a nonconforming use brings that use into conformance with the district and
zoning requirements.
3. Prohibited Variances. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant use Variances in floodplain
and conservancy districts. In all other districts, no use Variance shall be granted unless the
applicant has first petitioned for consideration of a Text Amendment to the UDC to allow the use,
if applicable, and upon a showing that no lawful or feasible use of the subject property can be
made in the absence of such a Variance.
B. Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is required
prior to submitting a Variance application.
C. Submission. The application for Variance shall be filed pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and
refer them to applicable City staff for review.
2. Hearing on Application. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing in accordance
with Subsection 13.05.12I and Table 13.05.11-1.
3. Criteria for Review. For the Board of Zoning Appeals to grant a Variance, it must find that the
applicant, which has the burden of proof, has demonstrated the following:
a. Unnecessary hardship due to the unique physical limitations of the property and not the
particular circumstances of the applicant. The unnecessary hardship must not be selfimposed
by the applicant or prior owners of the property. Further, economic loss or financial
hardship cannot serve as the basis for justifying a Variance.
b. The Variance will not create a detriment to an adjacent or neighboring property, and will not
be contrary to the public interest or public safety.
c. The Variance shall not have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that
district, permit a lower degree of flood protection that the flood protection elevation for the
particular area or permit standards lower than those required by state law.
4. Decision.
a. The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the Variance
application and shall issue a written Board of Zoning Decision.
b. Vote Required. All orders or decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals granting a Variance
require the affirmative vote of four (4) members. Whenever only four (4) members of the
Board are present and the vote stands three (3) to one (1) in favor of the appellant or
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.24
Page 138
applicant, the matter shall be laid over for consideration and final determination at the next
meeting of the Board or a special meeting noticed and called for that purpose.
c. The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the
premises benefited by a Variance as may be necessary to comply with the criteria for review
established in this Section.
d. No order of the Zoning Board of Appeals granting a Variance shall be valid for a period longer
than twelve (12) months from the date of such order unless a building permit is obtained
within such period and the erection or alteration of a building is started or the use is
commenced within such period.
E. Issuance of Variance.
1. A certified copy of the Board of Zoning Decision containing identifiable description and any
specific requirements for approval, shall be recorded by the City of Onalaska with the Office of
the La Crosse County Register of Deeds for the subject property.
2. A copy of a decision granting a Variance in a floodplain, shoreland or wetland district shall be
mailed to the district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
13.05.24 Appeal of UDC Interpretation
A. Applicability.
1. The Appeal of UDC Interpretation process shall facilitate review of questions of interpretation that
arise in the administration of this Title, including review of any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by an administrative official.
2. Appeals of an administrative decision or interpretation may be made by:
a. The owner, mortgagee, purchaser under a land contract, optionee or occupant under a
written lease for one (1) year or more of the property for which relief is sought.
b. Any officer (other than the Zoning Administrator), department, board or bureau affected by a
decision or order of the Zoning Administrator.
c. Any person aggrieved and whose use and enjoyment of property within the City is directly
and adversely affected by a decision or order of the Inspection Department, Zoning
Administrator or the requested Board action.
B. Submission. The application for an Appeal of UDC Interpretation shall be filed pursuant to
Subsection 13.05.12D. The Appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the alleged grievance or
judgment in question by filing with the officer(s) from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of
Zoning Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, together with payment of a filing
fee specified in the fee schedule. The date of receipt of the decision shall not be counted in
determining the time for filing of the Appeal. Sundays and holidays shall be counted, except if the last
day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the time for filing shall be extended to the next
secular day.
C. Stay of Proceedings. An Appeal shall put on hold the decision appealed unless the officer who
decision is being appealed certifies in writing to the Board of Zoning Appeals that a stay would, in
their opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or by a
court of record on the application, with notice to the officer from whom Appeal is made.
D. Criteria for Review. In considering an Appeal, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider, but not
be limited to the following criteria:
1. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, including its goals, objectives, and policies;
2. The plain meaning of the regulation;
3. Surplus language;
4. Conflicting provisions; and
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.25
Page 139
5. Policy history.
E. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and
refer them to applicable City staff for review.
2. Decision.
a. The Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all
the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance
of a permit.
b. A vote of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall require the affirmative vote of four (4) members.
Whenever only four (4) members of the Board are present and the vote stands three (3) to
one (1) in favor of the appellant or applicant, the matter shall be laid over for consideration
and final determination at the next meeting of the Board or a special meeting noticed and
called for that purpose.
c. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall render its decision either at the termination of the hearing
or within thirty (30) days thereafter.
d. The final disposition of an Appeal or application shall be in the form of a written decision or
order signed by the Chairman of the Board of Zoning Appeals and the City Clerk. Such
decision shall state the reasons for the Board of Zoning Appeal's determination with findings
of fact and conclusions of law. Conditions imposed in any permit shall be stated in the
decision or order embodying the Board's decision and shall also be set forth in any permits
issued under that order by the Zoning Administrator and/or Inspection Department.
F. Effect of Approval.
1. A certified copy of the Board of Zoning Decision, containing identifiable description and any
specific requirements for approval, shall be recorded by the City of Onalaska with the Office of
the La Crosse County Register of Deeds for the subject property.
2. Interpretations approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall expire one (1) year after issuance
if the performance of work is required and substantial work has not commenced.
3. A permit shall be valid only as long as the conditions upon which it is granted are observed.
G. Reconsideration.
1. Resubmission. No Appeal or application which has been dismissed or denied shall be
considered again without material alteration or revision within one (1) year of the Board's
decision, except pursuant to court order or by motion to reconsider made by a member voting
with the majority or as provided below.
2. Rehearing. No rehearing shall be held except upon the affirmative vote of four (4) or more
members of the Board upon finding that substantial, new evidence is submitted which could not
reasonably have been presented at the previous hearing. Requests for rehearing shall be in
writing, shall state the reasons for the request and shall be accompanied by necessary data and
diagrams. A rehearing shall be subject to the same notice requirements as original hearing.
13.05.25 Establishment of Planned Unit Development (PUD) or Downtown – Planned
Unit Development (D-PUD)
A. Applicability. The establishment of a Planned Unit Development provides design flexibility to
promote creative and efficient use of land. Planned Unit Development provisions are also intended to
create public and private benefit by allowing improved site design; allowing developments on multiple
lots to function as one coordinated site; facilitating protection of natural features; allowing flexibility
from the UDC for unique developments; and ensuring coordination of phased development.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.25
Page 140
B. Pre-application Meeting.
1. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is required prior to submitting a
Planned Unit Development or Downtown – Planned Unit Development application.
2. The applicant may request a meeting with the Plan Commission Sub-Committee to obtain
information and guidance before entering into binding agreements or incurring substantial
expense. This consultation is neither formal nor mandatory but is intended to inform the applicant
of the purpose and objectives of these regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, and duly adopted
plan implementation devices of the City. Discussions that occur are not binding on the City and
do not constitute official assurances or representations on the City.
C. Submission. The application for a Planned Unit Development or Downtown – Planned Unit
Development shall be filed pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D.
1. Combined Applications. An application for a PUD or D-PUD may be accompanied by all other
discretionary requests including but not limited to Subdivision Review and Site Plan Permit
applications in order to minimize review periods.
2. Authority. Authority is given to the Plan Commission to combine separate permit applications
into one (1) application for the convenience of the applicant and the City; however all individual
permit fees shall apply.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and
refer them to applicable City staff for review.
2. Hearing on Application. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on the General
Development Plan in accordance with Subsection 13.05.12I and Table 13.05.11-1.
3. Criteria for Review.
a. In establishing a PUD or D-PUD, the following criteria should be considered:
i. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
ii. Provide for variations to the strict application of the land use regulations in this title in
order to improve site design and operation, while at the same time incorporating design
elements (e.g., construction materials, landscaping, lighting, etc.) that exceed the City's
standards to offset the effect of any variations.
iii. Promote a more creative and efficient approach to land use within the city, while at the
same time protecting and promoting the health, safety, comfort, aesthetics, economic
viability, and general welfare of the City.
iv. Preserve and enhance natural features and open spaces.
v. Maintain or improve the efficiency of public streets and utilities.
vi. Ensure the establishment of appropriate transitions between differing land uses.
b. The Plan Commission may approve increased or decreased front yard setbacks in any
residential district as part of a subdivision request through a Planned Unit Development for
the purpose of orderly development of the parcel or parcels. The following criteria shall be
used by the Plan Commission in qualifying setback flexibility requests:
i. The proposed setback increase or decrease is based either on the physical constraints of
the site including steep slopes, potential driveway grades, preservation of mature
vegetation and the preservation of ridgelines or orderly development of a parcel or
parcels included in a master plan.
ii. The proposed setback increase or decrease will not be in conflict with the City of
Onalaska Comprehensive Plan or detrimental to public welfare or injurious to other
property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.26
Page 141
iii. The proposed setback increase or decrease will not be detrimental to the utility needs of
the neighborhood including but not limited to sanitary sewer, water or storm water
drainage.
iv. The proposed setback increase or decrease is not based exclusively on the desire to
increase the value or income potential of the property.
v. The proposed setback increase or decrease will not result in access constraints to
proposed structures including steep or excessively long driveway grades.
vi. The subdivider shall be required to submit a master layout plan at the time of the
subdivision application noting front yard setbacks for all parcels included in this request
along with a plan for sanitary sewer for each dwelling.
4. Decision.
a. An application for a PUD or D-PUD shall include the review of a General Development Plan
with a public hearing at the Plan Commission and formal approval by the Common Council.
i. Dedication or offers to dedicate interest in real property for specific purposes shown in
the General Development Plan may be required as a condition of approval of the PUD or
D-PUD if they are found by the Plan Commission to be in the public interest and/or are
consistent with the City of Onalaska Comprehensive Plan.
ii. Approval of the General Development Plan shall establish the basic right of use for the
area in conformity with the plan as approved, but such plan shall be conditioned upon
approval of a Final Implementation Plan and shall not make permissible any of the uses
as proposed until a Final Implementation Plan is submitted and approved for all or a
portion of the General Development Plan.
b. Following approval of the General Development Plan, a Final Implementation Plan shall be
reviewed by the Plan Commission with recommendations to the Common Council for final
consideration.
E. Issuance of Approval.
1. Recording of Requirements. The applicant shall record with the Office of the La Crosse County
Register of Deeds the legal description of the PUD or D-PUD and the Final Implementation Plan
conditions of approval which shall run with the land. Said conditions shall not lapse or be waived
as a result of any subsequent change in ownership or tenancy. Said conditions shall be deemed
to be part of the building permit issued for any use or structure in the PUD or D-PUD.
2. Stop Work. If after the approval of the PUD or D-PUD, any portion of the approved conditions or
plans are not met, the Planning, Engineering, Inspection and/or Fire Departments may stop
further construction of the development by posting a stop work order and providing the applicant
with written notice by certified mail within two (2) working days of the stop work order.
Construction shall be halted until such time as the applicant has made the necessary corrections
to comply with the approved plans.
13.05.26 Minor Amendment to PUD, D-PUD, or PCID.
A. Applicability.
1. A request for an Amendment shall be sought when there is a change to the approved Planned
Unit Development (PUD), Downtown Planned Unit Development (D-PUD), or Planned
Commercial Industrial Development (PCID) District.
2. An Amendment shall be classified as a Minor Amendment if no substantive changes are
proposed. Substantive change shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on the
following factors:
a. The uses proposed are pre-existing uses, allowed in the original approval, or permitted in the
underlying zoning district.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.27
Page 142
b. The Amendment does not result in a significant increase in density.
c. The Amendment does not reduce setbacks or applicable performance standards.
B. Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is required
prior to submitting an Amendment to a PUD, D-PUD, or PCID.
C. Submission. The application for an Amendment shall be filed pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and
refer them to applicable City staff for review.
2. Determination of Amendment Type. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the
amendment proposed is a Minor or Major Amendment. An application deemed to be a Major
Amendment shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 13.05.27 to PUD, D-PUD, or PCID.
3. Criteria for Review. In considering a Minor Amendment, the Zoning Administrator shall consider
the same criteria as used in establishing a PUD, D-PUD, or PCID.
4. Decision.
a. An application for a Minor Amendment shall include review and approval by the Zoning
Administrator.
E. Issuance of Approval.
1. Recording of Requirements. The applicant shall record with the Office of the La Crosse County
Register of Deeds the legal description of the PUD, D-PUD, or PCID and the conditions of
approval which shall run with the land. If any additional conditions are added to the Final
Implementation Plan, said conditions shall not lapse or be waived as a result of any subsequent
change in ownership or tenancy and said conditions shall be deemed to be part of the building
permit issued for any use or structure in the PUD, D-PUD, or PCID.
2. Stop Work. If after the approval of the PUD, D-PUD, or PCID, any portion of the approved
conditions or plans are not met, the Planning, Engineering, Inspection and/or Fire Departments
may stop further construction of the development by posting a stop work order and providing the
applicant with written notice by certified mail within two (2) working days of the stop work order.
Construction shall be halted until such time as the applicant has made the necessary corrections
to comply with the approved plans.
13.05.27 Major Amendment to PUD, D-PUD, or PCID.
A. Applicability. A request for an Amendment shall be sought when there is a change to the approved
Planned Unit Development (PUD), Downtown Planned Unit Development (D-PUD), or Planned
Commercial Industrial Development (PCID) District.
B. Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is required
prior to submitting an Amendment to a PUD, D-PUD, or PCID.
C. Submission. The application for an Amendment shall be filed pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and
refer them to applicable City staff for review.
2. Hearing on Application. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
Amendment to the approved Final Implementation Plan in accordance with Subsection 13.05.12I
and Table 13.05.11-1.
3. Criteria for Review. In considering an Amendment, the Plan Commission and Common Council
shall consider the same criteria as used in establishing a PUD, D-PUD, or PCID.
4. Decision. An application for a Major Amendment shall include the review of the proposed
amendment to the approved Final Implementation Plan at the Plan Commission and formal
approval by the Common Council.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.28
Page 143
E. Issuance of Approval.
1. Recording of Requirements. The applicant shall record with the Office of the La Crosse County
Register of Deeds the legal description of the PUD, D-PUD, or PCID the Amendment to the Final
Implementation Plan, and the conditions of approval, if any, which shall run with the land. Said
conditions shall not lapse or be waived as a result of any subsequent change in ownership or
tenancy. Said conditions shall be deemed to be part of the building permit issued for any use or
structure in the PUD, D-PUD, or PCID.
2. Stop Work. If after the approval of the PUD, D-PUD, or PCID, any portion of the approved
conditions or plans are not met, the Planning, Engineering, Inspection and/or Fire Departments
may stop further construction of the development by posting a stop work order and providing the
applicant with written notice by certified mail within two (2) working days of the stop work order.
Construction shall be halted until such time as the applicant has made the necessary corrections
to comply with the approved plans.
13.05.28 Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness
A. Applicability.
1. No other person in charge of a significant designated structure, site or site within a Historic
Preservation District shall reconstruct, alter or demolish all or any part of the exterior of such
property or construct any improvement upon such designated property or properties or cause or
permit any such work to be performed upon such property or demolish such property unless a
Certificate of Appropriateness has been granted by the Historic Preservation Commission. Also,
unless such Certificate has been granted by the Commission, the Building Inspector shall not
issue a permit for any such work.
B. Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is suggested
prior to submitting a Certificate of Appropriateness application.
C. Submission of Application. The application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be filed
pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D and Table 13.05.11-1.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and
refer them to applicable City staff for review.
2. Criteria for Review. The Historic Preservation Commission shall consider the following criteria in
considering an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness:
a. In the case of changes to a designated historic structure or historic site, the proposed work
would not detrimentally change, destroy or adversely affect any exterior feature of the
improvement or site upon which said work is to be done;
b. In the case of the construction of a new improvement upon a historic site, or within a Historic
District, the exterior of such improvement would not adversely affect or negatively contrast
with the external appearance of other neighboring improvements on such site or within the
district;
c. In the case of any property located in a Historic District, the proposed construction,
reconstruction, exterior alteration or demolition does not conform to the purpose and intent of
this Chapter and to the objectives and design criteria of the historic preservation plan for said
district;
d. The building or structure is of such architectural or historical significance that its demolition
would be detrimental to the public interest and contrary to the general welfare of the people of
the City of Onalaska;
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.31
Page 144
e. In the case of a request for the demolition of a deteriorated building or structure, any
economic hardship or difficulty claimed by the owner is self-created or is the result of any
failure to maintain the property in good repair;
f. The building or structure is of such old, unusual or uncommon design, texture, and/or
materials that it could not be reproduced without great difficulty and/or expense;
g. The owner of the property submits information that the denial of the Certificate of
Appropriateness will deprive the owner of all reasonable use of, or economic return on, the
property; and
h. In addition, in determining whether to issue a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission
shall consider and may give decisive weight to any or all of the following standards:
i. The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of
historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall
be avoided.
ii. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historical
significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
iii. Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship
that characterize a property shall be preserved.
iv. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic
materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
v. Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and
preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be
undertaken.
vi. New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction shall not destroy historic
materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be compatible with the
massing, size, scale and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the
property and its environment.
vii. The benefit of the preservation of a historic site, structure or site within a Historic
Preservation District to reach the goals of a City master plan such as a Comprehensive
Plan and Downtown Redevelopment Plan as adopted by the Common Council.
3. Decision.
a. The Historic Preservation Commission may approve or deny the proposed design and
authorize the Zoning Administrator to issue the Certificate of Appropriateness.
b. The Historic Preservation Commission may impose such conditions and restrictions as may
be necessary to comply with the criteria for review established in this Section.
E. Issuance of Certificate of Appropriateness.
1. The issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not relieve the applicant from obtaining
other permits and approvals required by the City. A building permit or other municipal permit shall
be invalid if it is obtained without the presentation of the Certificate of Appropriateness required
for the proposed work.
Subdivision Related
13.05.31 General Standards
A. Determination of Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services.
1. A Preliminary Plat, Final Plat or Certified Survey Map shall not be approved unless it is
determined that adequate public facilities and public services will be available to meet the needs
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.31
Page 145
of the proposed land division. Adequacy shall be determined to exist when the following
conditions exist:
a. The proposed land division is located in an urban service area where adequate sewer service
is presently available for extension, under construction or designated by the Common Council
for extension of sewer service within the current capital budget year and funds are specifically
provided for such extension either from public or private financing. The Plan Commission and
the Common Council shall consider the recommendations of the City Engineer and the
appropriate committees on the capacity of trunk lines and of sewerage treatment facilities and
any other information presented.
b. The proposed land division is located within an urban service area contiguous to an arterial
transmission water main of adequate capacity for the proposed development or if the water
distribution system that is needed is under construction or scheduled for construction within
the current budget year, and funds, either public or private, are available for the program. The
Plan Commission and the Common Council shall consider the recommendations of the City
Engineer and the appropriate committee(s) on line capacities, water sources and storage
facilities, as well as any other information presented. The City Engineer verifies to the Plan
Commission and the Common Council that adequate funds, either public or private, are
available to insure the installation of all necessary storm water management facilities.
c. The City Engineer can demonstrate to the Plan Commission and the Common Council that
street maintenance and refuse collection services, either public or private, are so situated that
adequate and timely service can be provided so as not to involve danger or injury to the
health, safety or general welfare to the future residents of the proposed land division or
existing City residents.
d. The Parks and Recreation Director or Zoning Administrator verifies to the Plan Commission
that the future residents of the proposed land division can be assured park, recreation and
open space facilities and services which meet the standards of the Comprehensive Outdoor
Recreation Plan as adopted by the Common Council.
e. The Police Department and Fire Department verify that timely and adequate service can be
provided to the residents.
f. The proposed land division is accessible by existing or officially mapped, publicly maintained,
all weather roadway system, adequate to accommodate both existing traffic and that traffic to
be generated by the proposed land division in accordance with the Official Map and City
Standards.
2. Where the Plan Commission and the Common Council determine that one (1) or more public
facilities or services are not adequate for the proposed development, but that a portion of the area
could be served adequately, or that careful phasing of the development could result in all public
facilities and public services being adequate, conditional approval may include only such portions
or may specify phasing of the development.
3. No land shall be divided which has been officially mapped as public lands storm water
management facility or is determined by the Common Council to be unsuitable for use by reason
of flooding, bad drainage, soil or rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe
erosion potential or unfavorable topography, or any other feature likely to be harmful to health,
safety or welfare of future residents or landowners in the proposed land division or of the
community.
4. The above requirements shall not apply to those areas outside the corporate limits of the City of
Onalaska and within the City's extraterritorial limits. Areas within the City capable of being served
by public sewer and water shall be required to connect to the City of Onalaska public water
distribution and/or public sewerage system if determined by the City Engineer to be feasible. If
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.32
Page 146
such connection(s) are not determined feasible, the proposed land division shall provide for
adequate on site systems and such special piping provisions as may be necessary to serve the
anticipated development during the interim period until such City public water and/or sewerage
systems are determined by the City Engineer to be feasibly available for connection. The
subdivider, and their heirs and assigns, shall, by written plat restriction, agree to abandon the
interim water and sewerage facilities and connect to the City public water and sewerage facilities
upon a determination by the City Engineer that such facilities are available for feasible
connection.
B. Disclaimers on Approvals.
1. The purpose of requiring approvals under this Title is to insure the health, safety, morale, comfort,
prosperity and general welfare of the City. This Title shall not be interpreted as placing any
responsibility or liability on any City official, City employee or the City as a municipal corporation
for the granting of approval or the denial of any approval. All approvals rendered as part of this
Title shall be considered as being approved conditionally based on the information and
circumstances apparent at that time.
2. Approvals issued by the City shall not be construed as an assumption or expression of any
responsibility, warranty or guarantee for the design or construction of any improvements within
the land division.
13.05.32 Minor Subdivision/Metes and Bounds – Lot Line Adjustment
A. Applicability.
1. To transfer land from one (1) existing parcel to another, where both new parcels meet Code
requirements.
B. Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is suggested
prior to submitting a Minor Subdivision application.
C. Submission. The application for a Minor Subdivision shall be filed pursuant to Subsection
13.05.12D and Table 13.05.11-1.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator and City Engineer shall review the
application and plans and refer them to applicable City Staff for review.
2. Decision. The Zoning Administrator and City Engineer shall approve or deny the application and
provide the applicant with written notice of the decision and reasons for approval or denial.
E. Recordation. The subdivider shall record the Certified Survey Map or Metes and Bounds Survey
Map within thirty (30) days of approval at the Office of the La Crosse County Register of Deeds and
provide a copy of the recorded document to the Engineering Department. Failure to do so shall
necessitate a new review and re-approval.
13.05.33 Minor Subdivision/Metes and Bounds – Land Division
A. Applicability.
1. Platted Area. When it is proposed to divide a lot, outlot or block within a recorded subdivision
plat, into not more than four (4) parcels or building sites, any one (1) of which is five (5) acres or
less in size and without changing the exterior boundaries of said plat, the subdivider may do so
by either a Certified Survey Map or by use of a Metes and Bounds Survey Map in accordance
with this Section.
2. Unplatted Area. When it is proposed to divide land by the owner or applicant resulting in the
creation of not more than four (4) parcels or building sites, any one (1) of which is five (5) acres in
size or less, the subdivider shall prepare a Certified Survey Map in accordance with this Title.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.34
Page 147
B. Pre-Application Meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is
suggested prior to submitting a Minor Subdivision application.
C. Submission. The application for a Minor Subdivision shall be filed pursuant to Subsection
13.05.12D and Table 13.05.11-1.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and
refer them to applicable City staff for review.
2. Decision.
a. The Plan Commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the
Certified Survey Map or Metes and Bounds Survey Map and shall transmit the application
along with its recommendations to the Common Council.
b. The Plan Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate
information.
c. After consideration of the Plan Commission’s recommendations, the Common Council shall
review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the requested land division.
d. The Common Council shall state, in writing, its findings for approval or denial, as well as any
conditions of approval.
E. Recordation. The subdivider shall record the Certified Survey Map or Metes and Bounds Survey
Map within thirty (30) days of Common Council approval of the land division at the Office of the La
Crosse County Register of Deeds and provide a copy of the recorded document to the Engineering
Department. Failure to do so shall necessitate a new review and re-approval of the map by the
Common Council.
13.05.34 Major Subdivision – Preliminary Plat
A. Applicability. A Preliminary Plat application shall be submitted to the City when any of the following
apply:
1. The applicant is proposing to create five (5) or more lots as part of the subdivision.
2. The applicant is proposing to divide land into parcels that are larger than five (5) acres.
3. The applicant is proposing to change the exterior boundaries of an existing plat.
4. Successive divisions within a five (5) year period creating five (5) or more parcels or building sites
(i.e. lots or outlots).
B. Pre-Application Meeting.
1. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D is required prior to submitting a
Preliminary Plat application.
2. The applicant may request a meeting with the Plan Commission Sub-Committee to obtain
information and guidance before entering into binding agreements or incurring substantial
expense. This consultation is neither formal nor mandatory but is intended to inform the
subdivider of the purpose and objectives of these regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, and duly
adopted plan implementation devices of the City. Discussions that occur are not binding on the
City and do not constitute official assurances or representations of the City.
C. Submission.
1. The application for a Preliminary Plat shall be filed pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D and Table
13.05.11-1.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and refer them to applicable
City staff for review.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.35
Page 148
2. Hearing on Application. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with
Subsection 13.05.12I and Table 13.05.11-1.
3. Criteria for Review. In evaluating a Preliminary Plat, the Plan Commission and Common Council
should consider:
a. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
b. The level of preservation and enhancement natural features and open spaces.
c. The adequacy of public streets and utilities.
4. Decision.
a. Following the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall recommend approval, conditional
approval, or denial of the Preliminary Plat and shall transmit the plat and application along
with its recommendations to the Common Council.
b. The Plan Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate
information.
c. The Common Council shall review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the
Preliminary Plat application.
d. The Common Council shall state, in writing, its findings for approval or denial, as well as any
conditions of approval.
E. Effect of Preliminary Plat Approval.
a. Simultaneously with the filing of the Preliminary Plat or map, the owner shall file with the City
Clerk three (3) physical copies and one (1) electronic copy of the final plans and
specifications of public improvements required by this Chapter.
b. Upon approval of the Preliminary Plat, and if approved by the City Engineer, the applicant
may start work on all improvements. Depending on the type of improvements, the City
Engineer may require the establishment of a Development Agreement before work
commences.
c. The Preliminary Plat shall be deemed an expression of approval or conditional approval of
the layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the final plat, which will be subject to
further consideration by the Plan Commission and Common Council at the time of its
submission.
F. Preliminary Plat Amendment. Requested amendments to the Preliminary Plat shall follow the same
procedure outlined in this Section. Should the subdivider desire to amend the Preliminary Plat as
approved, they may resubmit the amended plat which shall follow the same procedure, except for the
fee, unless the amendment is, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, of such scope as to constitute a
new plat, in which such case it shall be re-filed and follow the procedures as described above.
13.05.35 Major Subdivision – Final Plat
A. Applicability
1. An approved Preliminary Plat shall be on file with the City prior to applying for a Final Plat that
substantially conforms to the Preliminary Plat.
2. Partial Platting. The Final Plat may, if permitted by the Common Council, constitute only that
portion of the approved Preliminary Plat, which the subdivider proposes to record at the time.
B. Submission.
1. The application for a Final Plat shall be filed pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D and Table
13.05.11-1.
2. The application for a Final Plat shall be submitted not later than thirty-six (36) months after the
date of approval of the Preliminary Plat; otherwise, the Preliminary Plat and final plat will be
considered void unless an extension is requested in writing by the applicant and for good cause
granted by the City for a maximum of an additional three (3) years.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.36
Page 149
C. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and refer them to applicable
City staff for review.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall provide copies of the application to the applicable County and
State agencies which shall have the opportunity to comment on the application.
2. Criteria for Review.
a. Substantial conformance with the approved Preliminary Plat and all conditions of approval.
b. Conformance with this Title and all other applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations.
c. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan’s goals, objectives, and policies.
3. Decision.
a. The Plan Commission shall review the Final Plat and shall recommend approval, approval
with conditions, or denial of the application to the Common Council. The Final Plat and
application, along with the Plan Commission’s recommendations shall be transmitted to the
Common Council.
b. The Plan Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate
information.
c. When the Plan Commission determines to approve a Final Plat, the Planning Department
shall give at least ten (10) days prior written notice of its intention to the Municipal Clerk of
any municipality within one thousand (1,000) feet of the Final Plat.
d. The Common Council shall review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the Final Plat
application within sixty (60) days after submission, unless such time is extended by
agreement with the applicant.
e. The Common Council shall state, in writing, its findings for approval or denial, as well as any
conditions of approval.
f. The City of Onalaska may not inscribe its approval on the Final Plat prior to the certification of
no objection by the Department of Administration.
D. Effect of Final Plat Approval.
1. Recordation. After the Final Plat has been approved by the Common Council and required
improvements either installed or a contract and sureties insuring their installation is filed, the City
Clerk shall release the Final Plat for recording with the Office of the La Crosse County Register of
Deeds. Recording of the Final Plat and all associated conditions of approval must be completed
within six (6) months from the date of issuance by the City.
2. Final Copies. The applicant shall file three (3) copies of the Final Plat with the Planning
Department for distribution to the approving agencies, affected utilities and other affected
agencies for their files.
E. Replat.
1. Except as provided in Sec. 70.27(1), Wis. Stats. as may be amended, when it is proposed to
replat a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, so as to change the boundaries of a recorded
subdivision, or part thereof, the applicant shall vacate or alter the recorded plat as provided in
Sec. 236.40 through 236.44 Wis. Stats. as may be amended. The applicant shall then proceed,
using the procedures for Preliminary and Final Plats specified in Sections 13.05.34 and 13.05.35
above.
13.05.36 Extraterritorial Plat Review
A. Applicability.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.36
Page 150
1. Plats and Minor Land Divisions within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the City of
Onalaska are subject to this Section pursuant to Sec. 236.45 (3), Wis. Stats. as may be
amended.
B. Submission.
1. The application for Extraterritorial Plat Review shall be filed pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D
and Table 13.05.11-1.
C. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and plans and refer them to applicable
City staff for review.
2. Review Criteria.
a. The Plan Commission may recommend approval of a land division subdividing portions of
land to the Common Council provided that the proposed subdivision complies with the
following:
i. The proposed subdivision is compatible with adjacent land uses and maintains the
general pattern of land uses in the immediate area.
ii. The proposed subdivision, if approved, would result in a land use and development
pattern compatible with surrounding development and land use patterns with regard to
parcel size, lot frontage and access, aesthetics, traffic generation, public safety
considerations, and impact on surrounding land use.
iii. The proposed subdivision and resulting development shall not adversely affect the City’s
ability to provide public services and or future annexations and continuation of municipal
infrastructure.
iv. The proposed subdivision does not conflict with the City of Onalaska Comprehensive
Land Use Plan.
3. Decision.
a. The Plan Commission shall review the application and shall recommend approval, approval
with conditions, or denial of the application to the Common Council. The application and
recommendations shall then be transmitted to the Common Council.
b. The Plan Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate
information.
c. The Common Council reserves the right to reject any application due to the subdivision
submission conflicting with local Comprehensive Planning objectives requiring
intergovernmental coordination, boundary agreements and for insufficient study of the fiscal
impact of service and infrastructure delivery impacts.
d. The Common Council shall review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the
application. The Common Council decision shall be final.
e. The Common Council shall state, in writing, its findings for approval or denial, as well as any
conditions of approval.
D. Effect of Plat Approval.
1. Required Improvements. An applicant may proceed with the installation of improvements under
such regulations as the Town within whose limits the plat lies may require, provided approval has
been granted by all agencies or units of government required under this Section.
2. Recordation. After the Plat has been approved by the Common Council and required
improvements either installed or a contract and sureties insuring their installation is filed, the City
Clerk shall release the Plat for recording with the Office of the La Crosse County Register of
Deeds. Recording of the Plat and all associated conditions of approval must be completed within
six (6) months from the date of issuance by the City.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.41
Page 151
3. Final Copies. The applicant shall file three (3) copies of the Plat with the Planning Department
for distribution to the approving agencies, affected utilities, and other affected agencies for their
files.
Ordinance or Plan Amendment Related
13.05.41 UDC Text Amendment
A. Applicability.
1. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice requires,
the Common Council may, by Ordinance, amend, change or supplement the text of the
regulations established by this Title or amendments thereto.
2. A request to amend the UDC can be made by the:
a. City Planning Department, Plan Commission or Common Council.
b. A property owner or representative of a property owner.
B. Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is suggested
prior to submitting an Ordinance Amendment application.
C. Submission. The application for an Amendment shall be filed pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D
and Table 13.05.11-1.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and refer it to
applicable City staff for review.
2. Hearing on Application. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with
Subsection 13.05.12I and Table 13.05.11-1 .
E. Decision.
1. The Plan Commission shall review the application and recommend approval, conditional
approval, or denial of the Amendment and shall transmit the application along with its
recommendations to the Common Council.
2. The Plan Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate
information.
3. Following receipt of the Plan Commission’s recommendation, the Common Council shall review
and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the Amendment application.
4. The Common Council shall state, in writing, its findings for approval or denial, as well as any
conditions of approval.
5. In the event of protest against Amendment to the text of the regulations of this Title, it shall cause
a three fourths (3/4) vote of the full Common Council membership to adopt such Amendment.
13.05.42 Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)
A. Applicability. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice
requires, the Common Council may, by Ordinance, change the district boundaries established by this
Chapter and the Zoning Map incorporated herein and/or the Supplementary Floodplain Zoning Map
incorporated herein.
B. Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is required
prior to submitting a Map Amendment application.
C. Submission. The application for an Amendment shall be filed pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D
and Table 13.05.11-1.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and refer it to
applicable City staff for review.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.43
Page 152
2. Hearing on Application. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with
Subsection 13.05.12I and Table 13.05.11-1.
3. Decision.
a. The Plan Commission shall review the application and recommend approval, conditional
approval, or denial of the Map Amendment and shall transmit the application along with its
recommendations to the Common Council.
b. The Plan Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate
information.
c. Following receipt of the Plan Commission’s recommendation, the Common Council shall
review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the Amendment application.
d. The Common Council shall state, in writing, its findings for approval or denial, as well as any
conditions of approval.
e. If a request for a Map Amendment (rezoning) has been denied by the Council, no person
may again request the same zoning change for the same parcel until the expiration of one (1)
year after the previous denial.
i. Such restriction shall not apply if the subsequent Map Amendment (rezoning) request is
premised upon a proposed development or use of the parcel which is substantially
different than the previously rejected development or use and which addresses the
previously expressed concerns of the Plan Commission.
ii. Substantially different shall be determined by the Plan Commission based primarily on a
change of use, density or arrangement of development.
iii. Any request for a Map Amendment (rezoning) within the one (1) year limit shall be initially
reviewed by the Plan Commission for compliance with this paragraph. After such review,
the Plan Commission shall determine whether the application is substantially different
and whether a public hearing can be set for consideration of the request.
iv. A protest against Amendment of the Zoning Map. In the event of protest against
Amendment to the Zoning Map, it shall result in the need for a three fourths (3/4) vote of
the full Common Council membership for such Amendment to be adopted.
E. Update Map on File. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for updating the Zoning Map on
file with any Amendments adopted.
13.05.43 Establishment of Medical Campus (MC) District
A. Applicability. The establishment of a Medical Campus District is intended to provide for the
development of medically-related uses which, by their interrelationship, benefit from proximity and a
well-design environment with a unified feel.
B. Pre-application Meeting.
1. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is required prior to submitting a MC
Campus Master Plan application.
2. The applicant may request a meeting with the Plan Commission Sub-Committee to obtain
information and guidance before entering into binding agreements or incurring substantial
expense. This consultation is neither formal nor mandatory but is intended to inform the applicant
of the purpose and objectives of these regulations, the Comprehensive Plan, and duly adopted
plan implementation devices of the City. Discussions that occur are not binding on the City and
do not constitute official assurances or representations on the City.
C. Submission. The application shall be filed pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D and Table 13.05.11-1.
1. Combined Applications. An application for the establishment of a Medical Campus District (MC)
may be accompanied by all other discretionary requests, such as subdivision review, in order to
minimize review periods.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.44
Page 153
2. Authority. Authority is given to the Plan Commission to combine separate permit applications
into one (1) application for the convenience of the applicant and the City, however, individual
permit fees shall apply.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and refer it to
applicable City staff for review.
2. Hearing on Application. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with
Subsection 13.05.12I and Table 13.05.11-1 .
3. Criteria for Review. Approval of the Campus Master Plan will be based on the degree to which it
meets the intent of the Medical Campus District; implements the goals of the Comprehensive
Plan; and reflects adopted neighborhood, corridor, or special area plans adjacent to district
boundaries.
E. Decision.
a. Following the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall review the application and
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the Medical Campus District and shall
transmit the application along with its recommendations to the Common Council.
b. The Plan Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate
information.
c. Following receipt of the Plan Commission’s recommendation, the Common Council shall
review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the Medical Campus District.
d. The Common Council shall state, in writing, its findings for approval or denial, as well as any
conditions of approval.
F. Issuance of Approval.
1. Recording of Requirements. The applicant shall record with the Office of the La Crosse County
Register of Deeds the legal description of the Medical Campus District and the conditions of
approval which shall run with the land if any additional conditions are added to the Campus
Master Plan. Said conditions shall not lapse or be waived as a result of any subsequent change
in ownership or tenancy. Said conditions shall be deemed to be part of the building permit issued
for any use or structure in the MC District.
2. Stop Work. If after the approval of the MC District, any portion of the approved conditions or
plans are not met, the Planning, Engineering, Inspection and/or Fire Departments may stop
further construction of the development by posting a stop work order and providing the applicant
with written notice by certified mail within two (2) working days of the stop work order.
Construction shall be halted until such time as the applicant has made the necessary corrections
to comply with the approved plans.
G. Effect of Approval.
1. Campus Master Plans approved as part of the rezoning to Medical Campus District shall be
effective for ten (10) years and require a full update on or before the end of year eight (8) and
every five (5) years thereafter.
2. It is expected that Campus Master Plans will identify building locations and maximum heights, but
are not required to include detailed designs of each building. Building design review will be
conducted according to site plan review procedures identified in Section 13.05.21.
13.05.44 Medical Campus MC Master Plan Minor Amendment
A. Applicability.
1. A request for a Minor Amendment shall be sought when there is a change to the approved
Campus Master Plan or an update is required pursuant to Section 13.05.42.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.45
Page 154
2. An Amendment shall be classified as a Minor Amendment if no substantive changes are
proposed. Substantive change shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on the
following factors:
i. Use;
ii. Density;
iii. Intensity of overall Campus Master Plan; and
iv. Whether proposed change(s) will negatively affect adjacent properties and districts.
B. Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is suggested
prior to submitting a MC Campus Master Plan Minor Amendment application.
C. Submission. The application for an Amendment shall be filed pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12D
and Table 13.05.11-1.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and refer it to
applicable City staff for review.
2. Determination of Amendment Type. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the
Amendment proposed is a Minor or Major Amendment. An application deemed to be a Major
Amendment shall follow the procedures set forth in the Major Amendment section.
3. Criteria for Review. In considering a Minor Amendment, the Zoning Administrator shall consider
the same criteria as used in establishing the Medical Campus District.
4. Administrative Review. When the application is reviewed by the Planning Department, the
application will be granted, denied or referred for additional review and/or request for more
information.
E. Issuance of Approval.
1. Recording of Requirements. The applicant shall record with the Office of the La Crosse County
Register of Deeds the legal description of the Medical Campus District and the conditions of
approval which shall run with the land if any additional conditions are added to the Campus
Master Plan. Said conditions shall not lapse or be waived as a result of any subsequent change
in ownership or tenancy. Said conditions shall be deemed to be part of the building permit issued
for any use or structure in the MC District.
2. Stop Work. If after the approval of the MC District, any portion of the approved conditions or
plans are not met, the Planning, Engineering, Inspection and/or Fire Departments may stop
further construction of the development by posting a stop work order and providing the applicant
with written notice by certified mail within two (2) working days of the stop work order.
Construction shall be halted until such time as the applicant has made the necessary corrections
to comply with the approved plans.
13.05.45 Medical Campus MC Master Plan Major Amendment
A. Applicability.
1. A request for a Major Amendment shall be sought when there is a change to the approved
Campus Master Plan or an update is required pursuant to Section 13.05.42.
2. An amendment shall be classified as a Major Amendment if substantive changes are proposed.
Substantive change shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on the following
factors:
i. Use;
ii. Density;
iii. Intensity of overall Campus Master Plan; and
iv. Whether proposed change(s) will negatively affect adjacent properties and districts.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.46
Page 155
B. Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is required
prior to submitting a MC Campus Master Plan Major Amendment application.
C. Submission. The application for a Major Amendment shall be filed pursuant to Subsection
13.05.12D and Table 13.05.11-1.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and refer it to
applicable City staff for review.
2. Hearing on Application. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with
Subsection 13.05.12I and Table 13.05.11-1 .
3. Criteria for Review. In considering a Major Amendment, the Zoning Administrator shall consider
the same criteria as used in establishing the Medical Campus District.
4. Decision.
a. Following the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall review the application and
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the Major Amendment and shall
transmit the application along with its recommendations to the Common Council.
b. The Plan Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate
information.
c. Following receipt of the Plan Commission’s recommendation, the Common Council shall
review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the Major Amendment.
d. The Common Council shall state, in writing, its findings for approval or denial, as well as any
conditions of approval.
E. Issuance of Approval.
1. Recording of Requirements. The applicant shall record with the Office of the La Crosse County
Register of Deeds the legal description of the Medical Campus District and the conditions of
approval which shall run with the land if any additional conditions are added to the Campus
Master Plan. Said conditions shall not lapse or be waived as a result of any subsequent change
in ownership or tenancy. Said conditions shall be deemed to be part of the building permit issued
for any use or structure in the MC District.
2. Stop Work. If after the approval of the MC District, any portion of the approved conditions or
plans are not met, the Planning, Engineering, Inspection and/or Fire Departments may stop
further construction of the development by posting a stop work order and providing the applicant
with written notice by certified mail within two (2) working days of the stop work order.
Construction shall be halted until such time as the applicant has made the necessary corrections
to comply with the approved plans.
13.05.46 Annexation
A. Applicability. Subject to Sec. 66.0217, Wis. Stats., as may be amended, an applicant may request to
annex land into the City of Onalaska provided that the land is contiguous to the City’s municipal
boundary.
B. Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application meeting pursuant to Subsection 13.05.12C is required
prior to submitting an application for Annexation.
C. Submission. The application for Annexation shall be filed on a state-designated form and follow the
standards set forth in Subsection 13.05.12D and Table 13.05.11-1.
D. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and refer it to applicable City staff for
review.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.47
Page 156
b. The Zoning Administrator shall provide copies of the application to the applicable County and
State agencies which shall have the opportunity to comment on the application.
2. Hearing on Application. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with
Subsection 13.05.12I and Table 13.05.11-1 .
3. Criteria for Review. The City should approve applications for Annexation into the City of
Onalaska only when meeting the following utilities and community facilities criteria, or if other
important community goals are met:
a. The area proposed for Annexation has access to or can be easily connected to areas already
served by the City, thereby allowing efficient delivery of services, facilities and utilities.
b. The Annexation is in an area designated for growth on the City’s Future Land Use Map.
c. All public improvements, both off-site and onsite, necessary to serve the annexation area can
be constructed and financed in accordance with City standards and policies, and in
accordance with the goals and objectives within the Comprehensive Plan.
d. The annexation area can be developed in a timely manner so that the City does not invest in
development costs without the timely return of necessary fees and taxes.
e. The increased tax base and overall benefits to the City of approving the Annexation outweigh
the actual financial impact on the community for providing police, fire, road maintenance and
other public improvements and services to the annexation area.
4. Decision.
a. Following the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall review the application and
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the Annexation and shall transmit the
application along with its recommendations to the Common Council.
b. The Plan Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate
information.
c. Following receipt of the Plan Commission’s recommendation, the Common Council shall
review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the Annexation application.
d. The Common Council shall state, in writing, its findings for approval or denial, as well as any
conditions of approval.
e. If an application for Annexation has been denied by the Council, no person may again apply
for the annexation of that parcel until the expiration of one (1) year after the previous denial.
i. Such restriction shall not be applicable if the subsequent Annexation is premised upon a
proposed development and/or addresses the previously expressed concerns of the Plan
Commission.
ii. Any request for Annexation within the one (1) year limit shall be initially reviewed by the
Plan Commission for compliance with this paragraph. After such review, the Plan
Commission shall determine whether a public hearing can be set for consideration of the
application.
iii. A Protest against Annexation. In the event of protest against Annexation, it shall result in
the need for a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the full Common Council membership for such
Annexation to be adopted.
E. Update Map on File. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for updating the Zoning Map on
file with any Annexations approved.
13.05.47 Official Map Amendment
A. Applicability.
1. The Common Council may change or add to the Official Map so as to establish the exterior lines
of planned streets, highways, railroad right of ways and parkway corridors.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.51
Page 157
2. An Amendment to the Official Map may be initiated by the Common Council, Plan Commission,
or applicable City staff.
B. Review Process.
1. Application Distributed. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and refer it to
applicable City staff for review.
2. Decision.
a. Following the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall review the application and
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the map amendment and shall
transmit the application along with its recommendations to the Common Council.
b. The Plan Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate
information.
c. Following receipt of the Plan Commission’s recommendation, the Common Council shall
review and approve, approve conditionally, or deny the Amendment.
d. The Common Council shall state, in writing, its findings for approval or denial, as well as any
conditions of approval.
Impact Studies
13.05.51 Traffic
A. Applicability.
1. The applicant shall be required to file a Traffic Impact Study if the Zoning Administrator, City
Engineer, Plan Commission, or Common Council determines that the development meets
conditions warranting further study.
2. Upon determination that a Traffic Impact Study is required, the Planning and Engineering
Departments will identify the area of impact, the critical intersections to be analyzed and the
scope of the study.
B. Pre-study Meeting.
1. The individual parameters of the Traffic Impact Study will be agreed upon during an initial prestudy
meeting between the applicant and applicable City staff.
2. The applicant, or their representative, shall document the discussions at the pre-meeting and
submit a letter of confirmation to the City for approval.
3. After review of the letter of confirmation, the Planning Department shall provide the applicant with
a letter confirming approval of the study parameters. This confirmation should be obtained prior to
the beginning of analysis.
4. Failure to obtain approval for the methodologies, parameters or assumptions used, in the Traffic
Impact Study, may result in rejection of the entire study by the City.
C. Study Parameters and Methodology.
1. Parameters for a Traffic Impact Study may include, but not be limited to, the following and shall
be determined as part of the pre-study meeting:
a. Boundary of the traffic impact area;
b. Roadway segments and critical intersections to be included in the study;
c. Adequacy of available turning movement counts and need for additional data;
d. Period of analysis (A.M. and/or P.M. peak hour weekday and/or weekend, depending on the
development);
e. Trip generation rates or acceptable sources to be used;
f. Reductions to driveway trips due to internal circulation (if applicable);
g. Percentage of trip reassignment to account for pass-by and diverted traffic;
h. Directional distribution of site-generated traffic;
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.05.52
Page 158
i. Mode split assumptions (if applicable);
j. Roadway capacity and trends in traffic growth;
k. Acceptable methodologies to be used;
l. The range of feasible traffic engineering and operational improvements associated with the
development;
m. Feasibility of including measures in the development proposal to promote transit ridership;
n. Possibility of implementing other transportation system management strategies such as
flextime and variable work hour programs to redistribute peak hour traffic, employer
ridesharing programs, preferential parking for ride sharers, etc.;
o. Possibility of implementing provisions for alternative modes of transportation, such as
bikeways, pedestrian walkways, including the provision of sidewalks along State Highways
and along the County through roads system;
p. The identification of high accident locations; and
q. A formal cost estimate of mitigation measures, (including construction, design, right-of-way
and utility relocation cost).
2. The methodology shall be in accordance with the following guidelines:
a. Operating capacity and level of service analysis shall be provided for critical roadway
segments and/or intersections within a predetermined impact area.
b. Capacity and level of service analysis will be conducted for the following conditions:
i. Existing traffic, to establish the current conditions as a point of reference;
ii. Existing plus expected natural traffic growth, and approved development projects not yet
completed, if any, to establish the short-term future traffic conditions without the proposed
development;
iii. Full development traffic condition (including existing traffic, expected natural growth,
approved development projects, and expected site generated traffic), to estimate future
traffic conditions once the project is completed.
iv. If the proposed development is expected to be constructed in phases, over a period of
years, analysis for each phase of development must be provided for each of the above
conditions and should include a predetermined rate for natural growth of through traffic.
v. If the proposed development includes a request for rezoning, the study should also
include an analysis comparing the traffic generated by the proposed development with
the traffic generated by the existing zoning or land use/zoning recommendations in
Corridor Plans or Neighborhood Plans. This analysis should be very brief, possibly
consisting only of a table comparing the expected number of new trips generated by the
recommended zoning and the proposed development plan. In addition, a short narrative
should be present comparing the percentage or basic differences between the two (2)
scenarios.
D. Review Process.
1. Applicable city staff shall review the completed Traffic Impact Study in conjunction with the
development plan and make a recommendation to the Plan Commission.
E. Decision.
1. The Plan Commission may make a recommendation for approval or denial of a development plan
based on the Traffic Impact Study provided to the Common Council.
2. The Common Council may approve or deny a development plan based on the Traffic Impact
Study provided.
13.05.52 Air Quality
A. Applicability.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.11
Page 159
1. The applicant shall be required to file an Air Quality Study if the Zoning Administrator, City
Engineer, Plan Commission, or Common Council determines that the development meets
conditions warranting further study.
B. Study Content and Methodology. The content and methodology of the Air Quality Analysis shall be
demonstrate the project’s conformance with the following guidelines:
1. Particulate Emissions. No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direct or
portable source any matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in
Chapter NR 154.11, Wis. Adm. Code.
2. Visible Emissions. No operation or activity shall emit into the ambient air from any direct or
portable source any matter that will affect visibility in excess of the limitations established in
Chapter NR 154.11(6), Wis. Adm. Code.
3. Hazardous Pollutants. No operation or activity shall emit any hazardous substances in such a
quantity, concentration or duration as to be injurious to human health or property, and all
emissions of hazardous substances shall not exceed the limitations established in Chapter NR
154.19, Wis. Adm. Code.
C. Review Process.
1. Applicable city staff shall review the completed study in conjunction with the development plan
and make a recommendation to the Plan Commission.
D. Decision.
1. The Plan Commission may make a recommendation for approval or denial of a development plan
based on the Air Quality Study provided to the Common Council.
2. The Common Council may approve or deny a development plan based on the Air Quality Study
provided.
Chapter 06 Definitions
13.06.11 Rules of Construction
A. All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in the UDC shall be construed according to
the stated purpose and intent of the UDC.
B. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural number;
and the plural number includes the singular number.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory and not permissive.
D. In any instance where a gender specific pronoun is used (e.g. he, his/her), it is gender neutral.
E. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, list of items or examples that use terms such as including,
such as, or similar language are intended to provide examples and not to be exhaustive lists of all
possibilities.
F. Whenever a reference is made to an ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, that reference shall
be construed as referring to the most recent edition of such unless otherwise expressly stated.
G. In the case of any difference in meaning between the text of the UDC and any caption or illustration,
the text shall control.
H. Words and phrases not otherwise defined in this UDC shall be construed according to the common
and approved usage of American English.
13.06.12 General Definitions
A. For the purposes of this Title, the following general definitions shall be used.
1. Abutting. Have a common property line or district line.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.12
Page 160
2. Acre, Net. The actual land devoted to the land use, excluding public streets, public lands, or
unusable lands, and school sites contained within forty-three thousand, five hundred sixty
(43,560) square feet.
3. Alley. A public way that affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
4. Aquifer. A saturated, permeable geologic formation that contains and will yield significant
quantities of water.
5. Block. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public parks or other
recognized lines of demarcation.
6. Building Cornice. A projecting horizontal decorative molding along the top of the principal front
wall of a building.
7. Building Façade. The exterior elevation of a building or structure extending from the ground to
the top of the wall, cornice, parapet, or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation
8. Building Façade Articulation. A recess or projection in the building façade that gives texture to
the building surface, creates the impression that one (1) building is two (2) or more buildings,
incorporates a unique building element, and improves the building’s overall composition and
aesthetic. Minimum requirements for a building break are a depth of two (2) feet and a width of
four (4) feet.
9. Building Height. The vertical distance from the average curb level in front of the lot or the
average finished grade at the building line, whichever is higher, to the highest point of the coping
of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a
gambrel, hip or pitched roof. See Figure 13.06.12-1.
Figure 13.06.12-1 Building Height
10. Building Parapet. A low wall or protective barrier that extends vertically above the roof line of a
building.
11. Building Roof Ridge Line. The line which marks the highest point of a pitched roof.
12. Building Stepback. A setback of a building’s upper floor(s) in order to reduce the building’s bulk,
articulate the base of the building, ensure a more comfortable street environment, and provide
light and air at street level
13. Building Street Frontage. The proportion of a lot’s frontage on a public street that is occupied by
a building as measured at the required maximum front yard setback. Corner lots must meet
maximum front yard setback requirements for both public street frontages.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.12
Page 161
14. Building Transparency. Openings in the street-facing façade of a building that are transparent,
including windows and doors, which enable increased physical and/or visual interaction between
street/sidewalk/plaza activities and a building’s interior uses and activities.
15. Building, Detached. A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
16. Building, Principal. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is
conducted.
17. Business. An occupation, employment or enterprise that occupies time, labor and materials, or
wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered.
18. Commission. The Plan Commission created by the Common Council pursuant to Sec. 62.23 of
the Wis. Stats. as may be amended.
19. Community Event. An event in the Onalaska region that is sponsored by a social, religious,
fraternal, non-profit, or governmental organization that benefits the larger society, a charitable
cause, or acts a fundraiser for the sponsor.
20. Comprehensive Plan. A Comprehensive Plan prepared by the City indicating the general
locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and
for the general physical development of the City and includes any unit or part of such plan
separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
21. Cone of Depression. The area around a well, in which the water level has been lowered at least
one-tenth (1/10) of one (1) foot by pumping of the well.
22. Conservation Standards. Guidelines and specifications for soil and water conservation practices
and management enumerated in the Technical Guide, prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation
Service for La Crosse County, adopted by the County Soil and Water Conservation District
Supervisors, and containing suitable alternatives for the use and treatment of land based upon its
capabilities from which the landowner selects that alternative which best meets their needs in
developing their soil and water conservation.
23. Construction Area. Any area in which movement of earth, alteration of topography, soil
compaction, disruption of vegetation, changes in soil chemistry, or any change in the natural
character of the land occurs as a result of site preparation, grading, building construction or any
other construction activity.
24. Critical Root Zone. The area of tree roots within the crown drip line. This zone is generally
defined as a circle with a radius extending from a tree’s trunk to a point no less than the furthest
crown drip line. Disturbances within this zone will directly affect a tree’s chance for survival.
25. Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to construction of, or additions or substantial improvements to, buildings, other structures,
or accessory uses, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
disposition of materials.
26. District, Base. A part or parts of the City for which the regulations of this Title governing the use
and location of land and building are uniform.
27. District, Overlay. Overlay districts, also referred to herein as regulatory areas, provide for the
possibility of superimposing certain additional requirements upon a base zoning district without
disturbing the requirements of the base district. In the instance of conflicting requirements, the
stricter of the conflicting requirements shall apply with the exception of the Planned Unit
Development overlay district or Planned Commercial Industrial District, which may supersede the
requirements of the underlying base district as specifically approved by the Common Council.
28. Division of Land. Where the title or any part thereof is transferred by the execution of a land
contract, an option to purchase, an offer to purchase and acceptance, a deed, or a certified
survey.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.12
Page 162
29. Dwelling. A building designed or used exclusively as a residence or sleeping place, but does not
include boarding or lodging houses, motels, hotels, tents, cabins or mobile homes.
30. Dwelling Unit. A group of rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling, which are arranged,
designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one (1) family.
31. Dwelling, Efficiency. A dwelling unit consisting of one (1) principal room with no separate
sleeping rooms.
32. Easement. The area of land set aside or over or through which a liberty, privilege or advantage in
land, distinct from ownership of the land, is granted to the public or some particular person/entity
or part of the public.
33. Exposure, Primary. Open areas adjacent to the front wall (or main entrance) of a dwelling unit.
34. Exposure, Secondary. Open areas adjacent to side and rear walls of a dwelling unit.
35. Extraterritorial Plat Approval Jurisdiction. The unincorporated area within one and one-half
(1-1/2) miles of a fourth class City or a village and within three (3) miles of all other cities.
36. Family. The body of persons who live together in one (1) dwelling unit as a single housekeeping
entity.
37. Forester. A person holding a Bachelor’s degree in forestry from an accredited four-year college
of forestry.
38. Foster Family Home. The primary domicile of a foster parent which is four (4) or fewer foster
children and which is licensed under Sec. 48.62 of the Wis. Stats. as may be amended.
39. Frontage. All the property abutting on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets
or all of the property abutting on one (1) side of a street between an intersecting street and the
dead end of a street.
40. Garage, Private. A detached accessory building or portion of the principal building, designed,
arranged, used or intended to be used primarily for storage of automobiles of the occupant of the
private premises.
41. Garage, Public. Any building or portion thereof, not accessory to a residential building or
structure, used primarily for equipping, servicing, repairing, leasing or public parking of motor
vehicles.
42. Gross Floor Area. For the purpose of determining off-street parking and off-street loading
requirements, the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of the building, or portion
thereof, devoted to a use requiring off-street parking or loading. This area shall include elevators
and stairways, accessory storage areas located within selling or working space occupied by
counters, racks or closets and any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the
production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices. However, floor area, for
the purposes of determining off-street parking spaces, shall not include floor area devoted
primarily to storage purposes except as otherwise noted herein.
43. Group Foster Home. Any facility operated by a person required to be licensed by the State of
Wisconsin under State Stats. Sec. 48.62 for the care and maintenance of five (5) to eight (8)
foster children.
44. Junk. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in
conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use or
disposition. Junk includes, but is not limited to, vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper,
rags, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, brush, wood and lumber.
45. Landmark Tree. A tree designated because it is one of the largest or oldest of a species located
in the city; it has a historic significance due to an association with a historic building, site, street,
person, or event; or it is a defining landmark or significant outstanding feature of a neighborhood.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.12
Page 163
46. Landscape Architect. A person who practices architecture and is registered or licensed with the
State of Wisconsin in accordance with Sec. 443, Wis. Stats.
47. Loading Area. A completely off-street space or berth on the same lot for the loading or unloading
of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley.
48. Lot. A parcel of land having frontage on a public street, or other officially approved means of
access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size
to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area and other open space provisions of the UDC as
pertaining to the district wherein located.
49. Lot, Area. The area contained within the exterior boundaries of a lot excluding streets and land
under navigable bodies of water.
50. Lot, Buildable Area. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided.
51. Lot, Corner. A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection provided that the corner of
such intersection shall have an angle of one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°) or less, measured
on the lot side.
52. Lot, Coverage - Non-Residential. The area of a lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings and accessory buildings including any driveways, parking areas, loading areas, storage
areas and walkways.
53. Lot, Coverage - Residential. The area of a lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and
accessory buildings.
54. Lot, Interior. A lot situated on a single street which is bounded by adjacent lots along each of its
other lines and is not a corner lot.
55. Lot, Line. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership, except that
where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed
to be the abutting street or alley right-of-way line.
56. Lot, Reversed Corner. A corner lot which is oriented so that it has its rear lot line coincident with
or parallel to the side lot line of the interior lot immediately to its rear.
57. Lot, Substandard. A parcel of land held in separate ownership having frontage on a public
street, or other approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal
building or structure, together with accessory buildings and uses, having insufficient size to meet
the lot width, lot area, yard, off-street parking areas or other open space provisions of this the
UDC as pertaining to the district wherein located.
58. Lot, Through. A lot that has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) substantially parallel streets
and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
59. Lot, Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the building setback
line.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.12
Page 164
Figure 13.06.12-2 Types of Lots
60. Medical Campus. A group of establishments, in one (1) or more buildings, on one (1) parcel of at
least five (5) contiguous developable acres and additional developable land adjacent or
separated by public right-of-way parcels under common ownership designed as a coherent group
to concentrate outpatient or short-term inpatient medical care and in a single location and offer a
variety of medical services to promote the practice, teaching, and progress of medicine and care
of patients.
61. Mobile and Manufactured Home Space. A plot of ground within a manufactured or mobile home
community, designed for the accommodation of one (1) manufactured or mobile home.
62. Mobile and Manufactured Home Unit. A single manufactured or mobile home.
63. Mobile Home Lot. A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home and the exclusive
use of its occupants.
64. Mobile Home Subdivision. A Land Subdivision, as defined by Chapter 236 of the Wis. Stats.
and any City Land Division Ordinance, with lots intended for the placement of individual mobile
home units. Individual home sites are in separate ownership as opposed to the rental
arrangements in mobile home parks.
65. Modular Unit. A modular unit is a factor fabricated transportable building unit designed to be
used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular structure to
be used for residential, commercial, educational or industrial purposes.
66. Multi-modal Path. A path physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic that may be used
for activities such as walking, jogging, and bicycling.
67. Municipal Water Supply. The municipal water supply of the City of Onalaska.
68. Nonconforming Structure, Lot or Use. Any structure, lot, use of land, or any combination
thereof which was existing at the time of the effective date of this UDC or amendments thereto
and which is not in conformance with this UDC. Any such structure conforming in respect to use
but not in respect to frontage, width, height, area, yard, parking, loading or distance requirements
shall not be considered a nonconforming use, but shall be considered non-conforming with
respect to those characteristics.
69. Nurseryman. A person licensed by the State of Wisconsin as a Nurseryman.
70. Operating Standards. Regulations that apply to land use activities/business practices within a
designated Wellhead Protection Overlay District.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.12
Page 165
71. Owner. Includes the plural as well as the singular and may mean a natural person, firm,
association, partnership, private corporation, public or quasi-public corporation, or combination of
these.
72. Park. Parks, playgrounds and open space for recreational enjoyment. The term “park” does not
include facilities owned by a school district.
73. Park, Capital Costs. The cost to construct, expand or improve public park facilities, including the
cost of land, and including legal, engineering and design costs to construct, expand or improve
public park facilities, except that not more than ten percent (10%) of capital costs may consist of
legal, engineering and design costs unless the City can demonstrate that its legal, engineering
and design costs which relate directly to the public park improvement for which the impact fees
were imposed exceed ten percent (10%) of capital costs.
74. Park, Development Fees. Cash contributions, contributions of land or interest in land or any
other items of value that are imposed on a developer.
75. Park, Needs Assessment. New public facilities or improvements or expansions of existing public
facilities as relate to parks that are required because of land development for which impact fees
will be imposed are those which are identified in this section and in parks needs assessment
report prepared prior to the adoption of this section and any amendments hereto. The Needs
Assessment that forms the basis of any development fees imposed by the City by this Ordinance
shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. The Needs Assessment report shall remain on
file in the office of the City Clerk for the entire period during which development fees arising out of
a specific report and this section are collected prior to expenditure, and such report shall, after
expenditure of all development fees, be maintained as a public record for such time period as
required by law.
76. Park, Service Area. A geographic area delineated by the Common Council for which the City
provides public facilities.
77. Park, Service Standard. A certain quantity or quality of public facilities relative to a certain
number of persons, parcels of land or other appropriate measure, as specified by the City.
78. Park, Service Unit. Residential or nonresidential development that benefits from the City’s Park
system.
79. Parking Lot. A structure or premises containing five (5) or more parking spaces open to the
public.
80. Parties of Interest. Includes all abutting property owners, all property owners within one hundred
(100) feet, and all property owners of opposite frontages.
81. Pedestrian Pathway. A public way, usually running at right angles to streets, which is intended
for the convenience of pedestrians only; it may also provide public rightof-way
for utilities.
82. Person. Person means an individual, partnership, association, corporation, municipality or state
agency, or other legal entity.
83. Plat. The map, drawing or chart on which the applicant’s plat of subdivision is presented to the
City for approval.
84. Plat, Final. The Final Plat map, drawing or chart on which the applicant’s plan of subdivision is
presented for approval and which, if approved, will be recorded at the office of the La Crosse
County Register of Deeds.
85. Plat, Preliminary. The Preliminary Plat map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of
the subdivision to be submitted for its consideration as to compliance with the Comprehensive
Plan and these regulations along with required supporting data.
86. Protective Covenants. Contracts entered into between private parties or between private parties
and public bodies pursuant to Sec. 236.293, Wis. Stats., which constitute a restriction on the use
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.12
Page 166
of all private or platted property within a subdivision for the benefit of the public or property
owners and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which
would tend to impair stability of values.
87. Public Improvement. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, open channel, water main, roadway,
intersection controls, park, parkway, public access, sidewalk, pedestrian way, planting strip or
other facility for which the City may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation.
88. Recharge Area. The area which encompasses all areas or features that, by surface infiltration of
water, reaches the zone of saturation of an aquifer, and supplies groundwater to a well.
89. Regulated Substances. Chemicals and chemical mixtures that are health hazards. Health
hazards for chemicals and chemical mixtures are typically identified on Material Safety Data
Sheets (MSDS) available from the substance manufacturer or supplier. Substances packaged for
consumption for humans or animals are not considered regulated substances. Regulated
substances include but are not limited to:
a. Chemicals for which there is scientific evidence that acute or chronic health effects may result
from exposure including carcinogens, toxic and highly toxic agents, irritants, corrosives,
sensitizers, hepatotoxins, agents that act on the hematopoietic system, reproductive toxins,
and agents which damage the lungs, skin, eyes, or mucous membranes as defined in 29
CFR 1910.1200, Appendix A, “Health Hazard Definitions (Mandatory).”
b. Mixtures of chemicals, which have been tested as a whole and have been determined to be a
health hazard.
c. Mixtures of chemicals which have not been tested as a whole but which contain any chemical
which has been determined to be a health hazard and comprises one percent (1%) or greater
of the composition on a weight per unit weight basis.
d. Mixtures of chemicals which include a carcinogen if the concentration of the carcinogen in the
mixture is one-tenth (1/10) of one percent (1 &) or greater of the composition on a weight per
unit weight basis.
e. Ingredients of mixtures prepared within the Groundwater Protection Overlay District in cases
where such ingredients are health hazards but comprise more than one-tenth (1/10) of one
percent (1%) of the mixture on a weight per unit weight basis if carcinogenic, or more than
one percent (1%) of the mixture on a weight per unit weight basis if non-carcinogenic.
f. Petroleum and non-solid petroleum derivatives (except non-PCB dielectric fluids used in
equipment or for transmission of electric power to homes and businesses).
90. Replat. The process of changing, or a map or plat which changes the boundaries of a recorded
subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of a large block, lot or outlot within a recorded
subdivision plat without changing exterior boundaries of said block, lot or outlot is not a replat
91. Shoreland. The area within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of
navigable waters, as defined under Sec. 281.31(2)(d) Wis. Stats.: (1) one thousand (1,000) feet
from a lake, pond or flowage. If the navigable water is a glacial pothole lake, this distance shall be
measured from the high- water mark of the lake; or (2) three hundred (300) feet from a river or
stream or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater, Sec. 59.692(1)(b),
Wis. Stats.
92. Specimen Tree(s) or Stand. Any tree or grouping of trees which has been determined to be of
high value because of its type, size, age, or other professional criteria, and has been so
designated.
93. Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding fourteen (14) feet in height shall be considered as
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.12
Page 167
an additional story for each fourteen (14) feet or fraction thereof. A basement having one-half
(1/2) or more of its height above grade shall be deemed a story for purposes of height regulation.
94. Story, Half. That portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall plates of
which, on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls, are not more than four and one-half (4-1/2) feet
above the finished floor of such story. In the case of one (1) family dwellings, two (2) family
dwellings and multi-family dwellings less than three (3) stories in height, a half (1/2) story in a
sloping roof shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of this Code.
95. Street. Property other than an alley or private thoroughfare or travel-way which is subject to
public easement or right-of-way for use as a thoroughfare and which is twenty-one (21) feet or
more in width.
96. Street, Arterial. A public street or highway used or intended to be used primarily for large volume
or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets shall include freeways and expressways as well as
arterial streets, highways and parkways.
97. Street, Collector. A street which collects and distributes internal traffic within an urban area such
as a residential neighborhood, between arterial and local streets. It provides access to abutting
property.
98. Street, Controlled Access Arterial. The condition in which the right of owners or occupants of
abutting land or other persons to access, light, air or view in connection with an arterial street is
fully or partially controlled by public authority.
99. Street, Cul-de-sac. A short street having but one (1) end open to traffic and the other end being
permanently terminated in a vehicular turnaround.
100. Street, Frontage. A minor street auxiliary to and located on the side of an arterial street
for control of access and for service to the abutting development.
101. Street, Local. A street of little or no continuity designed to provide access to abutting
property and leading into collector streets.
102. Street, Major Thoroughfare. A street used or intended to be used primarily for fast or
heavy through traffic. Major thoroughfares shall include freeways, expressways and other
highways and parkways, as well as arterial streets.
103. Structural Alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as
foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
104. Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a permanent
location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground.
105. Structure, Minor. Any small, movable accessory erection or construction such as
birdhouses, tool houses, pet houses, play equipment, arbors and walls.
106. Subdivider. Any person, firm or corporation, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing
to divide land resulting in a subdivision, minor subdivision or replat.
107. Subdivision. The division of a lot, outlot, parcel, or tract of land by the owner thereof or
their agent for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development:
a. Where the act of division creates five (5) or more parcels or building sites, all of which are five
(5) acres or less in area; or
b. Where the act of division creates five (5) or more parcels or building sites, all of which are five
(5) acres or less in area, by successive divisions within a period of five (5) years, whether
done by the original owner or a successor owner.
108. Subdivision, Minor. The division of land by the owner or their agent resulting in the
creation of not more than four (4) parcels or building sites.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.12
Page 168
109. Time of Travel, Five Year. The five (5) year time of travel is the recharge area
upgradient a well, including the cone of depression, the outer boundary from which it is
determined or estimated that groundwater will take five years to reach a pumping well.
110. Time of Travel, Thirty Day. The thirty (30) day time of travel is the recharge area of a
well, or its cone of depression, the outer boundary of which it is determined or estimated that
groundwater will take thirty (30) days to reach a pumping well.
111. Tree Diameter-At-Breast-Height. A standard measure of tree size, and is a tree trunk
diameter measured in inches at a height of four and one-half (4½) feet above the ground. If a tree
splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half (4½) feet, the trunk is measured at its most
narrow point beneath the split.
112. Tree Drip Line. An imaginary vertical line that extends from the outermost branches of a
tree’s canopy to the ground.
113. Unnecessary Hardship. An unusual or extreme decrease in the adaptability of the
property to the uses permitted by the Zoning District which is caused by facts, such as rough
terrain or good soil conditions, uniquely applicable to the particular piece of property as
distinguished from those applicable to most or all property in the same Zoning District.
114. Utilities. Public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and sewage pumping
stations, water storage tanks, electrical power substations, static transformer stations, telephone
and telegraph exchanges, microwave radio relays and gas regulation stations, fiber cables,
inclusive of associated transmission facilities, but not including sewage disposal plants, municipal
incinerators, warehouses, shops, storage yards and power plants.
115. Vegetative Buffer. A protective vegetated zone located adjacent to a natural resource
such as a water body or a vegetated area used to screen or partially screen a use or property
from another use or property or to shield or mitigate noise, lights, or other impacts.
116. Well Field. A parcel of land used primarily for the purpose of locating wells to supply a
municipal water system.
117. Wetlands. An area where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to be
capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet
conditions as defined by Sec. 23.32(1), Wis. Stats..
118. Wisconsin Administrative Code. The rules of administrative agencies having
rulemaking
authority in Wisconsin published in a loose-leaf, continual revision system, as
directed by Sec. 35.93 and Chapter 227 of the Wis. Stats., including subsequent amendments to
those rules.
119. Yard. An open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from
the ground upward except vegetation.
120. Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall be
the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto through the
nearest point of the foundation of the principal structure. This yard shall be opposite the street
yard or one (1) of the street yards on a corner lot. See Figure 13.06.12-3.
121. Yard, Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
nearest point of the foundation of that portion of the building to be enclosed. The overhang
cornices shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches. Any overhang of the cornice in excess of
twenty-four (24) inches shall be compensated by increasing the setback by an amount equal to
the excess of cornice over twenty-four (24) inches.
122. Yard, Side. A yard extending from the street yard to the rear yard of the lot, the width of
which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and a line parallel
thereto through the nearest point of the foundation of the principal structure. See Figure 13.06.12-
3.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.13
Page 169
123. Yard, Street. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which shall be
the minimum horizontal distance between the existing street or highway right-of-way line and a
line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the foundation of the principal structure. Corner
lots shall have two (2) street yards. See Figure 13.06.12-3
124. Zone of Saturation. The saturated zone is the area of unconsolidated, fractured or
porous material that is saturated with water and constitutes groundwater.
Figure 13.06.12-3 Yard Designation
13.06.13 Uses Definitions
A. For the purposes of this Title, the following definitions shall be used to define land uses within the
City.
1. Accessory Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit that is located on the same lot as a principal
residential structure to which it is accessory.
2. Accessory Structure. A detached structure subordinate to the principal use of a structure, parcel
of land or water and located on the same lot or parcel serving a purpose incidental to the principal
use or the principal structure. Examples of accessory structures include, but are not limited to,
detached garages, detached decks, storage sheds, gazebos, greenhouses, pergolas, outdoor
saunas, solar equipment, children’s play structures that are permanently anchored to the ground
with earth screws/foundations/etc., swimming pools greater than eighteen (18) feet in diameter,
and other similar accessory structures.
3. Accessory Use. A subordinate use which is located on the same lot on which the principal
building or use is situated and which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the
primary use of such building or main use, when permitted by district regulations.
4. Adult Use - Adult Bookstore or Video Store. An establishment that has a substantial portion
[more than fifty percent (50%)] of its stock in trade and offers for sale, for any form of
consideration, any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed
matter, or photographs, film, motion pictures, electronic media, or other visual representations
that are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction of or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are
designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.13
Page 170
5. Adult Use – Adult Mini Theater Device. Such device shall mean any coin or slug-operated or
electrically or electronically or mechanically controlled machine or device that dispenses or
effectuates the dispensing of "entertainment," that is intended for the viewing of one (1) or more
but less than one hundred (100) persons in exchange for any payment of any consideration. The
term "mini-theatre device" shall not include any conventional motion picture screen or projection
area designed to be viewed in a room containing tiers or rows of seats with a viewer seating
capacity of one hundred (100) or more persons.
6. Adult Use - Adult Motion Picture Theater/Mini Motion Picture Theater/Arcade. An
establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, electronic media, or
similar photographic reproductions are shown, in which a substantial portion of the total
presentation is devoted to the showing of material characterized by an emphasis on the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
7. Adult Use - Adult Oriented Entertainment Business. An adult video or bookstore, adult motion
picture theater, arcade, adult massage parlor, adult sauna, adult entertainment center, adult
cabaret, adult steam room/bathhouse facility or any other business whose primary business
activity is characterized by emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse as defined herein.
8. Adult Use - Cabarets. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar establishment that regularly
features live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas
or by specified sexual activities, or films, motion pictures, electronic media, or other photographic
reproductions in which more than ten percent (10%) of the total presentation time is devoted to
the showing of material that is characterized by any emphasis upon the depiction of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
9. Adult Use - Massage Parlor. An establishment which restricts minors by reason of age, and
which provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". This definition does not
include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar
establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an
incidental or accessory service.
10. Adult Use - Nudity. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic areas with less
than a fully opaque covering or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly erect state
and/or the appearance of bare buttocks, anus or female breast, excluding the act of breastfeeding
an infant or child.
11. Adult Use - Sadomasochistic Abuse. The flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in
undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of the person so clothed.
12. Adult Use - Sexual Conduct. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a
person’s unclothed genitals, pubic areas, buttocks or if such person be a female, her breast.
13. Adult Use - Sexual Excitement. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a state
of sexual stimulation or arousal.
14. Adult Use - Specified Anatomical Areas. Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
15. Adult Use - Specified Sexual Activities. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic
touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
16. Agriculture. The use of land for the growing and/or production of field crops, livestock, and
livestock products for income generation, including but not limited to floriculture, forest and game
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.13
Page 171
management, orchards, raising of grain, grass, mint and seed crops, raising of fruits, nuts and
berries, sod farming and vegetable farming. Livestock products include but are not limited to milk,
butter, cheese, eggs, honey and fur. Agriculture includes the operating of such an area for one (1)
or more of the above uses with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce,
provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of
the normal farming activities.
17. Airport. Any airport which complies with the definition contained in Sec. 114.013(3), Wis. Stats.,
or any airport that serves or offers to serve common carriers engaged in air transport.
18. Animal Boarding, Shelter, or Daycare Center. Any structure or premises on which three (3) or
more dogs or cats over six (6) months of age are temporarily or permanently boarded, including
animal day care/spa facilities.
19. Animal/Veterinary Clinic or Hospital. A facility for the diagnosis, treatment, or hospitalization of
small animals, including dogs, cats, rabbits, hamsters, and other animals of similar nature. Facility
may also provide boarding for animals as part of medical services.
20. Automobile Fueling and Service Station. A place where gasoline, kerosene or any other motor
fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and
deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles, including greasing, oiling and vehicle washing on
the premises.
21. Automobile Repair and Service, Major. General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines,
motor vehicles or trailers; collision services including body, frame, or fender straightening or
repair; overall painting or paint shop; vehicle steam cleaning.
22. Automobile Repair and Service, Minor. Incidental body or fender work, or other minor repairs,
painting and upholstering, replacement of parts and motor service to passenger cars and trucks
not exceeding one and one-half (1.5) tons' capacity, but not including any operation named under
"Automobile Repair, Major," or any other similar thereto.
23. Automobile Sales, Leasing, and Service. An open area, other than a street, used for the
display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles in operable condition and where no repair
work is done.
24. Bed and Breakfast Establishment. Any place of lodging that provides eight (8) or fewer rooms
for rent to no more than a total of twenty (20) tourists for more than ten (10) nights in a twelve
(12) month period, is the owner's personal residence, is occupied by the owner at the time of
rental and in which the only meal served to guests is breakfast.
25. Brewery. A facility used for the manufacture of fermented malt beverages or a fermented malt
beverage manufacturer with a mechanized bottling capability.
26. Brewpub. An establishment that operates a restaurant and manufactures up to ten thousand
(10,000) barrels of fermented malt beverages per calendar year on premises for consumption
either on or off premises in hand-capped, machine-capped or sealed containers in quantities up
to one-half (1/2) barrel or fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons sold directly to the consumer. The
establishment shall hold a Class "B" liquor license issued by the state if, in addition to offering for
sale fermented malt beverages manufactured on the premises, it also offers for sale fermented
malt beverages manufactured by a brewer other than the establishment.
27. Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used
for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, machinery or materials. When a
building is divided into separate parts by unpierced fire walls extending from the ground up, each
part shall be deemed a separate building.
28. Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used exclusively for the burial of the human dead and
dedicated for cemetery purposes, including, mausoleums, if operated in connection with and
within the boundaries of such cemetery.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.13
Page 172
29. Child Care Center, Licensed. A dwelling unit licensed as a Licensed Family Child Care Center
by the State of Wisconsin, pursuant to Sec. 48.65 Wis. Stats., and Chapter DCF 250 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code, where a resident of the dwelling is providing care for less than
twenty-four (24) hours at a time for between four (4) and eight (8) children who are unrelated to
the provider.
30. Child Care Center, Licensed Group. A facility licensed as a Group Child Care Center by the
State of Wisconsin, pursuant to Sec. 48.65 Wis. Stats., and Chapter DCF 251 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, where the operator is providing care for less than twenty-four (24) hours at a
time for more than eight (8) children. This term includes, but is not limited to the following: day
care center, nursery school, or preschool. The term shall not include the exceptions identified in
DCF 251.03. This term also includes a child care center that is accessory to another use and that
is intended for use by the employees of the principal uses and their immediate family for more
than three (3) hours of care and supervision a day. This term does not include Certified Family
Child Care Provider, as defined below, in which the operator resides.
31. Child Care Provider, Certified Family. A dwelling unit certified under the Department of
Children and Families Chapter 202, where a resident of the dwelling is providing care for less
than (24) twenty- four hours at a time for one (1) to three (3) children under the age of seven (7)
who are unrelated to the provider.
32. Clinic. Any entity that is not a hospital or residence that is used primarily for the provision of
outpatient nursing, medical, podiatric, dental, chiropractic, optometric or mental health care and
treatment or an entity which is required to be certified under the Department of Health Services in
order to receive reimbursement for outpatient health services to clients.
33. Club, Lodge, or Meeting Place of a Non-Commercial Nature. A nonprofit association of
persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues, and are organized for some common
purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily
carried on as a commercial enterprise.
34. Construction Contractor Yard. A lot or portion of a lot or parcel used to store and maintain
construction equipment and other materials customarily required in the building trades by a
construction contractor. This definition includes architects, engineers, surveyors, real estate sign
placement services, showrooms and shops for the display and sale of electrical, plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, sheet metal and other materials in connection with contracting services.
35. Drive-Through Facility. A business establishment which includes on its site the opportunity for a
patron to receive a service or product while seated in their vehicle, including the receiving or a
service or product after ordering at a menu-board and being parked in a designated parking stall.
A drive-through facility shall not include a designated pick-up area for a retail store, a walk-up
window, or a drive-up restaurant whereby there is a canopy under which vehicles are parked and
food served.
36. Dwelling, Apartment. A residential building designed for or occupied by three (3) or more
dwelling units with a joint entrance from the outside.
37. Dwelling, Apartment Mixed Use. A building designed for or used by one (1) or more families or
dwelling units as well as non-residential uses that are permitted in the zoning district to be located
on the ground story, with all dwelling units sharing a joint entrance from the outside.
38. Dwelling, Attached Townhouse or Rowhouse. A building designed for or used exclusively for
five (5) or more families or dwelling units, which are attached horizontally by at least one (1)
common wall extending from the foundation to the roof, and providing separate entrances from
the outside for each unit.
39. Dwelling, Farmstead. A single-family residential structure located on a parcel of land for which
the primary land use is associated with agriculture.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.13
Page 173
40. Dwelling, Senior Independent Living. Any facility which provides independent living
opportunities for senior citizens, typically age fifty-five (55) and up, such as garden apartments,
group housing, and apartments.
41. Dwelling, Single-Family. A detached building designed for occupancy by one (1) family.
42. Dwelling, Two-Family. A detached building containing two (2) separate dwelling (or living) units,
designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families.
43. Dwelling, Zero Lot Line. The concept whereby two (2) respective dwelling units within a building
shall be on separate and abutting lots and shall meet on the common property line between them,
thereby having zero (0) space between said units.
44. Essential Services. Services provided by public and private utilities, necessary for the exercise
of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These services include underground,
surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, storm water drainage, and
communication systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, mains, drains,
vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations and hydrants, but not including
buildings.
45. Helipad or Helistop. Any area of land or building, other than an airport, which is made available
for the landing and takeoff of helicopters or other aircraft used in emergency situations and which
does not include refueling, maintenance, repair or storage of helicopters.
46. Home Occupation. An occupation, profession, or activity, whether conducted for profit or not for
profit, that is carried on by a resident of the dwelling in a manner that the use is limited in extent
and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. An occupation, profession, or
activity shall not be considered a home occupation if the resident is performing administrative,
clerical, or research work in their home for a licensed entity located elsewhere. A certified family
child care provider or licensed family child care center are not considered home occupations.
47. Hospital. Any building, structure or institution that meets the definition of a hospital under Wis.
Admin Code Department of Health Services 124.02(6).
48. Hotel/Motel. A building in which lodging, with or without meals, is offered to transient guests for
compensation and in which there are more than five (5) sleeping rooms.
49. Indoor Recreational Facility, Commercial. Facilities operated as a business and which are
open to the public for a fee that shall include, but is not limited to, billiard parlors, skating rinks,
indoor swimming pools, bowling alleys, movie theaters, arcades, tennis courts, and other similar
businesses. Such businesses may also provide a snack bar, restaurant, retails sales of related
items, and other support facilities.
50. Indoor Recreational Facility, Public. Municipal, County, State, or Federal owned recreation
facilities not accessory to a public park or school/university campus.
51. Makerspace. An establishment where hand-tools, mechanical tools and electronic tools are
shared or individually used for the manufacture of artisan finished products or parts including
design, processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of products; as well as the
incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products. Typical artisan manufacturing uses
include, but are not limited to: electronic goods; food and bakery products; non-alcoholic
beverages; printmaking; household appliances; leather products; jewelry and clothing/apparel;
metal work; furniture; glass or ceramic production; paper manufacturing.
52. Manufactured Home. A manufactured home that is HUD certified and labeled under the National
Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. A mobile home is a transportable
structure, being eight (8) feet or more in width (not including the overhang of the roof), built on a
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.13
Page 174
53. Manufactured or Mobile Home Community. A parcel of land which has been developed for the
placement of mobile homes and is owned by an individual, a firm, trust, partnership, public or
private association, or corporation. Individual lots within a mobile home community are rented to
individual mobile home users.
54. Manufacturing, Heavy. An establishment or use of land that manufactures, assembles, or
fabricates using processes that generally create odor, noise, vibration, illumination or particulates
that may impact surrounding properties. This category shall also include any use of land that
needs large unscreened outdoor structures or storage that cannot be incorporated into the
building. Examples include, but are not limited to the following: large-scale food and bottling
operations; lumber, milling and planning facilities; grain milling; aggregate, concrete, and asphalt
plants; foundries, forge shops, and other intensive metal fabrication; and chemical manufacturing.
55. Manufacturing, Light. An establishment or use of land for the assembly or processing of
previously processed components or manufactured parts using processes that do not create
significant amounts of noise, vibration, illumination, or particulates that may impact surrounding
properties. Odors produced on-site shall not negatively affect other businesses or properties in
the area. Examples include, but are not limited to the following: food; pharmaceuticals; clothes;
furniture (where wood is milled off-site); hardware; toys; light sheet metal products; mechanical
components; printing; small vehicle assembly; and computer software.
56. Outdoor Dining Area. An area for eating and drinking that is associated with an adjacent food or
beverage service principal use.
57. Outdoor Recreational Facility, Commercial. Land or facilities operated as a business and
which are open to the general public for a fee that shall include, but is not limited to, golf courses,
outdoor swimming pools, amusement parks, and other similar businesses. Such facility may also
provide a snack bar, restaurant, retail sales of related items, and other support facilities.
58. Outdoor Recreational Facility, Public. Municipal, County, State, or Federally-owned recreation
facilities not accessory to a public park or school/university campus.
59. Outdoor Sales Display. An outdoor arrangement of objects, items, products, and other
materials, typically not in a fixed position and capable of rearrangement, designed and used for
the purpose of selling product that is typically sold within the associated principal use.
60. Place of Worship. Building(s) or structure(s) which by design, construction, and/or adaptation
are primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services and associated
accessory uses.
61. Principal Use. The main use of land or building as distinguished from subordinate or accessory
use.
62. Provisional Use. Land use or development that either by design or operation requires additional
technical or regulatory review and permitting in order to exist within defined areas of a Wellhead
Protection Overlay District.
63. Retail Store. An establishment that engages in retail sales of merchandise or food to the general
public for direct consumption and not for wholesale.
a. Retail Store, High Intensity. A retail establishment of seventy-five thousand (75,000) gross
square feet or greater.
b. Retail Store, Medium Intensity. A retail establishment of fifteen thousand to seventy-five
thousand (15,000 to 75,000) gross square feet.
c. Retail Store, Low Intensity. A retail establishment containing no more than fifteen thousand
(15,000) gross square feet.
64. Satellite Earth Station. An apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or
a transmitter relay located in a planetary orbit. They are also commonly referred to as disks,
satellite communications systems or home earth stations.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.14
Page 175
65. Senior Care Facility. An establishment used as a dwelling place by the aged, infirm, chronically
ill or incurably afflicted, in which not less than three (3) persons live or are kept or provided for on
the premises for compensation, excluding clinics and hospitals and similar institutions devoted to
the diagnosis, treatment or the care of the sick or injured.
66. Shopping Center. Commercial sites that consist of primarily retail establishments with two (2) or
more separate businesses managed as a total entity and sharing common access, circulation,
and pedestrian and parking areas so that a public right-of-way does not need to be used to get
from one business to another.
a. Shopping Center, Community. A shopping center that provides a limited number of
frequently or recurrently needed retail or personal services for residents in the community
that generally has up to thirty thousand(30,000) square feet of gross leasable area.
b. Shopping Center, Regional. A shopping center that provides a wide range of retail or
personal service needs for residents in the region that generally contains greater than thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet of gross leasable area and two (2) or more anchor stores.
67. Short Term Vacation Rental. A place where the entire house or limited rooms in an individual’s
house are rented to travelers for one (1) or more nights, and include renting of rooms or
properties through internet sites such as or similar to craigslist, airbnb.com, vbro.com,
homeaway.com, and flipkey.com.
68. Storage Yard. A place other than a construction contractor yard where materials and/or
equipment utilized in commercial or industrial applications are stored outside, including scrap or
salvage yards where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled,
packed, disassembled, handled, or stored outside.
69. Swimming Pool. An outdoor accessory structure containing a body of water in a receptacle or
other container having a depth for water at any point greater than one and one half (1 1/2) feet
located above or below the surface of ground elevation, used or intended to be used solely by the
owner, operator or lessee thereof and their family, and by friends invited to use it, and includes all
structural facilities, appliances and appurtenances, equipment and other items used and intended
to be used for the operation and maintenance of a swimming pool.
70. Temporary Produce Tent/Stand. A temporary structure at which agricultural products such as
raw vegetables, fruits, plants, nuts, honey, eggs, etc. are sold.
71. Use. The purpose or activity, for which the land or building thereof is designed, arranged or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
13.06.14 Floodplain Definitions
A. The following definitions have been established as part of the Floodplain Protection Overlay District.
1. A Zones. Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map which would be inundated by
the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may
or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area.
2. AH Zone. See Area of Shallow Flooding definition.
3. AO Zone. See Area of Shallow Flooding definition.
4. Accessory Structure or Use. A facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or
incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building.
5. Alteration. An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or modifications other than an
addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and
other systems within a structure.
6. Area of Shallow Flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a
Community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.14
Page 176
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flood may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
7. Base Flood Elevation (BFE). Means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) as part of a Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and depicted on a FIRM.
8. Basement. Any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level,
on all sides.
9. Building. See Structure definition.
10. Bulkhead Line. A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a
municipal ordinance and approved by the Department pursuant to Sec. 30.11, Wis. Stats., and
which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high water mark,
except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this ordinance.
11. Campground. Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the
purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four (4) or more camping units, or
which is advertised or represented as a camping area.
12. Camping Unit. Any portable device, no more than four hundred (400) square feet in area, used
as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup
truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use.
13. Certificate of Compliance. A certification that the construction and the use of land or a building,
the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of
this ordinance.
14. Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct
normal flow of water.
15. Crawlways or Crawl Space. An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally
less than five (5) feet in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities.
16. Deck. An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which
allows the infiltration of precipitation.
17. Department. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR).
18. Development. Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of
additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged
structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage
or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation;
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition
or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private
sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
19. Dryland Access. A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which
connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its
surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
20. Encroachment. Any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in the floodway.
21. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that administers the
National Flood Insurance Program.
22. Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions:
a. The overflow or rise of inland waters;
b. The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.14
Page 177
c. The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels
along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior; or
d. The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or
by some similarly unusual event.
23. Flood Frequency. The probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical
analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the
average once in a specified number of years or as a percent (%) chance of occurring in any given
year.
24. Flood Hazard Boundary Map. A map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood
hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A Zones and do not contain floodway lines or
regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects
of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) and a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
25. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). A map of a community on which the Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the floodplain and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community. This map can only be amended by FEMA.
26. Flood Insurance Study (FIS). A technical engineering examination, evaluation, and
determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected
by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and
may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and
unnumbered A Zones. FIRM that accompany the FIS, form the basis for both the regulatory and
the insurance aspects of the NFIP.
27. Flood Profile. A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water surface
elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river.
28. Flood Protection Elevation. An elevation of two (2) feet of freeboard above the water surface
profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (See: Freeboard.)
29. Flood Storage. Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into
account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge
30. Floodfringe. That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by flood
waters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water.
31. Floodplain. Land which has been or may be covered by flood water during the regional flood. It
includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for
regulatory purposes.
32. Floodplain Island. A natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but
not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood.
33. Floodplain Management. Policy and procedures to insure wise use of floodplains, including
mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain
regulations..
34. Floodproofing. Any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties
and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the
purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage.
35. Floodway. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the
channel required to carry the regional flood discharge.
36. Freeboard. A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated
flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those
calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.14
Page 178
and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to
development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
37. Habitable Structure. Any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation.
38. Hearing Notice. Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. For
appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one (1) week (seven (7) days) before the
hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published
twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven (7) days) before the
hearing.
39. High Flood Damage Potential. Damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger
to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
40. Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
41. Historic Structure. Any structure that is either:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as
determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
42. Increase in Regional Flood Height. A calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation
greater than zero (0) foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions
which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation
of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and
discharge.
43. Land Use. Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (See
Development definition.)
44. Lowest Adjacent Grade. Elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any of the exterior
walls of a building.
45. Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation
design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
46. Maintenance. The act or process of restoring to original soundness, including redecorating,
refinishing, non-structural repairs, or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment
with equivalent fixtures, systems or structures.
47. Manufactured Home. A structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does
not include a "mobile recreational vehicle."
48. Mobile Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, four hundred (400)
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be selfOnalaska
Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.14
Page 179
propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway
use if registration is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured
homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed
or carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational
vehicles."
49. Mobile/Manufactured Home Park, Expansion to Existing. The preparation of additional sites
by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed. This includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or
the pouring if concrete pads.
50. Mobile/Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land,
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
51. Mobile/Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, Existing. A parcel of land, divided into two
(2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots is completed before the effective date of this ordinance. At a minimum, this
would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or
the pouring of concrete pads.
52. Model, Corrected Effective. A hydraulic engineering model that corrects any errors that occur in
the Duplicate Effective Model, adds any additional cross sections to the Duplicate Effective
Model, or incorporates more detailed topographic information than that used in the current
effective model.
53. Model, Duplicate Effective. A copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the effective FIS and
referred to as the effective model.
54. Model, Effective. The hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce the current effective
FIS.
55. Model, Existing (Pre-Project). A modification of the Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected
Effective Model to reflect any man made modifications that have occurred within the floodplain
since the date of the effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which the
revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date of the effective model,
then this model would be identical to the Corrected Effective Model or Duplicate Effective Model.
56. Model, Revised (Post-Project). A modification of the Existing or Pre-Project Conditions Model,
Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected Effective Model to reflect revised or post-project
conditions.
57. Municipality or Municipal. The City enacting, administering and enforcing this ordinance.
58. North American Vertical Datum (NAVD). Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988
adjustment.
59. National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum,
1929 adjustment.
60. New Construction. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures
for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning
regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or
after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
61. Nonconforming Structure. An existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with
the dimensional or structural requirements of this ordinance for the area of the floodplain which it
occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.14
Page 180
use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is
nonconforming.)
62. Nonconforming Use. An existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance for the area of the floodplain which it
occupies. (Such as a residence in the floodway.)
63. Obstruction to Flow. Any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that
this development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase in regional
flood height.
64. Official Floodplain Zoning Map. That map, adopted and made part of this ordinance which has
been approved by the Department and FEMA.
65. Open Space Use. Those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving
structures.
66. Ordinary High Water Mark. The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action
of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or
prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
67. Person. An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality
or state agency.
68. Private Sewage System. A sewage treatment and disposal system serving one (1) structure with
a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means
an alternative sewage system approved by the Department of Safety and Professional Services,
including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving
more than one (1) structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure.
69. Public Utilities. Those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as
electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary
sewer and storm sewer.
70. Reasonably Safe from Flooding. Mean that base flood waters will not inundate the land or
damage structures to be removed from the floodplain and that any subsurface waters related to
the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
71. Regional Flood Elevation (RFE). A flood determined to be representative of large floods known
to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent (1%) chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent
to the BFE.
72. Start of Construction. The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.15
Page 181
73. Structure. Any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily
attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited
to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
74. Subdivision. Has the meaning given in Sec. 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
75. Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of
the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.
76. Substantial Improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of
a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the equalized
assessed value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has
sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of
the work performed. The term does not, however, include either any project for the improvement
of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the
building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any
alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure.
77. Unnecessary Hardship. Where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not
self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage,
height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the
ordinance.
78. Variance. An authorization by the Board of Zoning Appeals for the construction or maintenance
of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses)
contained in the floodplain zoning ordinance.
79. Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain
zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor
elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment
calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
80. Water Surface Profile. A graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of
a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water
surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
81. Watershed. The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of
water.
82. Well. An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other
methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use.
13.06.15 Airport Overlay Zoning District (AOZD) Definitions
A. The following definitions have been established as part of the Airport Overlay Zoning District (AOZD),
which is established by the City of La Crosse, Wisconsin. The City of Onalaska uses these definitions
solely in its authority to administrate the AOZD for those areas of the AOZD which fall within the City
of Onalaska corporate limits.
1. Accessory Structure or Use. A detached subordinate structure or a use which is clearly
incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principal structure or use to which it is
related, and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure or use
2. Air Traffic (FAA FAR. Sec. 1.1). Aircraft operating in the air or on an airport surface, exclusive of
loading ramps and parking areas.
3. Airport (FAA FAR. Sec. 152.3). The La Crosse Regional Airport owned by the City of La Crosse.
Any area of land or water that is used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of
aircraft. Any appurtenant areas that are used or intended for use for airport buildings, other airport
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.15
Page 182
facilities, or rights-of-way; and all airport buildings and facilities located on the areas specified in
this definition.
4. Airport Elevation. The highest point on the usable landing area of an airport that is measured in
feet from Mean Sea Level (MSL).
5. Airport Environs. The land use and people in the areas surrounding an airport which can be
directly affected by the operation of the airport.
6. Airport Hazard (FAA FAR. Sec. 152.3). Any structure or object of natural growth located on or in
the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near a public airport that obstructs the airspace
required or is otherwise hazardous for the flight of aircraft landing or taking off at the airport.
7. Airport Layout Plan (ALP) (FAA FAR Sec. 152.3). The plan of an airport that shows the layout
of existing and proposed airport facilities.
8. Airport Master Plan. The La Crosse Regional Airport Master Plan Report.
9. Airport Overlay Zones. A zone intended to place additional land use conditions on land
impacted by the airport while retaining the existing underlying zone. The FAR Part 77 Surfaces
and Runway Protection Zones (RPZs) have been combined to create five (5) airport overlay
zones. The five (5) specific zones create a comprehensive area focused on maintaining
compatible land use around airports:
a. Zone A: is intended to provide a clear area that is free of above ground obstructions and
structures. This zone is closest to the individual runway ends.
b. Zones B1, B2, & B3: reflect the approach and departure areas for each runway at an airport.
The size of Zone B is predicated upon the type of approach (visual, non-precision, or
precision) that a specific runway has and the type/size of aircraft that utilize the runway.
c. Zone C: includes those areas that are parallel to the runway pavement and extend one
thousand and fifty (1,050) feet from the edge of the primary surface.
d. Zone D: encompasses the horizontal surface (innermost area) and the conical surface
(outermost area), which make up the three (3)-mile jurisdictional boundary delineated at the
La Crosse Regional Airport.
10. Airport Reference Code (ARC) (FAA Website www.faa.gov). The ARC is an FAA coding
system used to relate airport design criteria to the operational and physical characteristics of the
airplanes intended to operate at the airport.
11. Airport Reference Point (ARP). The latitude and longitude of the approximate center of the
airport.
12. Airport Zoning Permit. A Zoning/Building Permit that allows new development or alteration or
expansion of a Permit Required Use.
13. Airside (FAA Web site www.faa.gov). The portion of an airport facility that includes aircraft
movements, airline operations, and areas that directly serves the aircraft, such as taxiway,
runway, maintenance, and fueling areas.
14. Airspace (FAA Web site www.faa.gov). The space lying above the earth or above a certain
area of land or water that is necessary to conduct aviation operations.
15. Alteration. Any construction which would result in a change in height or lateral dimensions of an
existing structure or object.
16. Applicant. The owner of the land or their representative.
17. Approach Slopes (FAR Part 77). The ratios of horizontal to vertical distance that indicate the
degree of inclination of the approach surface. The various ratios include:
a. 20:1 Ratio: for all utility and visual runways extended from the primary surface a distance of
five thousand (5,000) feet.
b. 34:1 Ratio: for all non-precision instrument runways extended from the primary surface for a
distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.15
Page 183
c. 50:1/40:1 Ratio: for all precision instrument runways extended from the primary surface for a
distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet at an approach slope of fifty to one (50:1) and an
additional forty thousand (40,000) feet beyond this at a forty to one (40:1) approach slope.
18. Approach Surface. A surface that is longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline
and extends outward and upward from the end of the primary surface at the same slope as the
approach zone height limitation slope set forth in this Ordinance. In plain view, the perimeters of
the approach surface and approach zone coincide.
19. Aviation Easement (FAA Web site www.faa.gov). A grant of a property interest in land over
which a right of unobstructed flight in the airspace is established.
20. Building. Any structure used, designed, or intended for the protection, shelter, enclosure, or
support of persons, animals, or property.
21. Building Codes. Codes, either local or state, that control the functional and structural aspects of
buildings and/or structures. Local ordinances typically require proposed buildings to comply with
zoning requirements before building permits can be issued under the building codes.
22. Building Height. The vertical distance from the top of the building roof to the top of the basement
or to the foundation, whichever is less.
23. Commercial Lease. Land uses or activities that involve the production, processing,
manufacturing, or sale of goods or services for financial gain, including uses that provide
merchandise to the general public. Accessory uses may include offices, storage, food service, or
other amenities primarily for the use of employees and parking.
24. Compatibility. The degree to which land uses or types of development can coexist or integrate.
25. Construction. The erection or alteration of any structure or object of either a permanent or
temporary nature.
26. Density. The number of living units per acre.
27. Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to the construction of buildings, structures, or accessory structures; the construction of
additions or substantial improvements to buildings, structures, or accessory structures; the
placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes); mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of materials.
28. Easement. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another and for specified purpose of
any designed part of their property.
29. Existing Use. Any use of land lawfully in existence at the time of the effective date of this
Ordinance or amendment thereto becomes effective.
30. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). A federal agency charged to regulate air commerce in
order to promote its safety and development; encourage and develop civil aviation, air traffic
control, air navigation; and promote the development of a national system of airports.
31. Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) (FAA FAR). Regulations established and administered by
the FAA that govern civil aviation and aviation-related activities:
a. FAR Part 36 (FAA FAR Sec. 36.1): establishes noise standards for the civil aviation fleet.
b. FAR Part 91 (FAA FAR Sec. 91.1): pertains to air traffic and general operating rules,
including operating noise limits.
c. FAR Part 150 (FAA FAR Sec. 150.1): pertains to airport noise compatibility planning.
d. FAR Part 161 (FAA FAR Sec. 161.1): pertains to notice and approval of airport noise and
access restrictions.
e. FAR Part 77 (FAA FAR Sec. 77.1): Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace - Part 77 (a)
establishes standards to determine obstructions in navigable airspace; (b) defines the
requirements for notice to the FAA Administrator of certain proposed construction or
alteration; (c) provides for aeronautical studies of obstructions to air navigation to determine
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.15
Page 184
their effect on the safe and efficient use of airspace; (d) provides for public hearings on the
hazardous effect of proposed construction or alteration on air navigation; and (e) provides for
establishing antenna farm areas.
32. General Aviation Airport. Any airport that is not an air carrier airport or military facility.
33. Growth. Any object of natural growth that includes trees, shrubs, or foliage. Excludes farm
crops, which are cut at least once a year.
34. Height. Height is utilized for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in
this Ordinance and shown on the Height Limitations Zoning Map, La Crosse Regional Airport, La
Crosse, Wisconsin; height shall be the highest point of a structure, tree, or other object of natural
growth and measured from the mean sea level elevation, unless specified otherwise.
35. Industrial, Wholesale Trade, and Storage Uses. A use category that includes:
a. Industrial development or uses involved in the research, design, manufacturing, processing,
fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, man-made, raw, secondary, or
partially completed materials may be used. Products may be finished or semi-finished and
are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms
or customers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, they are a
subordinate part of sales (typically ten percent (10%) or less of the total gross floor area).
Relatively few customers come to the site.
b. Industrial, manufacturing, wholesale trade, and warehouse/storage uses and includes those
that produce goods from raw or finished materials, distribute goods in large quantities to
primarily wholesale customers, or provide for storage or warehousing of goods, either in
enclosed buildings or outdoors. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the
site. Accessory activities may include sales, offices, parking, and storage.
36. Imaginary Surfaces (FAA FAR Part 77.25). Those areas established in relation to the airport
and to each runway consistent with FAR Part 77, in which any object extending above these
imaginary surfaces, by definition, is an obstruction:
a. Approach Surface: longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extends
outward and upward from the end of the runway primary surface. The approach slope of a
runway is a ratio of 20:1, 34:1, or 50:1, depending on the approach type. The length of the
approach surface depends on the approach type and varies from five thousand (5,000) to fifty
thousand (50,000) feet.
b. Conical Surface: extends upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface
at a slope of twenty feet horizontally for every one foot vertically (20:1) for a horizontal
distance of four thousand (4,000) feet.
c. Horizontal Surface: horizontal plane located one hundred fifty (150) feet above the
established airport elevation and encompasses an area from the transitional surface to the
conical surface. The perimeter is constructed by generating arcs from the center of each end
of the primary surface and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
d. Transitional Surface: extends outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline
and at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each one foot vertically (7:1) from the sides of the
primary and approach surfaces. The transitional surfaces extend to the point at which they
intercept the horizontal surface at a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the
established airport elevation.
37. Incompatible Land Use (FAA FAR Sec. 150.7). Land use that is typically unable to coexist with
aircraft and airport operations.
38. Instrument Approach Procedure (FAA Pilot/Coordinator Glossary). A series of
predetermined maneuvers for the orderly transfer of an aircraft under instrument flight conditions
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.15
Page 185
from the beginning of the initial approach to a landing or to a point from which a landing may be
made visually. It is prescribed and approved for a specific airport by competent authority.
39. Instrument Landing System (ILS) (FAA Pilot/Coordinator Glossary). A precision instrument
approach system which normally consists of the following electronic components and visuals
aids: localizer, glideslope, outer marker, middle marker, and approach lights.
40. Itinerant Operation. Aircraft takeoff or landing operations that occur from one (1) airport to
another and involves a trip of at least twenty (20) miles. Local operations are excluded.
41. Land Use. Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate.
42. Land Use Compatibility. Land uses that can coexist with an airport and airport related activities.
43. Lighting and Marking of Hazards to Air Navigation. Installation of appropriate lighting fixtures,
painted markings, or other devices to objects or structures that constitute hazards to air
navigation.
44. Lot. A parcel of land described in a recorded plat or deed.
45. Mitigation. The avoidance, minimization, reduction, elimination, or compensation for adverse
effects of a proposed action.
46. Navigation Aids (Navaid). Any facility used by an aircraft for guiding or controlling flight in the air
or the landing or take-off of an aircraft.
47. Navigable Airspace. The airspace above minimum altitude for safe flight that includes the
airspace needed to ensure safety in landing or take-off of aircraft.
48. Noise Exposure Contours. Lines drawn around a noise source that indicates a constant energy
level of noise exposure. Day-Night Sound Level (DNL) is the measurement used to describe
community exposure to noise.
49. Noise Impact. A condition that exists when the noise levels that occur in an area exceed a level
identified as appropriate for the activities in that area.
50. Noise Sensitive Area. Defined as an area where noise interferes with normal activities
associated with the use of the area.
51. Nonconforming Use. Any structure or tree which does not conform to a regulation prescribed in
this Section or an amendment thereto, as of the effective date of such regulation.
52. Object. Includes, but is not limited to, above ground structures, NAVAIDSs, people, equipment,
vehicles, natural growth, terrain, and parked aircraft.
53. Obstacle Free Zone (OFZ). The three dimensional area of airspace that provides clearance
protection for aircraft during landing or take-off operations and for missed approaches. The area
encompasses one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation and along the
runway and extended runway centerline. The OFZ is required to be clear of all objects, except for
the frangible visual NAVAIDs, the location of which is fixed by function.
54. Obstruction. Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a
limiting height that is specific to its geographic location relative to the runway/airport.
55. Off-Airport Property. Property that is beyond the boundary of land owned by the airport sponsor
(the City of La Crosse).
56. On-Airport Property. Property that is within the boundary of land owned by the airport sponsor
(the City of La Crosse).
57. Ordinance. Any legislative action, however nominated, of a local government which has the force
of law, including any amendment or repeal of any ordinance.
58. Overlay Zone. A mapped zone that imposes a set of requirements, in addition to those of the
underlying zoning district.
59. Owner. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other
legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.15
Page 186
60. Permit Required Use. Are those land uses that shall be permissible following the issuance of a
Zoning/Building Permit. The Permit, which may include development and use related conditions,
along with a signed Affidavit (Applicant’s Recorded Affidavit Accepting Mitigation
Responsibilities), notifies applicants of their responsibilities and required mitigation for any
construction, alteration, location or use of land to minimize potential hazardous impacts to the La
Crosse Regional Airport, aircraft, airport operational areas, and aircraft overflight areas, as well
as nearby residents.
61. Permitted Use. Are those land uses generally considered compatible within a particular zone of
the AOZD. Compatible land uses do not impact or create hazardous conditions for aircraft, airport
operational areas, or aircraft overflight areas, and are considered reasonably safe for La Crosse
County residents.
62. Primary Runway. The runway used for the majority of airport operations. Large, high-activity
airports may operate two (2) or more parallel primary runways.
63. Primary Surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a
specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each
end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard
surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width
of the primary surface is set forth in FAR Part 77. The elevation of any point on the primary
surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
64. Principal Use. The use of primary importance or permitted use on a parcel of land, in contrast to
those which are accessory or of secondary importance.
65. Public Assembly Use. A structure or outdoor facility where concentrations of people gather for
purposes such as deliberation, education, shopping, business, entertainment, amusement,
sporting events, or similar activities, but excluding air shows. Public assembly use does not
include places where people congregate for relatively short periods of time, such as parking lots
and bus stops, or uses approved by the FAA in an adopted airport master plan.
66. Public Use Airport. A public- or private-owned airport that is open for public use.
67. Residential and Accommodation Uses. A use category that includes the following:
a. Residential: provide living accommodations, including sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitary facilities, to one (1) or more persons. Tenancy typically last longer than thirty (30)
days.
b. Accommodation: characterized by visitor-serving facilities that provide temporary lodging in
guest rooms or guest units, for compensation. The average length of stay of less than thirty
(30) days. Accessory uses may include pools and other recreational facilities for the exclusive
use of guests, limited storage, restaurants, bars, meeting facilities, and offices.
68. Runway. A portion of the airport having a surface specifically developed and maintained for the
landing and taking off of airplanes.
69. Runway Protection Zone (RPZ). An area off the runway end designed to enhance the protection
of people and property on the ground.
70. Runway Safety Area. A defined surface surrounding the runway that is prepared or suitable to
reduce the risk of damage to airplanes in the event of an overshoot or excursion from the runway.
71. Structural Alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as
foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof
structure or in the exterior or interior walls.
72. Structure. Any manmade object with form, shape, and utility that is permanently or temporarily
attached to, placed upon, or set into the ground, stream bed, or lake bed. Examples include, but
are not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, or television dishes.
Onalaska Title 13 Unified Development Code 13.06.15
Page 187
73. Substantial Improvement. Any structural repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure,
the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the present equalized assessed value
of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been
damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not include any
project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any
alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the Wisconsin State
Historical Society or listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Ordinary maintenance
repairs are not considered structural repairs, modifications or additions. Such ordinary
maintenance repairs include internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, and the
replacement of doors, windows, and other nonstructural components. (For purposes of this
definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.)
74. Tree. Any object of natural growth that shall not exceed the Zoning Height Restrictions. This
does not include shrubs, bushes or plants which do not grow to a height of more than twenty (20)
feet.
75. Use. That which is customarily or habitually done, may include seasonal uses, and need not
extend to the entire tract of land at the time of the adoption of this Section (See: Land Use).
76. Utility Runway. A runway constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of
twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds gross weight or less.
77. Variance. Authority granted to the owner to use their property in a manner that is prohibited by
the UDC. A departure from the terms of the zoning ordinance where it is shown that unique
physical circumstances that are applied to a land parcel can, has, or will cause a hardship to the
owner, and that the condition permitted by the departure will be in fundamental harmony with
surrounding uses:
a. Area Variance: one which does not involve a use that is prohibited by the UDC. Area
variances involve matters such as setback lines, frontage requirements, lot-size restrictions,
density, density regulations, and yard requirements. Height limitation variances shall not be
granted under this Section.
b. Use Variance: one which permits a use of land other than what is prescribed by the UDC. It
is primarily a grant to erect, alter, or use a structure for a permitted use in a manner other
than that prescribed by this Section. Use variances shall not be granted under Section.
78. Wetland. Those areas where water is at, near, or above the land surface long enough to support
aquatic or hydroponic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
79. Wildlife Attractants. Any manmade structure, land use practice, or manmade or natural
geographic feature that can attract or sustain hazardous wildlife within the landing or departure
airspace or the air operations area of an airport. Attractants include, but are not limited to,
architectural features, landscaping, waste disposal sites, wastewater treatment facilities,
agricultural or aquaculture activities, surface mining, or wetlands.
80. Wildlife Hazards. Feral or domesticated animals that are associated with aircraft strikes are
capable of causing structural damage to airport facilities, or act as attractants to other wildlife that
pose a strike hazard.
Title 14 Sign Code
Chapter 01 Introductory Provisions
Division 1 Establishment of Sign Code
14.01.11 Statement of Purpose
A. The purpose of the Sign Ordinance is to create the legal framework of a comprehensive and balanced
system of signage. The intent of this Sign Ordinance is to accomplish the following:
1. Encourage the effective use of signs as means of communication in the City while preserving the
rights of free speech under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution;
2. Facilitate economic development by allowing signs that identify businesses on site, while
promoting an attractive streetscape;
3. Reduce confusion and traffic hazards that result from excessive and prolific use of sign displays.
4. Permit signage that is designed, constructed, installed, and maintained in an aesthetically
pleasing manner;
5. Encourage a positive business atmosphere;
6. Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Onalaska by ensuring that signs
do not create a hazard by:
a. Collapsing, catching fire or otherwise deteriorating or decaying;
b. Confusing or distracting motorists; or
c. Impairing drivers’ ability by obstructing the awareness or visibility of pedestrians, obstacles or
other vehicles or to read traffic control devices.
7. Control the number, size, height, location, lighting and design characteristics of signs to avoid
visual clutter which leads to decline in the community’s appearance and property values and
reduces the effectiveness of the signs;
8. Effectively regulate issues pertaining to the location, size, height, and lighting of signs in an effort
to assure compatibility with adjoining land uses, architecture, and landscaping and compatibility
with the City’s Comprehensive Plan;
9. Provide for consistent and fair application and enforcement of regulations pertaining to signs; and
10. Address the latest and emerging technologies in the sign industries in a way that allows persons
and businesses to convey and communicate.
14.01.12 Applicability
A. Generally. The provisions contained in this Sign Ordinance shall be binding alike upon every owner,
every lessee and every person in charge or responsible for or who causes construction, repair, relocation
or alteration of any outdoor sign or other advertising structures in the City of Onalaska. Signs may be
erected, placed, established, painted, created or maintained only in conformance with the provisions of
this Sign Ordinance.
B. No Restriction on Content. This Sign Ordinance regulates only the sign structure or copy design, and
not the sign’s content. Despite any other provision of this Sign Ordinance, no sign is subject to any
limitation based on the content of its message.
C. Exemptions.
1. Addressing. Because address signs further compelling governmental interest of assisting
emergency service personnel, law enforcement, fire protection and other public safety officials in
identifying locations needing emergency assistance, numbers and letters for addressing are
exempted from this Sign Ordinance, provided that such street addresses shall be posted as required
under City Ordinances.
2. Subordination. City of Onalaska is subordinate to the laws of the Federal Government and State of
Wisconsin, except under home rule powers, this Sign Ordinance does not prohibit signs, require sign
or regulate sign locations or sign characteristics to the extent that they are required to be permitted by
State or Federal Law or allow signs that are prohibited by State of Federal law.
3. Government Signs. In order to promote the compelling interest of the City, State and Federal
governments in managing traffic; protecting against public hazards and nuisances; and announcing
the location of government facilities, infrastructure, rights-of-way and other public areas, government
signs are exempt from this Sign Ordinance.
14.01.13 Substitution
A. Subject to the property owner’s consent, noncommercial speech of any type may be substituted for any
duly permitted or allowed commercial speech; provided, that the structure or mounting device is legal
without consideration of message content. Such substitution or message may be made without additional
approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any provision to the contrary in this Sign Ordinance.
The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over
noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other
noncommercial message. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage
on a parcel, nor does it affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly
permitted. The term “commercial speech” means any sign, wording, logo or other representation
advertising a business, profession, commodity, goods, services, or entertainment for business purposes.
The term “noncommercial speech” means any message that is not commercial speech, including without
limitation, messages concerning political, religious, ideological, public service and information topics.
14.01.14 Severability and Conflict
D. The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase or portion of this Sign Ordinance is found to be unlawful or unenforceable, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not the affect the validity of
the remaining portions. If any part of this ordinance is found to be in conflict with any other ordinance or
with any other part of this ordinance, the most restrictive or highest standard shall prevail. If any part of
this ordinance is explicitly prohibited by federal or state statute that part shall not be enforced.
Division 2 Definitions
14.01.21 Definitions
A. The following definitions are used in this Sign Ordinance:
1. Awning. A cloth, plastic, or other non-structural covering that is permanently attached to a building or
can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use.
2. Billboard. A permanent sign in a fixed location advertising products not made, sold, used or served
on the premises where the sign is located or which provides a non-commercial or informational
message.
3. Blanketing. The unreasonable obstruction of view of a sign caused by the placement of another sign.
4. Canopy. A structure other an awning made of cloth, metal or other material with frames affixed to a
building and carried by a frame that may extend into a setback or over the public sidewalk.
5. Changeable copy. Copy those changes at intervals [of more than once every six (6) seconds].
6. Commercial. Proposing or otherwise encouraging one or more commercial transactions.
7. Community Event. An advertised event held open to the public.
8. Day. A day shall be designated as a period of time in terms of calendar days.
9. Digital Billboard. Any billboard sign utilizing LCD, LED or similar electronic technology, capable of
changing the static message or copy on the sign electronically.
10. Dynamic element. Any characteristic of a sign that appears to have movement or that appears to
change, caused by any method other than physically removing and replacing the sign face or its
components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the sign, the sign structure itself, or any
component of the sign. This definition includes a display that incorporates a technology or method
allowing the sign face to change the image without having to replace the sign face or its components
physically or mechanically. This definition also includes any graphic that incorporates rotating panels,
LED lights manipulated through digital input, “digital ink” or any other method or technology that
allows the sign face to present a series of images or displays.
11. Electronic Message Center Sign. Any sign whose message may be changed by electronic process,
including such messages as copy, art, graphics, time, date, temperature, weather or information
concerning civic, charitable or the advertising of products or services for sale.
12. External illumination. Illumination of a sign that is affected by an artificial source of light not
contained within the sign.
13. Façade. The side of a building below the eaves.
14. Flag. Flag means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols and
is attached to a pole and which is intended to be permanently affixed to the ground or attached to a
building.
15. Ground/Freestanding Sign. A sign supported by one (1) or more uprights, posts, or bases placed
upon or affixed in the ground and not attached to any part of a building. It includes “pole” graphics
and “monument” graphics.
16. Government Sign. A sign that is constructed, placed or maintained by the federal, state or local
government or a sign that is required to be constructed, placed or maintained by the federal, state or
local government either directly or to enforce a property owner’s rights.
17. Height. The vertical distance measured from grade at the edge of the adjacent right-of-way to the
highest point of the sign. (The height of any monument sign base or other structure erected to
support or adorn the sign is measured as part of the sign height).
18. Illumination. A source of any artificial or reflective light, either directly from a source of light
incorporated in or indirectly from an artificial source, so shielded that no direct illumination from it is
visible elsewhere than on and in the immediate vicinity of the sign.
19. Indirect Illumination. A source of external illumination, located away from the sign, that lights the
sign, but which is itself not visible to persons viewing the sign from any street, sidewalk, or adjacent
property.
20. Integral Sign. A sign that is embedded, extruded or carved into the material of a building wall
façade.
21. Internal Illumination. A light source that is concealed or contained within the sign and becomes
visible in darkness through a translucent surface.
22. Marquee. A permanent structure other than a roof attached to, supported by, and projecting from a
building and providing protection from the elements.
23. Monument Graphic. A ground/freestanding sign permanently affixed to the ground at its base,
supported entirely by a base structure made of a decorative feature of brick, wood, metal or other
material which is intended to serve as an entry feature or focal point.
24. Multi-Tenant Complex. A grouping of two (2) or more business establishments that either share
common parking on the parcel where they are located or that occupy a single structure or separate
structures that are physically or functionally related or attached. Multi-tenant signs are encouraged to
market shopping center destinations rather than individual businesses. Sign regulations are based
upon the applicable zoning district in which they are located.
25. Nit. A photometric unit of measurement referring to luminescence. One (1) nit is equal to one (1)
cd/m2 (candela per square meter).
26. Non-conforming Sign. Any sign that was lawfully established or installed prior the adoption of
amendment of this Sign Ordinance and was in compliance with all of the provisions of this Sign
Ordinance then in effect, but which does not presently comply with this Sign Ordinance.
27. Occupant. A use/business establishment located in a multi-tenant building or complex.
28. Parcel. A lot, tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land in single ownership and not
divided by a public right-of-way, so long as such area of land complies with the City of Onalaska
Code of Ordinances. The terms lot or tract may also refer to a parcel.
29. Peak. The highest point on a roof or the highest point on another architectural element that blocks
the rear view of a sign.
30. Pole Sign. A freestanding sign that is permanently supported in a fixed location by a structure of
poles, uprights, or braces from the ground and not supported by a building or base structure.
31. Portable Sign. A structure without a permanent foundation or otherwise permanently attached to a
fixed location, which can be carried, towed, hauled or driven and is primarily designed to be moved
rather than be limited to a fixed location regardless of modifications that limit its movability.
32. Projecting Sign. A sign attached to and projecting from the wall of a building.
33. Right-of-Way (ROW). A sidewalk, curb, street, alley, bike path or lane, or other similar public
improvement located in a public right-of-way normally used for the travel of pedestrians, motor
vehicles, bicycles or like vehicles.
34. Roof Sign. A sign that is displayed above the eaves and under the peak of a building.
35. Shopping Center. A commercial development under unified control consisting of two (2) or more
separate commercial establishments sharing a common building, or which are in separate buildings
that share a common entranceway or parking area.
36. Signable Area for Projecting Signs, Awnings, Roof Signs, and Wall Signs. One area enclosed
by a box or outline or within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of characters,
letters, illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures.
37. Size. The total area of the face that is used to display a sign not including its support poles or
structures.
38. Sign. Any structure that has a visual display of a name, identification, description or illustration,
visible from a public right-of-way, which is affixed to, painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon
a building or other outdoor surface which directs attention to or is designed or intended to direct
attention to the sign face or to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business. Signs located completely within an enclosed building and not exposed to view from a
street shall not be considered a sign.
39. Structure. Anything built that requires a permanent or temporary location. This term includes a
building
40. Temporary Sign. A sign intended to be displayed for a transitory or temporary period that are
portable or not permanently embedded in the ground or not permanently affixed to a building or sign
structure and are constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard, plywood or
other like materials.
41. Traffic Control Device. A sign, signal, marking or other device placed on or adjacent to a public
right-of-way or private street, parking lot or highway to regulate, warn or guide traffic.
42. Wall Sign. A sign painted on or attached to a wall of a structure and in the same plane as the wall
and presented in an orientation that is parallel to the roadway projecting.
43. Window Sign. A sign applied, painted, or affixed to the exterior window of a building.
Division 3 Administration
14.01.31 Administration and Sign Permits – Application, Enforcement and Revocation
A. Administration. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall be responsible for
administering and enforcing the provisions of this Sign Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent shall examine all sign permit applications, issue permits and denials,
authorize the continued use of signs that conform with the requirements of this Ordinance, record and file
all applications for permits with any accompanying plans and documents, and inspect signs in the City of
Onalaska. A sign shall also meet all other structural requirements of other applicable codes and
Ordinances of the City of Onalaska.
B. Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, erect, move, reconstruct, extend,
enlarge, convert or structurally alter a sign, canopy, awning, or billboard without a sign permit and without
being in conformity with the provisions of this Sign Ordinance or cause the same to be done in the City of
Onalaska without first obtaining a sign permit for each such sign from the Planning Department, except
those specified in Section 14.01.32 or as otherwise noted. "Altered" shall be defined as any modification
in the size, height, dimensions, location or mounting of a sign other than routine maintenance. Any sign
permit granted hereunder may not be assigned or transferred to any other sign or sign structure. Each
individual sign shall require an individual sign permit.
C. Required Information. Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the
Planning Department which contain the following information about the sign: dimensions, including
display surface; materials; illumination; wiring; height above grade; distance from parcel lines; and the
person, firm or corporation erecting or altering the sign.
D. Granting and Issuance. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall review the
application to ensure it is complete per the requirements of Section 14.01.31.A above. The Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall have a maximum of thirty (30) days to approve or
deny a sign permit or recommend the applicant apply for a Special Exception Permit.
1. Basis for Granting a Sign Permit. In deciding whether to grant a sign permit, the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall determine whether the proposed sign(s) is in
compliance with the provisions of this Sign Ordinance. In such review, the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent may also consider the following factors:
a. Whether the sign is designed, constructed, installed or maintained in such a manner that is does
not endanger public safety or traffic safety.
b. Whether the sign is in compliance will all provisions of the City of Onalaska Code of Ordinances,
including those related to traffic safety, traffic visibility, sign setbacks, and structural integrity.
E. Enforcement and Revocation of a Sign Permit.
1. A sign permit may be revoked if the applicant has failed to comply with the provisions of this Sign
Ordinance or any conditions that may have accompanied the permit at the time of issuance.
Revocation requires written notice by either the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent
for Zoning Ordinance violations.
2. In the event that construction, installation, or manufacture of a sign for which a permit has been
issued has not commenced within one hundred and eighty (180) days or six (6) months, from the date
of the issuance of such permit, said permit shall be null and void and automatically revoked. If work
authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of ninety (90) days any time after
the work is commenced, the original permit shall become null and void. In such cases a new permit
shall be obtained to complete the work and a new permit fee shall be required.
3. Any sign subject to a revoked permit shall be removed by the licensee, sign owner, or property owner
within forty-five (45) days of such revocation. Revocation shall not result in reimbursement of permit
fees paid.
F. Fee. The fee for each sign permit shall be set forth on the City’s Fee Schedule.
G. Insurance. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of erecting, repairing, maintaining or
relocating any sign shall maintain in effect at all times a policy of liability insurance with limits of Three
Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00)
aggregate and One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) property damage. Proof of insurance shall
be presented to the Planning/Inspection Department before the sign permit is granted.
H. Sign Permit Appeal. Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any sign permit denial or decision by
the Planning Department relative to the provisions of these sign regulations may appeal and seek review
of such decision to the Plan Commission.
I. Alterations. For signs erected before the adoption of this Sign Ordinance, said signs shall be rebuilt or
relocated to conform to this Sign Ordinance if the cost of reconstruction or relocation is fifty percent (50%)
or more of its replacement value.
J. Violations of Sign Ordinance. Any person, firm or corporation who begins, erects or completes the
erection or construction of any sign controlled by this Sign Ordinance prior to the granting of a sign permit
shall pay a penalty of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, with the penalty for each subsequent
offense increasing by Fifty Dollars ($50.00). Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this Sign Ordinance shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in the Sign Ordinance and each day, or
portion thereof, that such violation continues is hereby deemed to constitute a separate offense.
K. Removal of Signs in Violation of this Sign Ordinance.
1. If the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent determines that any sign exists in
violation of this Sign Ordinance are hereby declared public nuisances within the meaning of this Code
of Ordinances, the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall notify the sign permit
holder or the owner of the property on which the sign is located. Said notification shall indicate that
such violation shall be corrected within sixty (60) days of receipt of said notice on penalty of automatic
revocation of any sign permit and that removal of the sign by the City may occur at the expense of the
owner of the property in the manner set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes.
2. If notification is sent and the violation is not corrected within sixty (60) days, the Zoning Administrator
or Designated Authorized Agent shall revoke the associated sign permit that is in violation of this Sign
Ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent to cause
removal of such signs.
3. The expense of removing such sign and all sign support structures shall be charged to the owner of
the property on which the sign is located. If the owner fails to pay such expense within thirty (30)
days of being billed therefore, or has not made arrangements for payment satisfactory to the Finance
Director, then such expense shall become a lien on the property and shall be placed upon the tax roll
in addition to a one hundred ($100.00) dollar administrative fee charged for processing
payments/invoicing.
4. Any sign illegally placed in a public right-of-way shall be subject to immediate removal and
confiscation without notice by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
14.01.32 Signs Not Requiring a Permit
L. The following is a list of signs that do not require an issued sign permit. If a sign similar in nature to those
listed below is proposed, the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall determine if the
proposed sign requires a permit.
1. Banners on Utility Poles (including privately-owned Utility Poles and City Banners on City-owned
Utility Poles) under ten (10) square feet per side.
2. On-site Directional Signs on private property that includes a directional arrow or symbol that directs
people to a specific destination within a development or site. Institutional signs erected to display
facility/campus locations, building identification, transportation routes, or similar signs that are not
visible or intended to be visible from public street rights-of-way or non-adjacent parcels. Directional
signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet per sign face with a maximum height of six (6) feet and
a maximum of two (2) sign faces per sign.
3. On-site Directional Signs as mandated by a government entity.
4. Building Management Identification Sign which indicates the name and/or address of the property
owner, tenant, and/or manager of a property not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
5. On-Site Warning Sign that indicates a warning from the property owner related to conditions on-site
and/or that cites a City, State, or Federal law, order rule or regulation. Such signs shall contain no
commercial message. Examples include signs listing parking hours, “No Trespassing,” “No
Loitering,” “Customer Parking Only,” “Handicap Parking,” or signs indicating danger or aids to service
or safety.
6. Traffic Control Signs/Devices erected for control of traffic and other regulatory purposes, direction
signs, railroad crossing signs.
7. Memorial signs, plaques, tablets, names of buildings, dates of erection, etc. that are cut into a
masonry surface or inlaid so as to be a part of the building or when constructed of bronze or other
non-combustible material not more than twenty-four (24) square feet of area shall be allowed without
a sign permit.
8. Public notices posted by Authorized Designated Agents of the City or other official Governmental
Agencies.
9. Signs on trucks, buses, trailers or other vehicles while operating in the course of normal business,
which is not primarily the display of signs.
10. Signs may be installed no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to an election and shall be removed within
ten (10) days following said election. Signs shall be placed on private property and with the consent
of the property owner. Each sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet on residential properties or
thirty-two (32) square feet on non-residential properties. No more than five (5) such signs may be
allowed at a single time on a single property to allow for pedestrian and vehicular safety.
14.01.33 Prohibited Signs
A. Prohibited Sign Area. No signage shall be permitted on the west side of Second Avenue North (State
Highway 35) from John Street to Sunset Vista Road.
B. Signs with Flashing, Blinking, or Traveling Lights. No signs, billboards or other advertising media
which creates a hazard or dangerous distraction to vehicular traffic or a nuisance to an adjoining
residential property shall be permitted in any district.
C. Signs on Public Rights-of-Way. Signs shall not be permitted on public rights-of-way, except for
municipal traffic control devices and as otherwise specified in this Sign Ordinance.
D. Signs at Intersections. Signs at intersections shall comply with traffic visibility standards in the Unified
Development Code.
E. Traffic Interference. Signs shall not resemble, imitate or approximate the shape, size, form or color of
railroad or traffic signs or devices. Signs, canopies and awnings shall not obstruct or interfere with the
effectiveness of railroad or traffic signs, signals or devices or the safe flow of traffic. No sign shall be
erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire
escape. No sign, awning or canopy shall be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility.
F. Blanketing. Blanketing of signs shall not be allowed.
G. Signs on City Property/Rights-of-Way. No person shall: paste, tape, staple, or otherwise affix/fasten
any paper or similar material to, nor paint, stencil or otherwise write or color any object, vegetation or
pavement located within any street right-of-way or on City property; including, but not limited to trees,
lamp posts, utility poles, fire hydrants, or similar features, nor shall any of such object, vegetation or
pavement be defaced in any manner.
H. Human Signs. Human signs that (a) are located in or within 10 feet of the public right of way; (b) carry or
operate flashing or illuminated objects, or (c) operate after daytime.
I. Vehicular Signs. Signs placed on semi-trailers, pull-behind trailers, vehicles, shipping containers or
portable storage units, unless: (a) the trailers, containers or portable storage units are functional, used for
their primary storage propose, and if subject to registration, have current registration and tags; (b) the
signs are subordinate to the use for temporary storage, pick-up, or delivery, and (c) the semi-trailer is
parked in a designated loading area or on a construction site at which is being used for deliveries or
storage.
J. Any sign not expressly permitted. Any sign not expressly permitted by this Sign Ordinance and
constructed pursuant to the standards set forth in this Sign Ordinance shall be prohibited.
14.01.34 General Provisions, Design and Maintenance Standards
A. Compatibility. To the maximum extent practical, signs shall be compatible and complimentary to their
surroundings in terms of size, shape, color, texture and lighting. Buildings and sites shall be designed so
that the signs are an integral part of the building and/or site. Signs shall not visually detract from other
conforming signs.
B. Protection of First Amendment rights. Any sign under this Sign Ordinance may contain, in lieu of any
other copy, any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business,
activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a location
C. Sign Measurements: Sign area and sign height measurements shall be calculated as follows:
1. Signable Area for Projecting Signs, Awnings, Roof Signs, and Wall Signs. The sign copy and
graphic area shall be calculated by means of the smallest four-sided figure (such as a rectangle) that
encompasses the extreme limits of characters, writing, representation, emblem, ornamentation,
illustrations or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign and copy graphic area from the structure.
2. Sign Structure Area. Where a maximum allowable sign structure is specified in this Sign Ordinance,
the sign structure area shall include the sign copy and graphic area.
3. Sign Structure Height. The height of a ground/freestanding sign shall be measured from the
average grade of the adjacent street to the top of the sign structure.
D. Buildings with a secondary public entrance at the rear or side of the building. In addition to the
allowable signage with a use in a particular district, commercial, public and institutional uses that have a
secondary entrance for the public that does not front a public right-of-way, may have, at the secondary
entrance, one (1) sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
E. Placement of Ground/Freestanding Signs. The placement of such signs shall comply with the
following standards:
1. Minimum required distance from parcel lines. All ground/freestanding signs shall be placed a
minimum of five (5) feet from all parcel boundaries.
2. Outside the required vision triangle. No sign shall obstruct the required vision triangle as specified in
the Unified Development Code.
3. Outside drainage and utility easements. No sign shall be placed in a drainage, utility or other
easement without first obtaining all applicable authorizations and a copy of said authorizations
provided to the City.
4. The distance between ground/freestanding signs shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet
throughout the street frontage in order to prevent congestion and maintain traffic visibility.
Ground/freestanding signs may be placed at less than two hundred (200) feet where the street
frontage of the parcel and adjacent parcels is less than two hundred (200) feet and does not permit
the minimum spacing. Where this condition exists, the maximum spacing available must be
maintained and such ground/freestanding signs shall be monument style only and not exceed fifteen
(15) feet in height and sixty (60) square feet per side in area. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this Sign Ordinance, in no case may a ground/freestanding sign be placed at less than one hundred
(100) feet from another ground/freestanding sign on the same street frontage.
a. Distance between ground/freestanding signs and approved On-Site Directional Signs to be a
minimum of twenty (20) feet.
F. Allowable Number of Signs. No more than two (2) signs of any type are allowed on a single parcel,
unless the parcel has multiple street frontages which shall allow two (2) sign types for each street
frontage, excluding canopies and/or awnings and additional signage may be allowed as otherwise noted
in specific zoning district regulations or through an approved Design Overlay District (Planned Unit
Development, Downtown Planned Unit Development, Planned Commercial Industrial District, or Medical
Campus District).
1. Any signs exempt from sign permits are not considered in determining the allowable number of signs,
and shall be in addition to the allowable number of signs under this Sign Ordinance.
G. Design and Construction Standards. All signs shall comply with the following construction standards:
1. All signs shall be constructed in a safe structural manner in accordance with the National Building
Code and National Electrical Code with fireproof and fire-resistant materials and the Wisconsin State
Codes, if more restrictive. All signs shall be fastened, supported and maintained so as to withstand a
wind load pressure of thirty (30) p.s.f. per American Society of Engineering.
2. All signs shall be constructed of durable, weather-resistant materials.
3. Electrical service to signs shall comply with applicable electrical codes. No sign shall have exposed
electrical wires and electrical service to signs shall be concealed wherever possible to preserve
aesthetic values. Contractors to apply for Electrical Permits when installing new electric services to
signs or modifying services (new technology, etc.) to signs.
4. The use of unshielded lighting, including exposed light bulbs hung or strung on poles, wires or other
support intended to illuminate a sign or other advertising device is prohibited. All sign lighting shall be
so designed, located, shielded, or hooded to prevent the casting of glare or direct illumination upon
adjacent roadways, surrounding properties or into the sky.
5. All signs in newly annexed areas shall comply with this Sign Ordinance within five (5) years of
annexation.
H. Installation and Maintenance. All signs shall be installed and maintained as follows:
1. Safety. All signs shall be installed and maintained in a workmanlike manner using equipment that is
adequate and safe for the task.
2. Indemnification for sign installation and maintenance. All persons engaged in the business of
installing or maintaining signs that involves in whole or in part, the erection, alteration, relocation, or
maintenance of a sign or other sign work in, over, or immediately adjacent to a public right-of-way or
public property that is used or encroached upon by the sign contractor, shall hold the City of
Onalaska harmless and indemnify the City of Onalaska, its officers, agents and employees from any
and all claims for bodily injury or property damage resulting from the erection, alteration, relocation, or
maintenance of a sign or any sign work.
3. All signs shall be properly secured, supported and braced and shall be kept in reasonable structural
condition at all times. Bolts or screws shall not be fastened to window frames. Every sign and its
framework, braces, anchors and other supports shall be constructed of such material and with such
workmanship as to be safe and satisfactory to the Inspection Department.
4. All signs, including supports and attachments, shall be properly maintained in good repair in
accordance with all applicable building codes, be kept clean, and protected from the elements to
prevent decay and rust by the periodic application of weather-coating material. The immediate
surrounding premises of signs shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition and
kept free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
I. Illumination of Signs. The following illumination requirements apply to all signs for which illumination is
allowed including, but not limited to, freestanding signs and other similar signs.
1. Compliance with the Electrical Code.
2. Hazards. Artificial light used in conjunction with the lighting of any sign shall not be directed or
reflected onto any structure or constitute a hazard to the safe and efficient operation of vehicles upon
a street or highway.
3. Shield the Light Source. The light source, whether internal or external, shall be shielded from view
or directed so that the light intensity or brightness is directed away from the public right of way or
boundary of any residential zoning district or residentially-used property. Ground mounted external
flood lighting shall be shielded and properly placed and directed to avoid direct visibility of the
directed light to passing motorists.
4. Light Trespass. No sign or associated luminaire shall create light spillover of more than 0.1 footcandles
at any property line within or bounding a residential use or district.
5. Use of a Projected Light Source. Illumination by a projected light shall be an indirect spotlight or
gooseneck down light. External lighting fixtures shall not cast light or glare in any direction other than
on the elements of the sign. Such lighting shall be placed so as to provide even illumination to the
signage and to avoid hot spots or dark areas on the signage.
6. Prohibited Illumination. A sign shall not:
a. Be illuminated by flashing, intermittent or moving lights;
b. Contain or display animated, moving video or scrolling advertising;
c. Display messages for a period of less than eight seconds and use transitions or frame effects with
an interval of more than two seconds;
d. Include audio, pyrotechnic, or bluecasting (Bluetooth advertising) components;
e. Consist of a static image projected upon a stationary object; or
f. Be a mobile sign located on or attached to a truck or trailer.
7. Luminosity.
a. Daytime. During the daytime, based on normal daytime illumination, a maximum limit of 5,000 nits
is permitted to keep luminous signage balanced with the surrounding landscape.
b. During nighttime hours, a maximum luminosity is limited to 350 nits.
c. If the nighttime luminance setting and limit is based on the sign in question being set to display full
white, full brightness field, a limit as high as 400 nits for this method of calibration and testing is
suitable.
d. Incremental luminance limits between the nighttime limit and the full sunlight shall require
automatic luminance controls for overcast or foggy days and for dawn and dusk hours by means
of automatically controlling sign luminance based on the ambient lighting conditions, to restrict
luminance between the sunny-day and night maximum luminosity range.
e. Surface luminosity measurements should be made directly with a calibrated luminosity meter,
following the instruments manufacturer’s instructions. Readings should be taken from the area
where the sign in question will be visible from, and which is closes to being directly in front of the
sign (where the luminosity outpost is most focused).
8. Safety. Electronic Message Centers and Digital Billboards shall:
a. Include systems and monitoring to either turn the display off or show “full black” on the display and
contain a default mechanism that freezes the sign in one (1) position at the maximum illumination
in the event of malfunction; and
b. Be designed so if a catastrophic power surge occurs, the sign will go dark or it will have maximum
brightness limitations in place; and
c. Automatically adjust the intensity of its display according to natural ambient light conditions.
14.01.35 Landscape Features
M. Landscape features such as plant materials, berms, boulders, fencing, masonry columns and similar
design elements unincorporated or in conjunction with the freestanding signs are encouraged.
14.01.36 Special Exceptions
N. Special exceptions to these sign regulations may be granted by the Plan Commission, with appeals of a
Plan Commission determination made to the Common Council.
14.01.37 Nonconforming Signs
A. Signs Eligible for Characterization as Legal Nonconforming. Any permanent existing sign located
within the City of Onalaska of the date of adoption of this Sign Ordinance hereafter which does not
conform with the provisions of this Sign Ordinance, is eligible for characterization as a legal
nonconforming sign and is permitted, providing it meets the following requirements:
1. The sign was covered by a proper sign permit prior to the date of adoption of this Sign Ordinance;
and
2. If no permit was required under the applicable law for the sign in question and the sign was, in all
respects, in compliance with applicable law on the date of adoption of this Sign Ordinance.
a. Continuation of Legal Nonconforming Signs.
i. Nonconforming signs shall be maintained and repaired in a manner so as to comply with
safety standards within this Sign Ordinance.
ii. Nonconforming signs shall not be altered or moved to a new location without being brought
into compliance with the requirements of this Sign Ordinance. See Section 14.01.37.A.2.b
below, for what would constitute an alteration of a sign.
b. Alteration of Nonconforming Signs.
i. For the purpose of this Sign Ordinance, alteration of a sign is considered to be any change
to the sign’s frame, supporting structure, lighting, material, height, location, or any other
alterations as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
ii. Altering a sign does not include maintaining the existing appearance of the sign face;
replacing the sign face or the supporting structure with identical materials, colors, and
messages, or changing the sign face.
c. Loss of Legal Nonconforming Status. A sign loses its nonconforming status if one (1) or more
of the following occurs:
i. If said sign is damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot or act of God; or
structurally altered as noted in Section 14.01.37.A.2.b.i. above, except for activities noted
in Section 14.01.37.A.2.b.ii. above. The sign may be reconstructed and used as before if it
is reconstructed within three (3) months after such calamity, unless the damage to the sign
is fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement value, in which case, the sign shall be
brought into compliance with the requirements of this Sign Ordinance. If the sign is not
reconstructed within three (3) months, the sign shall be removed.
ii. The sign is relocated so as to be a minimum of five (5) feet from a parcel line (off the rightof-
way) and is outside the required vision triangle as specified in the Unified Development
Code.
iii. The sign fails to conform to the City requirements regarding maintenance and repair,
abandonment or dangerous or defective signs.
iv. On the date of occurrence of any of the above activities, the sign(s) shall be immediately
brought into compliance with this Sign Ordinance with a new sign permit secured therefore
or shall be removed.
14.01.38 Abandoned Signs and Their Structures Where a Business is No Longer in
Operation
A. Vacation of a building, portion of a building, structure or site shall have the following effect:
1. At ninety (90) days, nonconforming signs shall lose their legal nonconforming status.
2. At ninety (90) days, the owner of the property shall take action regarding any signage/signage
structures, associated with the vacancy and either removal all such signage and structures
associated with the vacancy or replace the face of such signage with a blank sign face (no sign
permit required).
3. Sign structures that have been left without modifying the sign face for a continuous period of ninety
(90) days, shall be deemed abandoned and shall be removed by the owner of the sign structure in
accordance with the standards set forth in Section 14.01.31.Q. Removal of Signs.
Code in effect 2/11/2020 Updated by Ord. No. 1659-2020
Chapter 02 General Standards
Division 1 Standards for Specific Types of Signs
14.02.11 Awning and Canopy Signs
A. Awning and Canopy Signs. All awning and canopy signs require individual sign permits and shall
comply with the following requirements and conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which they
are to be located. Awning/canopy signs are defined as an awning/canopy which displays text, logo, or
similar feature. There is no limit to the number of awning/canopy signs on a property. If any sign is
suspended or projects above a right-of-way, the issuance and continuation of a sign permit shall be
conditioned on the sign owner agreeing to hold the City of Onalaska harmless, and obtaining and
maintaining in force liability insurance for such a sign in such form and such amount as the City of
Onalaska may reasonably from time to time determine, provided that the amount of such liability
insurance shall be as noted below in 14.02.11.A.5.
1. Support. Awnings shall be securely attached to and supported by the building and shall be without
posts or columns beyond the setback. The structural support of all canopies shall be designed by a
licensed professional engineer and approved by the Inspection Department for compliance with the
Building Code of the City. All frames and supports shall be of metal and designed to withstand a wind
pressure as provided in Section 14.01.34. All canopies shall be attached to a building and no
supports shall exist beyond the setback line between the canopy and the sidewalk or ground below.
2. Height. All awnings and canopies shall be constructed and erected so that the lowest portion thereof
shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet above the level of the public sidewalk or public thoroughfare.
3. Setback from Curb Line. No awning shall extend beyond a point four (4) feet into the right-of-way
and no canopy shall extend beyond four (4) feet from the face of a wall or building.
4. Text and Copy Size Limitations:
a. Awnings. Text, copy and characters shall not exceed eight (8) inches in average height on the
front and side edges.
b. Canopies. Text, copy and characters shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in average height
on the front and side edges.
5. Insurance and Release Requirements. Every applicant for a sign permit for an awning and/or
canopy which will overhang a public street or sidewalk shall, before the sign permit is granted, file
with the Planning/Inspection Department an indemnification and hold harmless agreement for the
sign and a liability insurance policy with minimum limits of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) for
personal injury to any person and One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) for any one (1)
accident and Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage which shall indemnify and
save harmless the City of Onalaska from any and all damages, judgments, costs or expense which
the said City may incur or suffer by reason of the granting of said sign permit.
14.02.12 Electronic Message Center Signs
A. All electronically or mechanically energized/digital signs shall comply with the following standards:
1. Message Timing. Segmented messages must be displayed for not less than one-half (1/2) second
and more than ten (10) seconds.
2. Dimmer Control. Electronic Message Center Signs shall have an automatic dimmer control such as
a photocell or other ambient light sensing mechanism that automatically adjusts the sign’s brightness
in direct correlation with the natural ambient light conditions.
3. Light Sensor Required. All Electronic Message Center Signs that are directly illuminated shall
include a sensor or other devise that automatically determines ambient illumination and is
programmed to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions or that can be adjusted to
comply with the foot-candle requirements set out below without human assistance.
4. Brightness. Electronic Message Center Signs shall not exceed a brightness level of five thousand
(5,000) nits (candela per square meter) during daylight hours and five hundred (500) nits between
sunset and sunrise and at no time exceed 0.3 footcandles above natural ambient light conditions.
Such measurements shall be taken using a footcandle (Lux) meter at a preset distance depending on
the sign area, measured as follows in the table below. Signs found to exceed the brightness levels
shall be adjusted to meet the below standards after notification by the City of Onalaska.
Area of Sign (SF) Measurement Distance (FT)
10 32
15 39
20 45
25 50
30 55
35 59
40 63
45 67
50 71
55 74
60 77
65 81
70 84
75 87
80 89
85 92
90 95
95 97
100 100
5. Certification Required. Prior to the issuance of a sign permit for an Electronic Message Center Sign,
the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has
been factory preset not to exceed five thousand (5,000) nits and that the intensity level is protected
from end-user manipulation by password-protected software or other method that will effectively deter
end-user manipulation and that the Electronic Message Center Sign includes a sensor or similar
device in compliance with Sections 14.02.12 A.2-3 above.
6. Additional Location and Size Requirements shall be as follows:
1. Electronic Message Center Signs are not permitted within one hundred (100) feet of a residential
district parcel line. Such signs are allowed within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district
parcel line, only if the residential district parcel is separated from the sign/property in question by
a public right-of-way.
2. All Electronic Message Center signs within three hundred (300) feet of a residential district parcel
line shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per side or sixty-four (64) square feet for both
sides. Such Electronic Message Center Signs may only be operational between 7:00A.M. and
10:00P.M. to preserve the integrity of the surrounding neighborhood.
3. Electronic Message Center Sign faces shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet per side
and a total of two hundred (200) square feet total on both sides when located beyond three
hundred (300) feet from a residential district parcel line.
14.02.13 Ground/Freestanding Signs
B. For the purpose of this Sign Ordinance, a monument sign, multiple pole sign, or single pole sign shall be
considered a ground/freestanding sign. Unless specified elsewhere in this Sign Ordinance, all
ground/freestanding signs shall comply with the following standards:
1. Allowable sign area and sign height. The allowable sign area and sign height shall be as specified
in the applicable zoning district.
2. Monument sign base. In the case of a ground/freestanding monument sign, the width of the base of
the sign shall be at least sixty percent (60%) the width of the sign.
3. Materials. Ground/freestanding signs shall be constructed of durable and quality materials that are
compatible with surrounding development. In the case of a monument sign, the base and exposed
foundation shall be covered with a finished material such as brick, stone, metal or wood.
14.02.14 Signs Adjacent To Drive-Thrus
C. Signs adjacent to drive-thrus where allowed pursuant to this Sign Ordinance shall be subject to the
following conditions:
1. Allowable sign area and sign height. The sign shall have a maximum sign copy of fifty (50) square
feet.
2. Orientation. The sign shall be single-sided and oriented in such a manner so that the signs are
directly visible to the patrons using a drive-thru facility only.
14.02.15 Billboards
D. All Billboard signs shall be permitted subject to the following standards:
1. Location Requirements: all Billboard signs must be:
a. A minimum of one hundred (100) feet from a residential district parcel line for Billboards. A
minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) feet from a residential district parcel line for Digital
Billboards.
b. A minimum of one hundred (100) feet from an intersection.
c. A minimum of three hundred fifty (350) feet from a church and/or school parcel line.
d. A minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from another Billboard. Digital Billboards must be at
least five thousand two hundred eighty (5,280) feet from another Digital Billboard.
e. A minimum of five (5) feet from right-of-way and parcel lines.
f. Further than three hundred fifty (350) feet of the east and west rights-of-way of STH 157 and/or
US 53 from Federal Interstate 90 to CTH OT.
i. A Digital Billboard may be allowed not less than two hundred fifty (250) feet and not more than
three hundred fifty (350) feet of the east and west rights-of-way of US 53 from Federal
Interstate 90 to CTH OT provided that all other setback requirements listed in Section
14.02.15.A.1.a-f. above are met.
g. Further than three hundred fifty (350) feet of the east and west rights-of-way of Sand Lake Road
(STH S) from Main Street to CTH OT.
2. Allowable sign area and sign height. The maximum size of a Billboard sign shall be three hundred
(300) square feet per side of a sign structure. The height of the Billboard shall not exceed thirty (30)
feet above the ground at the site of the sign and in no event shall the maximum height exceed fortyfive
(45) feet above the adjacent road centerline. Sign shall be constructed in a ground/freestanding
design without back bracing or guy wires.
3. Digital Billboards.
a. Digital Billboards may be allowed to up to three hundred seventy eight (378) square feet per side
and a total of seven hundred fifty six (756) square feet total on both sides.
b. Technology. Any technology that complies with the performance standards including maximum
brightness as set forth in this Sign Ordinance is permitted.
c. Public Service Announcement. Digital Billboards shall display up to ten (10) holds/flip messages
annually, each hold/flip to occur once per minute for one (1) week prior to an event requested by
the City of Onalaska free of charge.
d. Digital billboards images and messages must be static and each display/message must be
maintained for a minimum of seven and one-half (7.5) seconds. The transition from one static
display/message on a digital billboard to another display/message must be instantaneous and
without special effects or video.
e. Brightness. Signs found to be too bright shall be adjusted to meet the standards set forth in
Section 14.01.34.I. and Section 14.02.12 above upon notification by the City of Onalaska.
f. Each image and message shall be complete and self-contained.
g. Height. The height of the Digital Billboard shall not exceed thirty (30) feet above the ground at the
site of the sign and in no event shall the maximum height exceed forty-five (45) feet above the
adjacent road centerline.
h. A Digital Billboard, existing or for which a permit has been issued for prior to the adoption of this
ordinance, must still meet the above requirements for brightness as set forth herein.
4. Conversion of Existing Static Billboards into Digital Billboards fronting Federal Aid Primary
(FAP) Highways. A legally nonconforming, illuminated Billboard may be converted to a Billboard with
digital display if the following conditions are met and shall adhere to the requirements of this Section.
a. Removal. As part of the sign permit application, the applicant shall agree in writing to remove
permanently other existing Billboards in the City: for each Digital Billboard erected, one (1)
illuminated or non-illuminated face shall be removed. The removal shall take place within sixty
(60) days of permit approval. The converted Billboard shall not count towards the removal
requirement. If the removed Billboard are ones for which a state permit is required, the applicant
and owners shall surrender such permits to the state. The Billboard with a digital display may not
be put into operation until proof is provided that such state permits have been surrendered. An
existing Billboard located within two thousand (2,000) feet of a residential district lot line shall not
be eligible for conversion.
5. Compliance. Billboards and Digital Billboards shall meet all federal, state and local requirements
prior to issuance of a sign permit.
14.02.16 Projecting Signs
E. Unless specified otherwise in this Sign Ordinance, all projecting signs shall comply with the following
standards. If any sign is suspended or projects above a right-of-way, the issuance and continuation of a
sign permit shall be conditioned on the sign owner agreeing to hold the City of Onalaska harmless, and
obtaining and maintaining in force liability insurance for such a sign in such form and such amount as the
City of Onalaska may reasonably from time to time determine, provided that the amount of such liability
insurance shall be as noted in Section 14.02.11.5 above.
1. Allowable sign area and sign height. Projecting signs fastened to, suspended from or supported
by structures shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in an area for any one (1) premises and
not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet above the mean centerline street grade. Projecting signs must
be of a scale consistent with and appropriate for the building to which they are affixed.
2. Allowable extension from building. Projecting signs shall not extend closer than six (6) feet to the
edge of the public right-of-way or extend closer than ten (10) feet to a side parcel line. Properties
located along Main Street between State Highway 35 and 4th Avenue and located along State
Highway 35 from Quincy Street to Oak Forest Drive shall be allowed to install a sign where the lowest
portion thereof is a minimum of ten (10) feet above the level of the public sidewalk or public
pedestrian thoroughfare or extend beyond four (4) feet over the public sidewalk or public pedestrian
thoroughfare.
3. Clearance above grade. All projecting signs shall maintain a minimum of ten (10) foot vertical
distance between the bottom of the sign and the grade immediately below the sign.
14.02.17 Wall Signs
A. Allowable Sign Area. The allowable sign area is specified in the applicable zoning districts.
B. Sign Placement. Where feasible, wall signs shall be placed in the traditional sign band above the
entrance to the building and shall not exceed the height of the wall for which it is displayed, depending
upon the height of the wall as specified in the applicable zoning. In no case shall a sign be placed higher
than the cornice.
C. Attachment to Building/Structure. Wall signs placed against the exterior of buildings shall not extend
more than sixteen (16) inches out from a building wall’s surface.
14.02.18 Roof Signs
F. Roof signs shall comply with the following standards:
1. Allowable Sign Height. In no case shall a roof sign exceed fifteen (15) feet in height above the
parapet line or higher than thirty (30) feet above the mean grade of the centerline of the street from
which access to the premises is obtained.
2. Roof sign structures shall be constructed entirely of steel or aluminum and all faces shall be
constructed of fire-resistant materials and shall withstand a wind pressure of thirty (30) p.s.f. per
American Society of Engineering.
14.02.19 Temporary Signs
G. The following temporary signs shall be allowed with a temporary sign permit issued by the City of
Onalaska’s Planning Department as required below, provided they are not located over, on or in a public
road right-of-way or in, on or over public water. Temporary signs may not be illuminated and for purposes
of the following sections, the length of time is measured within a calendar year. The City of Onalaska
Planning Department or their designee may remove any temporary sign which does not meet the
requirements of this Sign Ordinance without notice. For purposes of this Sign Ordinance, the lessor of a
property is considered the property owner, as to the property the lessor holds a right to use exclusive of
others. If there are multiple lessors of a property, then each lessor shall have the same rights and duties
as the property owner as to the property the lessor leases, and has the sole right to occupy and the size
of the property shall be deemed to be the property that the lessor has the sole right to occupy under the
lease.
1. Non-Residential Districts. Temporary Signs Allowed Generally. The below temporary signs do not
require a Temporary Sign Permit unless as noted.
a. One (1) temporary sign per street frontage, up to thirty-two (32) square feet in size, may be
located on a parcel when that property is being offered for sale.
b. One (1) temporary sign up to thirty-two (32) square feet may be located on the property for a
period of fifteen (15) days following the date on which a contract of sale has been executed by a
person purchasing the property.
c. One (1) temporary sign up to thirty-two (32) square feet may be located on the owner’s property
when the property owner is opening the property to the public; provided, however, that this type of
sign may not be used for more than fourteen (14) days in a calendar year.
d. Up to three (3) temporary signs may be located on a property in which an active construction site
of a new building or substantial remodel for which a building permit exists provided such
temporary signs are attached to construction trailers or are free standing. Parcels are allowed up
to an aggregate of one hundred (100) square feet of such temporary signage. For parcels
abutting I-90, the sign face may be up to seventy-two (72) square feet provided that approval is
granted by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. In addition to the three (3) temporary
signs, banners may be installed on the construction site fence to the same length and height as
the fence surrounding a construction site. Signs or banners may not be installed until after
issuance of a Site Plan Permit or Building Permit. The signs shall be confined to the construction/
development site and shall be removed within thirty (30) days of completion or prior to issuance
of a Final Occupancy, whichever is sooner.
e. One (1) temporary sign up to thirty-two (32) square feet may be located on the owner’s property
when that property is being offered for rent at the time of a known vacancy.
f. Up to three (3) temporary signs may be located on a property for a seven (7) day period
immediately after construction work has been completed by a licensed contractor. Signs may be
up to thirty-two (32) square feet in area (per side).
g. One (1) temporary sign, per street frontage, up to thirty-two (32) square feet in size may be
located on a property up to 14 days in advance of a registered Community Event. Such signs
shall be removed within 24 hours of the community event. If included on an electronic message
center sign, the electronic message center sign shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from any
residential district line and may only be illuminated from 6:00 A.M. until 10:00 P.M.
h. Two (2) temporary signs, up to thirty-two (32) square feet in area (per side) may be located on a
parcel if a temporary outdoor displays, sales area, or tent event is taking place on the property
throughout the duration of said event. A Temporary Sign Permit is required prior to installation
approved by the Planning Department.
i. A property owner may place one (1) temporary sign with a sign face no larger than thirty-two (32)
square feet on the property at any time for up to ninety (90) days in a year. A Temporary Sign
Permit for the calendar year is required prior to installation approved by the Planning Department.
j. Sidewalk sign. Each parcel is allowed (1) sidewalk sign per street frontage, up to twelve (12)
square feet in size. A sidewalk sign shall have a professional designed appearance and be
constructed of durable, weather-resistant materials (cardboard, paper, fabric, and other similar
materials are prohibited). Sidewalk signs shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner that is
consistent with all applicable codes. A sidewalk sign shall have no moving parts, except for
wheels to move the sign to and from a display location and shall not be electric or illuminated.
Sidewalk signs may be located at the subject parcel, unless a structure has been constructed in a
manner where no street yard setback exists. In these instances, a sidewalk sign may be placed
immediately adjacent to the subject parcel in a manner that does not present a pedestrian safety
issue or vehicle hazard. Under no circumstances shall a sidewalk sign obstruct vehicular parking
stalls, bus stops, benches, fire hydrants, or other features located legally in the public right-ofway.
A sidewalk sign shall be located closer to the building face, rather than the curb. A
sidewalk sign shall not be located in the required vision triangle as specified in the Unified
Development Code.
2. Residential Districts. Temporary Signs Allowed Generally. The below temporary signs do not
require a Temporary Sign Permit unless as noted.
a. One (1) temporary sign up to three (3) square feet in size is allowed at all times on a
property.
b. One (1) temporary sign per street frontage, up to four (4) square feet in size, may be located
on a parcel when that property is being offered for sale.
c. One (1) temporary sign may be located on the property for a period of fifteen (15) days
following the date on which a contract of sale has been executed by a person purchasing the
property, up to four (4) square feet in size.
d. One (1) temporary sign may be located on the owner’s property when the property owner is
opening the property to the public; provided, however, that this type of sign may not be used
for more than four (4) days in a year, up to four (4) square feet in size.
e. One (1) temporary sign may be located on the owner’s property when that property is being
offered for rent, up to four (4) square feet in size.
f. Up to three (3) temporary signs may be located on a property in which an active construction
site of a new residence or substantial remodel for which a building permit exists provided
such temporary signs are attached to fencing, construction trailers or are free standing. The
maximum size of any one (1) sign shall be nine (9) square feet for a single parcel. Where a
new residence or substantial remodel for which a building permit exists and for which the
construction site is fenced, banners may be installed on the construction site fence to the
same length and height as the construction fence.
g. Up to three (3) temporary signs may be located on a property for the seven (7) day period
immediately after construction work has been completed by a licensed contractor. Individual
signs may be up to three (3) square feet in area (per side).
h. One (1) temporary sign, per street frontage, up to four (4) square feet in size, may be located
on a property up to fourteen (14) days in advance of a registered Community Event. Such
signs shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the community event.
i. One (1) temporary sign, per street frontage, up to four (4) square feet in area (per side) may
be located on a parcel for the seventy-two (72) hours prior to a time when the owner of the
parcels holds the property open to the public for a garage or alley sale and for up to twentyfour
(24) hours afterwards.
j. A property owner may place one (1) sign with a sign face no larger than two (2) square feet
on the property at any time for up to ninety (90) days in a calendar year.
k. Up to three (3) temporary signs may be located on a new subdivision in which an active
construction site of new residences exists provided such temporary signs are attached to
fencing, construction trailers or are free standing. Installation of the signs may not occur until
after the approval of a Final Plat. The maximum size of any one (1) sign shall be thirty-two
(32) square feet for a single parcel. A Temporary Sign Permit is required prior to installation
approved by the Planning Department.
l. Sidewalk signs are allowed for permitted and permitted with standards uses in Residential
Districts, up to twelve (12) square feet in size. Each parcel is allowed one (1) sidewalk sign
per street frontage. A sidewalk sign shall have a professional designed appearance and be
constructed of durable, weather-resistant materials (cardboard, paper, fabric, and other
similar materials are prohibited). Sidewalk signs shall be constructed in a workmanlike
manner that is consistent with all applicable codes. A sidewalk sign shall have no moving
parts, except for wheels to move the sign to and from a display location and shall not be
electric or illuminated. Sidewalk signs shall be located at the subject parcel. Under no
circumstances shall a sidewalk sign obstruct vehicular parking stalls, bus stops, benches, fire
hydrants, or other features located legally in the public right-of-way. A sidewalk sign shall be
located closer to the building face, rather than the curb. A sidewalk sign shall not be located
in the required vision triangle as specified in the Unified Development Code.
Division 2 Standards by District
14.02.21 Allowable Signs in R-1 (Low Density Residential), R-2 (Low-Medium
Density Residential) R-3 (Medium Density Residential), R-4 (High Density
Residential), R-MMH (Residential Manufactured and Mobile Home) Zoning Districts
A. Intent. The R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-MMH Zoning Districts accommodate primarily residential uses and
a limited amount of other compatible non-residential uses. The signage in these districts is intended to
relate to the predominately residential character of the districts.
B. Allowable signs. The following are the only types of signs allowed:
1. Ground/Freestanding sign. Ground/freestanding signs shall comply with the standards specified in
Section 14.02.13.
2. In addition, the following standards shall apply:
a. One (1) ground/freestanding sign shall be allowed per primary entrance of subdivisions
containing at least: (a) six (6) single-family residential parcels or(b) at least twelve (12) two-family
dwelling units in the subdivision;
b. One (1) ground/freestanding sign shall be allowed per primary entrance of a multi-family
development that has three (3) or more dwelling units.
c. The maximum height of the ground/freestanding sign structure shall not exceed eight (8) feet.
d. The maximum total area of the ground/freestanding sign structure shall not exceed seventy-five
(75) square feet.
e. Signs for properties with permitted and permitted with standards uses in these districts may have
one (1) ground/freestanding sign per public road frontage a maximum of four (4) square feet per
side.
f. Permitted home occupations are allowed one (1) sign up to four (4) square feet.
g. Signs shall not be internally illuminated.
3. Wall sign. Wall signs shall comply with the standards specified in Section 14.02.17 In addition, the
following standards shall apply:
a. Multi-family uses. One (1) wall sign per building wall fronting a public street shall be allowed for a
multi-family use that is a permitted or permitted with standards use in the district, with a maximum
sign square footage of thirty-two (32) square feet and shall not be illuminated.
b. Signs with properties with permitted and permitted with standards uses in the district, may have
one (1) wall sign per premise, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area. Sign shall be a
permanent sign and not illuminated.
4. Government Signs.
5. Traffic Control Devices.
6. Flags. Provided that such flags shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet per face. The maximum
flagpole height shall be twenty-five (25) feet and no more than two (2) flagpoles shall be allowed per
parcel. The minimum setback for flagpoles shall be one (1) foot for every one (1) foot of flagpole
height. Flags that meet these requirements shall not count toward any maximum sign provisions. A
flag that has been adopted by the federal government, this State or the local government may be
displayed as provided under the law that adopts or regulates its use.
14.02.22 Allowable Signs in B-1 (Neighborhood Business), B-2 (Community Business), B-3
(Regional Business), I-1 (Light Industrial) and I-2 (Heavy Industrial) Zoning
Districts
A. Intent. The B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts accommodate primarily commercial and industrial
uses. The signage in these districts is intended for vehicular traffic moving at speeds ranging from
twenty-five (25) to forty-five (45) miles per hour.
B. Allowable signs. The following are the only types of signs allowed:
1. Ground/Freestanding Sign. Ground/freestanding signs shall comply with the standards specified in
Section 14.02.13. In addition, the following standards shall apply:
a. Ground/freestanding signs may have a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet per side for
any one (1) premise.
b. Ground/freestanding sign structure shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) feet above the
centerline of the grade of the street from which access to the premises is obtained.
c. An Electronic Message Center Sign may be permitted pursuant to the standards in Section
14.02.11.
d. Ground/freestanding signs shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from parcel boundaries and
shall follow traffic visibility standards found in the Unified Development Code.
e. Parcels that front a Federal Aid Primary (FAP) Highway are allowed a maximum of three hundred
(300) square feet per side and the sign structure shall not exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet
above the centerline of the grade of the street from which access to the premises is obtained.
2. Wall Sign. Walls signs shall comply with the standards specified in Section 14.02.17. In addition, the
following standards shall apply:
a. Wall signs are allowed up to a maximum of five hundred (500) square feet in area or forty percent
(40%) of the wall surface (whichever is smaller), per wall for any one (1) premise and such sign(s)
shall not exceed the height of the wall for which it is displayed.
b. Multi-tenant facilities and/or businesses may have one (1) wall sign per distinct and unrelated
service.
3. Billboards. Billboard and Digital Billboard signs shall comply with the standards specified in Section
14.02.15 as applicable. Billboards and Digital Billboards are allowed only in B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1 and I-2
Districts.
4. Roof Sign. Roof signs shall comply with the standards specified in Section 14.02.18
5. Projecting Sign. Projecting signs shall comply with the standards specified in Section 14.02.16.
6. Sign Adjacent to Drive Thrus. Signs adjacent to drive-thrus shall comply with the standards
specified in Section 14.02.14.
7. Awning/Canopy Sign. Awning/Canopy Signs shall comply with the standards specified in Section
14.02.11.
8. Window Sign. Window signs shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the glass area of the
pane upon which the sign is displayed.
9. Government Sign.
10. Traffic Control Devices.
11. Entrance Sign. A property owner may place a sign no larger than four (4) square feet adjacent to the
main entrance of a building or structure.
12. Flags. Provided that such flags shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet per face. The
maximum flagpole height shall be forty-five (45) feet for flags that are sixty (60) square feet or smaller
and the maximum flagpole height shall be fifty (50) feet for flags larger than sixty (60) square feet. No
more than two (2) flagpoles shall be allowed per parcel. The minimum setback for flagpoles shall be
one (1) foot for every one (1) foot of flagpole height. Flags that meet these requirements shall not
count toward any maximum sign provisions. A flag that has been adopted by the federal government,
this State or the local government may be displayed as provided under the law that adopts or
regulates its use.
14.02.23 Allowable Signs in MU-N (Mixed Use Neighborhood) and MU-C (Mixed Use
Community) Zoning Districts
A. Intent. The MU-N and MU-C Zoning Districts accommodate a mixture of residential and commercial
uses. The signage in this district is intended for vehicular traffic moving at speeds ranging up to twentyfive
(25) miles per hour.
B. Allowable signs. The following are the only types of signs allowed:
1. Ground/Freestanding Sign. Ground/freestanding signs shall comply with the standards specified in
Section 14.02.13. In addition, the following standards shall apply:
a. Ground/freestanding signs may have a maximum of sixty (60) square feet per side.
b. Ground/freestanding sign structure shall not exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet above the
centerline of the grade of the street from which access to the premises is obtained.
c. Ground/freestanding sign structure shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from parcel
boundaries and shall follow traffic visibility standards found in the Unified Development Code.
d. An Electronic Message Center Sign may be permitted pursuant to Section 14.02.12.
e. Parcels that front on a Federal Aid Primary (FAP) Highway may have a sign with a maximum of
one hundred and fifty (150) square feet per side and the sign structure shall not exceed a height
of thirty (30) feet above the centerline of the grade of the street from which access to the
premises is obtained.
2. Wall Sign. Walls signs shall comply with the standards specified in Section 14.02.17. In addition, the
following standards shall apply:
a. Wall signs are allowed a maximum of one (1) sign up to forty (40) square feet of signage per
building wall per approved use within the structure and such signs shall not exceed the height of
the wall for which it is displayed.
b. Multi-tenant facilities and/or businesses may have one (1) wall sign per distinct and unrelated
service per frontage.
3. Entrance Sign. A property owner may place a sign no larger than four (4) square feet adjacent to the
main entrance of a building or structure.
4. Projecting Sign. Projecting signs shall comply with the standards specified in Section 14.02.16.
5. Sign Adjacent to Drive-Thrus. Signs adjacent to drive-thrus shall comply with the standards
specified in Section 14.02.14.
6. Awning/Canopy Sign. Awning/Canopy Signs shall comply with the standards specified in Section
14.02.11.
7. Window Sign. Window signs shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the glass area of the
pane upon which the sign is displayed.
8. Government Sign.
9. Traffic Control Devices.
10. Flags. Provided that such flags shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet per face. The maximum
flagpole height shall be twenty-five (25) feet. No more than two (2) flagpoles shall be allowed per
parcel. The minimum setback for flagpoles shall be one (1) foot for every one (1) foot of flagpole
height. Flags that meet these requirements shall not count toward any maximum sign provisions. A
flag that has been adopted by the federal government, this State or the local government may be
displayed as provided under the law that adopts or regulates its use.
14.02.24 Allowable Signs in P-1 (Public and Semi-Public), P-2 (Park and Open Space) and
A-1 (Agricultural) Zoning Districts
A. Intent. The P-1, P-2 and A-1 Zoning Districts are intended for institutional, public uses and agricultural
uses. These districts accommodate a variety of uses including parks, governmental and cultural uses,
schools, places of worship and farming/ agricultural uses. The signage in these districts is intended for
vehicular traffic moving at speeds ranging from twenty-five (25) to forty-five (45) miles per hour.
B. Allowable signs. The following are the only types of signs allowed:
1. Ground/Freestanding Sign. Ground/freestanding signs shall comply with the standards specified in
Section 14.02.13. In addition, the following standards shall apply:
a. Ground/freestanding signs are allowed up to a maximum of up to sixty-four (64) square feet per
side.
b. Ground/freestanding sign structure shall not exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet above the
centerline of the grade of the street from which access to the premises is obtained.
c. Ground/freestanding signs shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from parcel boundaries and
shall follow traffic visibility standards found in the Unified Development Code.
d. An Electronic Message Center Sign may be permitted pursuant to Section 14.02.12.
2. Wall Sign. Walls signs shall comply with the standards specified in Section 14.02.17. In addition, the
following standards shall apply:
a. Wall signs are allowed an aggregate of up to three hundred (300) square feet, with a maximum of
one hundred (100) square feet per wall façade.
3. Entrance Sign. A property owner may place a sign no larger than four (4) square feet adjacent to the
main entrance of a building or structure.
4. Projecting Sign. Projecting signs shall comply with the standards specified in Section 14.02.16.
5. Awning/Canopy Sign. Awning/Canopy signs shall comply with the standards specified in Section
14.02.11.
6. Window Sign. Window signs shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the glass area of the
pane upon which the sign is displayed.
7. Government Sign.
8. Traffic Control Devices.
9. Flags. Provided that such flags shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet per face. The
maximum flagpole height shall be forty-five (45) feet for flags sixty (60) square feet or smaller and the
maximum flagpole height shall be fifty (50) feet for flags larger than sixty (60) square feet. No more
than two (2) flagpoles shall be allowed per parcel. The minimum setback for flagpoles shall be one (1)
foot for every one (1) foot of flagpole height. Flags that meet these requirements shall not count
toward any maximum sign provisions. A flag that has been adopted by the federal government, this
State or the local government may be displayed as provided under the law that adopts or regulates its
use.
14.02.25 Allowable Signs in Design Overlay Districts including PUD (Planned Unit
Development), D-PUD (Downtown Planned Unit Development), PCID (Planned
Commercial Industrial District), and MCD (Medical Campus District)
H. Intent. Signs within the PUD, D-PUD, PCID, and MCD Overlay Districts are intended to have a unified
appearance that is integral to the design concepts. Signs should generally comply with the sign
standards associated with the underlying districts or uses that most reflect the proposed uses in the
Overlay Districts, but may deviate from those standards pursuant to approved plans.
I. MCD On-Premise Signage.
1. In addition to the general City sign provisions, developments within a MCD may install the following
signs with dimensions, locations, and amounts as set forth in this Subsection. Signs should be an
accent to the architecture with the overall effect being low-key and proportional to the building. As
part of the Campus Master Plan, a conceptual signage plan noting locations for all proposed signage
(which may include temporary signage), to be provided during staff review.
a. Freestanding Signs. A MCD may erect freestanding signs with no more than two (2) faces in
conformance with an approved Campus Master Plan.
i. Signs fronting Federal Aid Primary (FAP) Highways. In no event shall any sign face
exceed three hundred (300) square feet on one (1) side for signage fronting FAP Highways.
Freestanding signs shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet in overall height above the centerline
of the grade of the street from which access to the premises is obtained, and setback a
minimum of five (5) feet from parcel boundaries. All signs to follow traffic visibility standards
in Section 13.03.12.A.
ii. Signs fronting non-FAP Highways (other public streets). In no event shall any sign face
exceed two hundred (200) square feet on one (1) side for signage fronting a public street.
Freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in overall height above the centerline of
the grade of the street from which access to the premises is obtained, and setback a
minimum of five (5) feet from parcel boundaries. All signs to follow traffic visibility standards
in Section 13.03.12.A.
iii. Internal Traffic Control Signs. In addition to other signage permitted within an MCD, traffic
control signs are permitted on the parcel(s) containing the campus. Such signs may be
erected along public and private roadways to direct vehicles or pedestrians to utilize certain
and follow certain streets, paths or access ways within the campus and such signs may not
be erected in the public right-of-way. Traffic control signs shall prominently display directions
to the emergency room and like services, if any. Traffic control signs shall be freestanding
monument-style signs with a maximum height of ten (10) feet in overall height and a
maximum area of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet on one (1) side. Final internal
traffic control sign locations shall be determined during site plan review.
b. Wall Signs.
i. Each building or structure within the MCD may have one (1) wall sign per permitted or
approved use, with one (1) sign face for each side of the building that faces a public or
private street or parking lot. Each facade may not have wall signs that exceed five hundred
(500) square feet in sum or forty percent (40%) of the wall surface (whichever is smaller) and
otherwise be consistent with standards set forth in this Sign Ordinance.
c. Building or Structure Addressing.
i. For emergency and fire protection services, each building or structure within the MCD that is
open to the public shall prominently display an address street number sign visible from the
internal circulation system. Each address sign must be visible and legible from the nearest
public or private street and may not exceed fifty (50) square feet. A conceptual addressing
plan shall be provided with the Campus Master Plan.
d. Temporary Signs.
i. Temporary signs shall be allowed on-premise provided they do not exceed fifteen (15) square
feet in area per side, must located on private infrastructure and may not be in the public rightof-
way. Temporary signs may not be illuminated. The locations and frequency of these signs
shall be displayed and considered during review of a conceptual signage plan.
Code in effect 2/11/2020 Updated by Ord. No. 1659-2020
Page 1 of 39
Title 15 Building Code
Chapter 01 Building Code
Division 1 Establishment of Building Code
15.01.11 Building Code Established
A. Title. This Chapter shall be known as the "Building Code of the City of Onalaska" and will be referred to in
this Chapter as "this Code," "this Chapter" or "this Ordinance."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to:
1. Exercise jurisdiction over the construction and inspection of new one (1)family and two (2)-family
dwellings, additions or alterations to existing one (1) and two (2) -family dwellings by Inspectors
certified by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services (“DSPS”).
2. Provide for plan review and onsite inspections of one (1) and two (2)-family dwellings by Inspectors
certified by the state department of safety and professional services.
3. Provide for review and onsite inspection of commercial structures to the extent permitted by and
subject to state law.
4. Provide for the collection and establishment of fees to defray administrative costs.
5. To adopt relevant state statutes and administrative code provisions to promote the interests stated in
this section.
C. Uniform Dwelling Code.
1. State Uniform Dwelling Code Adopted. Wis. Admin. Code SPS Chapters 321 through 325, in
associations with SPS 321.40, Manufactured Homes, are hereby adopted by reference and made
part of this Chapter as if fully set forth. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any such
provision is required or prohibited by this Chapter. Future amendments, revisions, or modifications of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions incorporated in this Chapter are intended to be made a
part of this Chapter to secure uniform state regulation of one (1)-family and two (2)-family dwellings in
this city. The Wisconsin Administrative Codes, as adopted in this Chapter, are intended to apply to
additions and alterations to one (1) and two (2)-family dwellings, including existing one (1) -family and
two (2)-family dwellings, which were built prior to December 1, 1978 (effective adoption date of the
Uniform Dwelling Code), detached garages, accessory buildings, as well as new construction. A copy
of these Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions and any future amendments shall be kept on file
in the office of the city building inspector.
2. Enforcement and Right to Inspect. The Inspection Department is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all of the provisions of the Uniform Dwelling Code. The Inspection
Department, as a condition of the issuance of a building permit, shall have the authority to enter at
any reasonable time during normal work hours, during the course of the work and until final inspection
and approval thereof has been given to inspect such premises for compliance of all state and
municipal codes in this Chapter.
D. Definitions. Definitions for this Title are located in Chapter 5.
15.01.12 Building Permits and Inspection
A. Permit Required.
1. General Permit Requirement. No one (1)-family or two (2)-family dwelling shall be built, enlarged,
altered or repaired unless a building permit for that work shall first be obtained by the owner or their
agent from the Inspection Department. Application for a building permit shall be in writing upon the
form designated by the State Uniform Dwelling Permit Application.
2. Alterations and Repairs. No addition, alteration or repair to an existing one (1)-family or two (2)-
family dwelling shall be undertaken unless a building permit for this work is first obtained by the owner
or their agent from the Inspection Department. The Inspection Department may not require a permit
for minor repairs (i.e., repairs or alterations not affecting occupancy, area, structural integrity, fire
protection, exits, lighting or ventilation).
3. Dedicated Street and Approved Subdivision Required. No building permit shall be issued unless
the property on which the building is proposed to be built abuts a street that has been dedicated for
street purposes. No building permits shall be issued until the land division and required
improvements are accepted by the Common Council upon recommendation of the Plan Commission.
4. Utilities Required.
a. Residential/UDC Buildings. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any one
(1) and two (2)-family dwellings until sewer, water, grading, graveling, and pavement are installed
in the streets necessary to service the property for which the permit is required.
b. Non-Residential Building. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building
other than residential until contracts have been let for the installation of sewer, water, grading,
graveling, and pavement in the streets necessary to service the property for which the permit is
requested.
c. Occupancy. No person shall occupy any building until sewer, water, grading, graveling, and
pavement are installed in the streets necessary to service the property and a Certificate of
Occupancy shall not be issued until such utilities are available to service the property.
d. Utility Service Not Available. If municipal sewer and water are not available, no building permit
or Occupancy Permit will be issued until plans are provided for a private domestic sewage
treatment and disposal system and an approved well system. The installation of the abovementioned
systems must be approved by the City Engineer, Inspection Department, and La
Crosse County in charge of issuing the applicable state permits.
5. Accessory Structures. No accessory building or structure, including detached garages, open sheds,
roof covered patios, gazebos, pergolas, or any other accessory building or structure, shall be
constructed, enlarged, altered or repaired unless a building permit for that work shall first be obtained
by the owner or their agent from the Inspection Department. Further, accessory structures may only
be constructed on a parcel after a principal structure has been established.
6. One (1)-family and two (2)-family homes built prior to December 1, 1978. No addition, alteration,
or repair to a one (1)-family or two (2)-family dwelling that was built before December 1, 1978 as per
the effective date of the adoption of the Uniform Dwelling Code shall be undertaken unless a building
permit for this work is first obtained by the owner or their agent from the Inspection Department. The
Inspection Department may not require a permit for minor repairs (i.e., repairs as defined in SPS
320.05(3) of the Uniform Dwelling Code, alterations not affecting occupancy, area, structural integrity,
fire protection, exits, lighting or ventilation).
7. Submission of Plans. The applicant shall submit two (2) sets of plans along with a comprehensive
site plan and soil erosion control plan for new construction to one (1)-family and two (2)-family
dwellings at the time that the building permit application is filed. All required plans submitted for
approval, shall be accompanied by sufficient data, calculations and information to determine if the
dwelling will meet the minimum requirements of the Uniform Dwelling Code.
8. Required Inspections and Requests. Prior to concealment of any electrical, plumbing, or HVAC
installations, buildings shall be inspected at such times and in such manner to be in accordance with
all state and local codes, ordinances, or rules applicable thereto. No structural portion of any building
or structure shall be covered or concealed until the completion of the required inspections and
approval by the Inspection Department. The permit applicant or an authorized representative shall
notify the building inspector after completion of the required inspections as listed below (inspection
types) orally, email or in writing. The Inspection Department shall make a reasonable effort to conduct
all inspections in a timely manner. Work shall not proceed until required inspections have been
completed and approval by the Inspection Department, except that construction may proceed if an
inspection has not been performed within two (2) business days after proper notification has been
given.
9. Inspection Types. The following inspections shall be completed for all projects whenever applicable:
a. Erosion Control Inspection. Erosion control measures shall be inspected after implementation
and concurrently with the following required inspections for proper maintenance.
b. Building Sanitary, Storm and Water Service Inspection. The building sanitary, storm sewer
and water service shall be inspected in accordance with SPS 382.21(1) of the State Plumbing
Code prior to be covered or concealed.
c. Foundation Excavation Inspection. The excavation for the foundation shall be inspected after
the placement of any forms or required reinforcement and prior to the placement of the
permanent foundation material. If a drain tile system is required, by the local inspector or by
groundwater levels in the excavation, the presence and location of bleeders used to connect the
interior and exterior drain tile shall be inspected at the same time as the excavation.
d. Foundation Inspection. The foundation shall be inspected after completion. Where
dampproofing, exterior insulation or drain tile are required for code compliance, the foundation
shall be inspected prior to backfilling.
e. Underground Building Drains and Drain Tile Inspection. Plumbing building drain, drain tile,
washed stone base, and required sub slab vapor retarder shall be inspected prior to backfilling or
placement of basement slab floors.
f. Rough Inspection. General building construction (basement floor area, framing), plumbing,
HVAC, and electrical installations shall be inspected after all work is complete, but before any of
the installations are covered or concealed.
g. Insulation Inspection. Insulation, vapor retarders, air barriers, and exterior drainage planes shall
be inspected after installation is complete, but before any of the installations are covered or
concealed.
h. Final Inspection. The dwelling shall not be occupied until a final inspection has been made. The
permit applicant shall notify the Inspection Department orally, or by written notification for a final
inspection upon completion of the permitted work. The final inspection shall be performed within
five (5) business days after proper notification and prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. The Inspection Department shall notify the applicant and/or owner in writing of any
code violations to be corrected. All code violations shall be corrected within thirty (30) days after
written notification unless an extension of time is granted. Failure to obtain a final inspection upon
completion of the permitted work, and/or correct noted code violations prior to occupancy, and
refused or neglected to pay for previous permits shall be considered in violation of this Section
and may be subjected to citations and/or a re-inspection fee. The Inspection Department may
refuse to issue permits to any person or applicant who has refused or neglected to correct any
violations of this chapter.
i. Stop Work Order. If a noted violation is not corrected within thirty (30) days, a stop work order
may be served on the owner or the owner's representative, and a copy shall be posted at the
construction site. Such stop work order shall not be removed except by written notice of the
Inspection Department after satisfactory evidence has been provided that the noted violation(s)
have been corrected.
10. Inspection Disclaimer. All inspections are intended to cite conditions of noncompliance in
accordance with all state and local code standards that are evident at the time of inspections. An
inspection does not involve a thorough examination to all appliances, mechanical systems, and
closed structural elements of the building or structure.
11. Certificate of Occupancy and Use.
a. One and Two-Family Dwellings. No one (1)-family and two (2)-family dwelling shall be used or
occupied until the Inspection Department has issued a certificate of temporary occupancy or a
certificate of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy shall state that the work has been
completed; all violations have been corrected on the final inspection report and that the use or
occupancy complies with provisions of this Chapter.
b. Temporary Occupancy. The Inspection Department may issue a temporary occupancy permit
for a part or parts of a building or structure, before the entire work covered by a building permit
shall have been completed provided such portions may be occupied safely prior to full completion
of the structure without endangering life or public welfare. No such partial occupancy permit may
be issued prior to full compliance with those provisions of State Statute and the Wisconsin
Administrative Code that affect health and safety or before full completion of accessible routes to,
into and through the structure exist. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued for a period
not exceeding six (6) months, except as specifically approved by the Inspection Department for
weather related or similar type delays. A temporary occupancy permit shall not be granted until all
applicable fees, including necessary inspection fees have been paid. Applications for temporary
occupancy shall be on such form as provided by the Inspection Department.
15.01.13 Commercial Buildings
A. Wisconsin Uniform Commercial Building Code (UCBC). Wis. Admin. Code SPS 361, SPS 360-66,
and “International (I) Codes”, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Chapter as if fully
set forth. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any such provision is required or prohibited by
this Chapter. Any future amendments, revisions, or modifications of the State Commercial Building Code
provisions incorporated in this Chapter are intended to be made a part of this Chapter to secure uniform
state regulations.
B. Commercial Buildings. Notwithstanding the provisions of the State Uniform Commercial Building Code,
no commercial building (i.e., any building not covered by the Uniform Dwelling Code) shall be built,
enlarged, altered or repaired unless a building permit for that work has first been obtained by the owner or
owner's agent from the Inspection Department. Application for such building permit shall be made as
required by Wis. Admin. Code SPS 361.30 and a copy of such permit, together with the plans and
specifications for such construction activities, shall be filed with the Inspection Department for review in
accordance with the requirements of the Wis. Admin. Code SPS 361 and the State Uniform Commercial
Building Code SPS 360-66.
C. Design. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 443.14, a public building, structure or place of employment shall be
designed by an architect or an engineer, except as provided under Wis. Stats. §§ 443.14 and 443.15; b.
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 443, a component or a system, including an electrical system, a fire protection
system, a heating ventilating and air conditioning system shall be designed by an architect, engineer, or a
designer of engineering systems, except as provided under Wis. Stats. §§ 443.14 and 443.15.
1. Pursuant to SPS 361.30-1, the following buildings are exempt from state plan review containing less
than twenty-five thousand (25,000) cubic feet in volume:
a. Buildings of group assembly A-2; A-3;
b. Business B;
c. Factory F
d. Mercantile M;
e. Storage S; and
f. Utility and miscellaneous U containing less than twenty-five (25,000) cubic feet in volume.
D. Supervision Pursuant to SPS 361.40.
1. Except as noted below, the proposed construction of a project within the scope of this Code shall be
supervised by one (1) or more Wisconsin registered architects or engineers, except that Wisconsin
registered designers may supervise the installation of heating, ventilating and air conditioning
systems, fire protection systems and illumination systems. The person responsible for supervision
shall also be responsible for the construction and installation being in substantial compliance with the
approved plans and specifications. If the supervising architect, engineer or designer is confronted
with a nonconformance with the Code during or at the end of construction, that party, together with
the designing architect, engineer or designer shall effect compliance or shall notify the Inspection
Department of the noncompliance.
a. A project does not require supervision by a Wisconsin registered architect or engineer, if the
project qualifies under one (1) of the following conditions:
i. The building contains less than fifty thousand (50,000) cubic feet in volume.
ii. An addition to an existing building does not cause the entire building to contain or exceed a
volume of fifty thousand (50,000) cubic feet.
b. For the purposes of this Subsection, the utilization of the fire walls to divide up a building does
not create separate buildings.
2. Compliance statement. Pursuant to SPS 361.40(4), initial occupancy of a new building or addition,
and final occupancy of an alteration of an existing building, the supervising architect, engineer, or
designer shall file a written statement with the authority that issued plan approval certifying that, to
the best of their knowledge and belief, construction of that portion to be occupied has been
performed in substantial compliance with the approved plans and specifications. This statement shall
be provided on a form prescribed by the Department of Safety and Professional Services.
E. Occupancy and Use.
1. Certificate of Occupancy and Use. No building shall be used or occupied until the Inspection
Department has issued a certificate of temporary occupancy or a certificate of occupancy. The
certificate of occupancy shall state that the work has been completed; all violations have been
corrected on the final inspection report and that the use or occupancy complies with provisions of this
Chapter.
2. Temporary Occupancy. The Inspection Department may issue a temporary occupancy permit for a
part or parts of a building or structure, before the entire work covered by a building permit shall have
been completed provided such portions may be occupied safely prior to full completion of the
structure without endangering life or public welfare. No such partial occupancy permit may be issued
prior to full compliance with those provisions of State Statute and the Wisconsin Administrative Code
that affect health and safety or before full completion of accessible routes to, into and through the
structure exist. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued for a period not exceeding six (6)
months, except as specifically approved by the Inspection Department for weather related or similar
type delays. A temporary occupancy permit shall not be granted until all applicable fees, including
necessary inspection fees have been paid. Applications for temporary occupancy shall be on such
form as provided by the Inspection Department.
F. Change of Occupancy or Use. Pursuant to SPS 361.03(c)11, except as provided herein, no change
may be made in the use or occupancy of any building or structure, or any space within a building or
structure, that would place the building, structure or space either in a different division of the same group
of occupancies or in a different group of occupancies, unless the building, structure or space complies
with this Code's requirements for the new division or group of occupancies, as these requirements exist
on the following dates:
1. Pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code SPS 361.30, the date when plans for the change in occupancy or use
are approved by the Inspection Department;
2. The date a local building permit is issued, if plan submittal and approval is not required under Wis.
Admin. Code SPS 361.30;
3. The date construction is initiated, where pars. 1. and 2. above do not apply;
4. The date an occupancy permit is issued, where pars. 1- 3. do not apply.
F. Existing Buildings and Structures. Unless otherwise stated in the State Uniform Commercial Building
Code, an existing building or structure, and every element, system or component of an existing building or
structure shall be maintained to conform with the building code requirements that applied when the
building, structure, element, system, or component was constructed, and to conform to the International
Existing Building Code as adopted into the Uniform Commercial Building Code.
15.01.14 Regulation and Permit for Razing Buildings
A. No building within the City of Onalaska shall be razed without a permit from the Inspection Department. A
snow fence or other approved barricade shall be provided as soon as any portion of the building is
removed and shall remain during razing operations. After all razing operations have been completed, the
foundation shall be filled at least one (1) foot above the adjacent grade, the property raked clean, and all
debris hauled away. Razing permits shall lapse and be void unless the work authorized thereby is
commenced within six (6) months from the date thereof or completed within thirty (30) days from the date
of commencement of said work. Any unfinished portion of work remaining beyond the required thirty (30)
days must have special approval from the Inspection Department.
B. All debris must be hauled away at the end of each day for the work that was done on that day. No
combustible material shall be used for backfill, but shall be hauled away. There shall not be any burning
of materials on the site of the razed building. If any razing or removal operation under this Section results
in, or would likely result in, an excessive amount of dust particles in the air creating a nuisance in the
vicinity thereof, the permittee shall take all necessary steps, by use of water spraying or other appropriate
means, to eliminate such nuisance. The permittee shall take all necessary steps, prior to the razing of a
building, through the employment of a qualified person in the field of pest control or by other appropriate
means, to treat the building as to prevent the spread and migration of rodents and insects therefrom
during and after the razing operations.
C. Insurance Requirements for Razing Buildings. The City shall require, in addition to the said bond
above indicated, a certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured with the City Clerk,
giving evidence of liability insurance in the following amounts: Public Liability- Bodily Injury: $1,000,000
each occurrence, $2,000,000 aggregate, Property Damage: $500,000 each occurrence, $2,000,000
aggregate.
D. Asbestos Abatement/Removal. The City shall require all asbestos material to be appropriately abated
per Wisconsin Admin Code NR 447. All properties being razed must be inspected for the presence of
asbestos-containing materials prior to demolition. Notification must be submitted to the DNR regardless of
whether or not asbestos is present and a copy of the inspector’s report submitted to the Inspection
Department. All regulated asbestos-containing materials must be properly removed before beginning
demolition.
15.01.15 Regulations for Moving Buildings
A. General Requirements.
1. No person shall move any building or structure upon any of the public ways of the City of Onalaska
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Inspection Department and upon the payment of the
required fee. Every such permit issued by the Inspection Department for the moving of a building
shall designate the route to be taken, the conditions to be complied with and shall limit the time during
which said moving operations shall be continued.
2. Issuance of moving permit shall further be conditioned on approval of the moving route.
3. Applicant shall provide copies of all State Permits as required.
B. Continuous Movement. The movement of buildings shall be a continuous operation during all the hours
of the day and at night, until such movement is fully completed. All such operations shall be performed
with the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to remain overnight
upon any street crossing or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant
or any other public facility. Lights shall be kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during
the night.
C. Street Repair. Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall, within one (1) day after said
building reaches its destination, report that fact to the Inspection Department, inspect the trees, streets,
highways and curbs and gutters over which said building has been moved and ascertain their condition. If
the removal of said building has caused any damage to any street or highway, the person to whom the
permit was issued shall forthwith place them in as good repair as they were before the permit was
granted. On the failure of the said permittee to do so within ten (10) days thereafter to the satisfaction of
the Director of Public Works, the City shall repair the damage done to such streets and hold the person
obtaining such permit and the sureties on his bond responsible for the payment of same.
D. Conformance with Code. No permit shall be issued to move a building within or into the City and to
establish it upon a location within the said City until the Inspection Department has made an investigation
of such building at the location from which it is to be moved and is satisfied from such investigation that
said building is in a sound and stable condition and of such construction that it will meet the requirements
of this Building Code in all respects. A complete plan of all further repairs, improvements and remodeling
with reference to such building shall be submitted to the Inspection Department, and it shall make a
finding of fact to the effect that all such repairs, improvements and remodeling are in conformity with the
requirements of this Code and that, when the same are completed, the building as such will so comply
with said Code. In the event a building is to be moved from the City to some point outside the boundaries
thereof, the provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans and specifications for proposed alterations to
such building may be disregarded.
E. Bond.
1. Before a permit to move any building is granted by the Inspection Department, the party applying
therefor shall give a bond in the sum of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) with good and sufficient
sureties to be approved by the City of Onalaska conditioned, among other things, that said party will
save and indemnify judgments, costs and expenses which may, in any way, accrue against the City
and will save the City harmless against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expense in consequence
of granting of such permit.
F. Insurance. The City shall require, in addition to the said bond above indicated, a certificate of insurance
naming the city as an additional insured with the Inspection Department, giving evidence of liability
insurance in the following amounts: Public Liability- Bodily Injury: $1,000,000 each occurrence,
$2,000,000 aggregate, Property Damage: $500,000 each occurrence, $1,000,000 aggregate; Auto
Liability-Bodily Injury: $100,000 each occurrence, $300,000 aggregate, Property Damage: $100,000 each
occurrence.
15.01.16 Building Permits and Inspection Fees
A. Issuance of Permits. If the Inspection Department finds that the proposed building repair, alteration or
addition complies with all City Ordinances and the Uniform Dwelling Code, the Inspection Department
shall approve the application. The issued building permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the
building site. A copy of any issued building permit shall be kept on file with the Inspection Department. All
issued permit becomes null and void if work or construction authorized is not commenced within twelve
(12) months or if construction or work is suspended or abandoned for a period of twelve (12) months at
any time after work is commenced.
B. Before issuing a building permit required under this Title, the owner or their agent shall pay to the
Inspection Department the necessary building permit fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee
Scheduled approved each year by resolution of the Common Council. Such fees may include late fees,
inspection fees, fees for expedited process and fees for professional services.
C. For all fees based upon building square footage, the square footage calculations shall include all floor
levels, basements, attached garages, mezzanines, occupied roofs and all spaces enclosed under a room.
All fees so calculated shall be rounded to the nearest dollar.
D. Permit Duration. All permits requiring state approval and all permits for initial construction of one (1)-
family and two (2)-family dwellings shall be valid as stated in SPS 320.09(9)(5) from date of issuance. All
plan approvals and extensions of plan approvals shall be valid as stated in SPS 361.36 (1) and (2). All
other permits shall be valid for one year from date of issuance. Renewal of expired permits shall include
fee assessments for such renewal in addition to other fees required by law.
Division 2 Building Code
15.01.21 Inspection Enforcement
A. Method of Enforcement.
1. Certified Inspector to Enforce. The Inspection Department is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all of the provisions of the Uniform Dwelling Code. Inspectors of the
Inspection Department shall be certified for inspection purposes by the Department in each of the
categories specified under Chapter SPS 305, Wis. Adm. Code.
2. Duties. The Inspection Department shall administer and enforce all provisions of this Title and the
Uniform Dwelling Code.
3. Inspection Powers. Inspectors of the Inspection Department or an authorized agent may at all
reasonable hours enter upon any public or private premises for inspection purposes and may require
the production of the permit for any building, plumbing, electrical or heating work. No person shall
interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises to a representative of the Inspection
Department while in performance of their duties.
4. Records. The Inspection Department shall perform all administrative tasks required by the
Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations under the Uniform Dwelling Code. In addition,
the Inspection Department shall keep a record of all applications for building permits and shall
regularly number each permit in the order of its issue. Also, a record showing the number, description
and size of all buildings erected indicating the kind of materials used and the cost of each building
and aggregate cost of all one (1) and two (2) family dwellings shall be kept.
15.01.22 Unsafe Buildings
A. Whenever the Inspection Department finds any building or part thereof within the City to be, in its
judgment, so old, dilapidated or out of repair and consequently dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or
otherwise unfit for human habitation or use and unreasonable to repair, they shall order the owner to raze
and remove such building or part thereof or, if it can be made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe
and sanitary, or to raze and remove at the owner's option. Such order and proceedings shall be as
provided in Sec. 66.0413, Wis. Stats.
B. Where public safety requires immediate action, the Inspection Department shall enter upon the premises
with such assistance as may be necessary and cause the building or structure to be made safe or to be
removed, and the expenses of such work may be recovered by the City in an action against the owner or
tenant.
15.01.23 Abandoned Premises and Protection of Property; Fill Dirt; Basement Subflooring
A. Abandoned Excavations. Any excavation which exists for thirty (30) days or more where construction
has not been commenced therein shall be considered abandoned and shall be refilled and leveled to
grade by the owner of such lot or parcel of land within ten (10) days after receiving a written notice from
the Engineering Department of such requirement; upon the failure of such owner to comply with such
requirement within the stated period, the work may be done by the City or its agent and the expense
thereof shall be assessed against such lot or parcel of land as a special tax pursuant to Sec. 66.0627,
Wis. Stats., to be collected in the same manner as are other real estate taxes.
B. Transfer of Solid Fill. No person, firm or corporation shall transfer to, dump or place upon lands, public
or private, solid fill within the City of Onalaska without first obtaining a permit therefor:
1. Application. Application for a permit to transfer, place or dump solid fill within the City of Onalaska
shall be made by the owner of the lands to be filled or their designated agent in writing to the
Engineering Department upon an application furnished by the City. The applicant shall set forth upon
the application form the following information:
a. Proposed route for hauling fill;
b. Other equipment involved in fill operation;
c. Descriptions and source of fill material; and
d. Grading plan indicating final limits and finished grade of fill area.
2. Fill Material. Fill material shall be clean, inert material fee from organic material, brush, garbage and
material subject to organic decomposition. Where necessary, to avoid dust or similar litter, all material
shall be wetted down before transporting. Fill containing items such as hollow containers, appliances
and equipment subject to subsequent collapse or settlement is prohibited. Generally, material such as
earth fill and broken concrete of a size approved by the Inspection Department or their designee will
be classified as acceptable fill subject to other permit requirements.
3. Permits. The Engineering Department is authorized to issue a filling permit to each applicant when
Department officials are satisfied that the fill material meets the requirements provided herein and
that the filling operation will not create noise, traffic or other problems detrimental to the residents of
the area of the community in which said filling is taking place; the Engineering Department shall not
authorize any filling between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays, nor at any time on
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday; the Engineering Department shall further restrict the hours of
filling or the number of trucks involved based upon the location of the filling operation and the traffic
conditions of the area where the filling is being placed. The permit shall be for a period not to exceed
three (3) consecutive months in a calendar year. Permit applications for subsequent years, when
filling operations span a period of several years, will be subject to conditions and fees governing initial
applications.
4. Other Regulations. Filling operations also shall be subject to all applicable county, state or federal
license or permit regulations. Filling operations shall not block a natural drainage course.
5. Exceptions. The provisions of this Subsection relating to the transfer of solid fill shall not apply to
customary top dressing or fertilizing of lawns and gardens nor shall they apply to the construction of
block or concrete patios, driveways or platforms permitted under City Ordinances. Filling involved in
an operation requiring a building permit or a wrecking permit is exempt from this Subsection of the
Code.
Division 3 Plumbing Code
15.01.31 Purpose and Scope of Plumbing Code
A. Title. This division shall be known as the “Plumbing Code of the City of Onalaska and will be referred to
in this Chapter or elsewhere as the “Plumbing Code”
B. Purpose. The purpose of this Division is to:
1. Provide minimum regulations, provisions and requirements in the City of Onalaska to insure safety
and adequacy to persons and property wherever plumbing is installed and to all alterations or
improvements, including replacement of any apparatus or device pertaining to plumbing.
2. Ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter; the State Plumbing Code as described
below, the City Utility Code, and the City’s Water Utility Rules approved by the Wisconsin Public
Service Commission.
C. Uniform Dwelling Code.
1. State Statutes and Plumbing Admin. Code Adopted. Wis. Stats. Chapter 145 and Wis. Admin.
Code SPS 381 to 384 together with all amendments, are hereby adopted and by reference made a
part of this Chapter with the same force and effect as though set out in this section in full. Failure to
comply with the provision of the statutes or administrative rules, regulations and bulletins, shall
constitute a violation of this Chapter, publishable according to the penalties provided.
15.01.32 Plumbing Permits
A. Required. No person shall engage in any plumbing work in any building, make any connection with any
building, sewer or drains, or do any other plumbing work required by this Chapter or any state
administrative code without first making application and paying the requisite fee for a plumbing permit
under this section. The Inspection Department may require plans and specifications prior to approval of
any permit. The permit may be issued by a designee of the Inspection Department.
B. Application and Fee. The application shall be in writing upon forms which the Inspection Department
shall provide and shall include the name of the owner and the description of the property on which the
work is to be done, along with such pertinent information as the Inspection Department may require, and
shall state that the property owner and the applicant will be bound by and subject to the provisions of this
Chapter. At the time the application for a plumbing permit is filed, the applicant shall pay such fees for
such services as are required under the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. Such fees include late fees,
inspection fees, professional services fees and fees for expedited process.
C. Issuance, Term, Suspension and Revocation. When the Inspection Department is satisfied that the
work proposed by the applicant can be done in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter and after the
appropriate fees have been paid, the Inspection Department shall issue the permit. Such permit shall
allow for the continuous performance of the work named thereon. A permit shall automatically expire
when work ceases for a period of sixty (60) days without good and reasonable cause for same as may be
approved by the Inspection Department and shall automatically expire on completion of the work for
which it is used, provided the Inspection Department may, upon notice, suspend or revoke such permit for
violation of the provisions of this Chapter.
15.01.33 Restrictions on Issuance.
A. No permit will be issued to anyone not licensed, where applicable, or who has failed to renew such
license or had failed to comply with the provisions of this Chapter. No plumbing permit shall be issued to
any person who is in violation of this Chapter until such violation has been corrected. No plumbing permit
shall be issued to any person against whom an order issued by the Inspection Department is pending,
provided this restriction may be waived by the Inspection Department.15.01.33 Plumbers to be
Licensed
B. No person shall carry on the business of plumbing or do any plumbing work until they shall have first
obtained the proper license to do so from the state. An unlicensed person may remove stoppages in drain
pipes or repair valves or faucets.
15.01.34 Plumbing Inspections
A. Inspector.
1. Qualification. The City employs Building Inspectors I, II, III and Lead Building Inspector to perform
plumbing inspections. Those Building Inspectors in the Inspection Department with the appropriate
certifications and licenses for UDC and Commercial Plumbing shall perform inspections under this
Division.
2. Duties and Authority. Those City inspectors certified to perform plumbing inspections shall have
control of the supervision and inspection of plumbing and drainage work within or in connection with
all buildings within the city. They shall make or cause to be made all inspections of house sewers
from the main sewer or other disposal terminal to the buildings, and shall faithfully enforce all laws,
ordinances and rules in relation thereto. It shall be the duty of the Inspection Department to see that
the construction, reconstruction and alteration of all plumbing, drainage and plumbing ventilation
hereafter installed in all of the buildings in the City shall conform with the laws and ordinances of the
state and the rules and regulations laid down by the state department of commerce and the city and
that the work is done by licensed plumbers as provided by law and this chapter, and to make all
inspections required thereby and in the manner therein set forth. The Inspection Department shall
have the right to enter any building during reasonable hours in the discharge of their duties. The
Inspection Department is empowered to exercise in the best interests of the general public such
supervision over all plumbing and drainage installations as may be necessary to adequately enforce
and administer the provisions of this Chapter and state law and code to make plumbing safe and
sanitary and to promote public welfare in all classes of buildings, private and public.
B. Inspections. Inspections shall be made as provided for in the State Code and this Chapter and shall
include:
1. Inspection of the entire house sewer, and drain from the main sewer or other disposal terminal to the
building, including connections at point of discharge, and the water service from curb box into
building.
2. The house drain within the building and its branches, under test as prescribed, which inspection shall
be made before any part of the drain has been covered.
3. The soil, waste and vent pipe known as roughing in, shall be inspected under test before it is
enclosed or covered.
4. Final inspection of the plumbing installation after fixtures, appurtenances and appliances have been
tested and completed, and the installation is ready for use. When practical, the final inspection shall
be made with the water supply serving such plumbing system turned on for such test purposes.
C. Notification for Inspection. The plumber or owner/occupant to whom the permit has been issued, or
their agent, shall notify the Inspection Department in the manner prescribed by the Inspection Department
when the work is ready for inspection and shall specify the street address and permit number under which
the work is being done. The person making the request for inspection shall make such arrangements as
will enable the Inspection Department to reach all parts of the building and shall provide the equipment
and labor for making tests of the system.
D. Final Inspection. The plumber or owner/occupant to whom the permit has been issued, or their agent
shall notify the Inspection Department when the work is completed and ready for final inspection. The
person making the request for final inspection shall make arrangement for entry into all parts of the
building where the inspection is to be performed. When practical, the final inspection shall be made with
the water supply serving such plumbing system turned on for such test purposes. The Inspection
Department shall furnish the owner or the plumber to whom the permit was issued with a certificate of
such inspection indicating whether the installation has been approved or disapproved and giving the
reasons therefore in writing.
E. Right to Entry. The Inspection Department shall have the right to enter onto public or private property
during reasonable hours to inspect plumbing work. Where entry is refused, the Inspection Department
may seek an inspection warrant as provided in Sec. 66.0119, Wis. Stats. as may be amended.
15.01.35 Installation of Check Valves on All New Plumbing
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, all residential units/homes within the City of
Onalaska, within a secondary water pressure zone, shall have installed a check valve and a pressurereducing
valve. Said check valve is to be located on the home side of the water meter and said pressure
reducing valve shall be installed on the street side of the water meter.
15.01.36 Plumbing Records and Reports
A. The Inspection Department shall prepare suitable records and applications for the permits required and
keep an updated record of all inspections.
15.01.37 Discharge of Clear Waters
A. Discharge. No person shall cause, allow or permit any roof drain, surface drain, subsoil drain, drain from
any mechanical device, gutter, ditch, pipe, conduit, sump pump or any other object or thing used for the
purposes of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining or discharging clear water from any
part of any private premises owned or occupied by said person to discharge into a sanitary sewer.
B. Nuisance. The discharge into a sanitary sewer from any roof drain, surface drain, subsoil drain, drain
from any mechanical device, gutter, ditch, pipe, conduit, sump pump or any other object or thing used for
the purposes of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting, draining or discharging clear water from
any part of any private premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a hazard to the health,
safety and well-being of the residents of the City and to the protection of property.
C. Groundwater.
1. Where deemed necessary by the Inspection Department, every house shall have a sump pump
installed for the purpose of discharging clear waters from foundation drains and ground infiltration and
where the building is not serviced by a storm sewer shall either discharge into an underground
conduit leading to a drainage ditch, gutter, dry well or shall discharge onto the ground surface in such
other manner as will not constitute a nuisance as defined herein.
2. Roof water shall be directed to the street storm sewer or between buildings.
D. Storm Water. All roof drains, surface drains, drains from any mechanical device, gutters, pipe, conduits
or any other objects or things used for the purpose of collecting, conducting, transporting, diverting,
draining or discharging storm waters shall be discharged either to a storm sewer, a dry well, an
underground conduit leading to a drainage ditch or onto the ground surface in such other manner as will
not constitute a nuisance as defined herein.
E. Storm Sewer Lateral. Where municipal storm sewers are provided and it is deemed necessary by the
property owner and/or the City to discharge clear waters from a parcel of land, a storm sewer lateral shall
be installed and connected to the storm sewer main at the expense of the owner.
F. Conducting Tests. If the Inspection Department or their designated agent suspects an illegal clear water
discharge as defined by this Chapter or by any other applicable provision of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code as it may, from time to time, be amended, they may, upon reasonable notice and at reasonable
times, enter the private premises where such illegal clear water discharge is suspected and conduct
appropriate tests to determine whether such suspected illegal clear water discharge actually exists.
Division 4 Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Code
15.01.41 Purpose and Scope of Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Code
A. The purpose of this Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Code is to provide minimum regulations,
provisions and requirements in the City of Onalaska to insure safety and adequacy to persons and
property wherever heating, ventilating and air conditioning is installed and to all alterations or
improvements, including replacement of any apparatus or device, pertaining to heating, ventilating and air
conditioning.
B. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to every building, or portion of a building, devoted to a new use
for which the requirements are in any way more stringent than the requirements covering the previous
use.
15.01.42 State Regulations Adopted
A. Adopted by Reference. Ch. SPS 323, Wis. Adm. Code; Ch. SPS 364 Wis. Adm. Code; NFPA 54; and
ANSI Z223.1 are adopted and by reference made a part of this Chapter with the same force and effect as
though set out in full.
15.01.43 Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning (HVAC) Inspections
A. In any new building or addition, immediately upon completion of those portions of the installation which
are thereafter to be concealed or covered, the heating contractor shall notify the Inspection Department
that said portions of the installations are ready for inspection; and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to lath over, plaster or cover up any heating work before such work has been inspected
and a rough inspection card posted. The Inspection Department shall have the right and authority to order
the removal of all such lath, plaster or other covering which may have been placed over such work as has
not been inspected. The Inspection Department shall make inspections within two (2) working days after
notice. Final inspection on new installations is to be made upon completion of such work. Inspection of
repairs, replacement or conversion work is to be made upon completion of such work. The heating
contractor shall notify the Inspection Department as soon as the installation is complete and ready for
inspection.
B. Wherever any work or project governed by provisions of the HVAC Code and for which a permit has been
issued, as provided herein, is being performed or carried on in violation of any of the provisions of said
Code, it shall be the duty of the Inspection Department to post a printed notice to "Stop Work" signed by
the Inspection Department on the premises where such work is in progress and to notify anyone in
charge of such work on the premises of such stop work order. After the posting of such notice, it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do any further work on such project until such time as the
defects or violations of the HVAC Code have been eliminated to the approval of the Inspection
Department.
C. When the Inspection Department finds any installation in which there are violations of the Code, it shall
issue a written order specifying the violation and stating the date by which these corrections shall be
made. Any licensee failing or neglecting to comply with written orders at the discretion of the Inspection
Department shall not be issued any further permits until such violations have been corrected and penalty
fee paid. Failure or neglect to comply with the provisions of the HVAC Code and of the permit issued
under this Code shall be considered a violation of this Chapter.
15.01.44 Liability for Damages
A. This Chapter shall not affect the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling, or
installing any heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment for damages to persons or property
caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspection or re-inspection authorized herein or the certificate of approval issued as herein provided or by
reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein.
15.01.45 Bonds and Insurance
A. No permit shall be issued to any person engaging in the business of installing, altering, repairing, or
servicing gas burner or gas burner equipment as defined herein within the City of Onalaska without first
having on file with the Inspection Department a Surety Bond in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) operating in favor of the City and conditioned that the City will be saved harmless from any
cause or damage by reason of work performed under this Section, or by reason of improper or
inadequate performance under this Section, by the holder of any such license. Such bond shall be
approved as to form and execution by the City of Onalaska and as to surety by the Controller. Surety
Bond must be filed with the Inspection Department before any such permit shall become issued.
B. Gas installers shall carry insurance of the kind specified below and in the amounts herein specified as
follows:
1. For Personal Injuries. Liability insurance in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for
each person and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each accident.
2. For Property Damage. Liability insurance in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
3. For Completed Operations Insurance. Insurance for completed operations with coverage
sufficiently broad to cover installation, service and repair of equipment sold by the HVAC installer and
servicing, installation and repair of equipment not sold by the Gas installer, with coverage for personal
injuries to be in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for each person, and one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each accident; and for property damage fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) with one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) aggregate limit.
4. Copies of such insurance policies or certificates of insurance indicating such coverage must be filed
with the Inspection Department before any such permit shall be issued.
15.01.46 Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Permits Required
A. Permit Required. No person shall repair or install any furnace/boiler, air conditioner, fireplace or wood
burning stove, or commence any other heating, ventilating or air conditioning work in any structure under
the scope of this Chapter, or as provided by the Wisconsin Administrative Code provisions adopted under
this section, without first obtaining a permit from the Inspection Department.
B. Application. The application shall be in writing upon forms which the Inspection Department shall provide
and shall include the name of the owner and the description of the property on which the work is to be
done, along with such pertinent information as the Inspection Department may require, and shall state
that the property owner and the applicant will be bound by and subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
C. Issuance, Term, Suspension and Revocation. When the Inspection Department is satisfied that the
work proposed by the applicant can be done in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter and after
appropriate fees have been paid, the Inspection Department shall issue the permit. Such permit shall
allow for the continuous performance of the work named thereon.
D. Fees. The applicant shall, at the time such permit application is filed, shall pay any necessary HVAC
permit fee as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule approved each year by resolution of the
Common Council. Such fees may include late fees, inspection fees, fees for expedited process and fees
for professional services.
E. Restrictions on Issuance.
1. No HVAC permit shall be issued to any person who is in violation of this Chapter until such violation
has been corrected.
2. No HVAC permit shall be issued to any person, against whom an order issued by the Inspection
Department is pending, provided this restriction may be waived by the Inspection Department.
F. Data Required as Part of the Permit Application. All drawings submitted for approval shall be
accompanied by sufficient data and information for the Inspection Department to determine if the capacity
of the equipment and the performance of the equipment shall satisfy the requirements of the Chapter.
Division 5 Electrical Code
15.01.51 Application of the Provisions of the Electrical Code
A. Title. This Division shall be known as the "Electrical Code of the City of Onalaska" and will be referred to
in this Division as “this Code” or "Electrical Code"
B. Purpose. The purpose of this Electrical Code is the practical safeguarding of persons and property from
hazards arising from the installation and use of electricity; and to establish rules and fees for the issuance
of permits, and the inspection of all electrical and low voltage work covered under the scope of this article.
C. Scope. This Code shall apply to the installation, re-construction, alteration, extension and repair of wiring
and equipment for heat, light, power, control, voice, data, CATV, fire alarm, security systems and other
low voltage work (one hundred (100) volts or less). Materials, fittings, devices, appliances, luminaries,
apparatus and the like used as part of or in conjunction with said installations shall be referred to in this
Code as “Equipment” or “Electrical Equipment” unless specifically stated otherwise.
D. Conflict. No part of this Chapter shall be interpreted to prevent the enforcement of other City ordinances
or regulations which prescribe standards equal to or more stringent than the standards established by this
Article.
15.01.52 State Regulations Adopted
A. Adopted by Reference. Chapter 101, Wis. Stats.; SPS 305, 316 and 320, Wis. Adm. Code and NFPA 70
together with all amendments and reinstatements are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of
this Chapter with the same force and effect as though set out in full. Failure to comply with any of the
provisions of the statutes or administrative rules, regulations and bulletins, shall constitute a violation of
this Chapter, punishable according to the penalties provided below. References in this Chapter to
Wisconsin statutory section or chapter or Wisconsin Administrative Code sections or Chapter describing
or defining procedures or author for enactment or enforcement shall be deemed to refer to the most
recent enactments of the Wisconsin Legislature describing or defining such procedures or authorities.
15.01.53 State of WI Electrical Licenses
A. State Codes Adopted. Secs. 101.80-101.88 Wis. Stats. relating to the regulation of electrical wiring and
electricians; and Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters 305, 316 and 324 and all future amendments
thereto are hereby adopted by reference in their entirety except as to penalties contained therein. A copy
of these provisions shall be permanently on file and open to public inspection in the Inspection
Department. It is intended that all modifications, amendments, and renumbering of the foregoing
provisions as may occur from time to time shall likewise be immediately adopted and fully incorporated
into this code by reference. Any act prohibited by any of the foregoing provisions is prohibited by this
Electrical Code. In the event any of the provisions of this code, whether incorporated by reference or
enumerated hereinafter, are in conflict, it is intended that the more restrictive provisions shall be applied
and enforced.
B. License Required. No person, firm or corporation shall alter, install, or repair electrical wires and
apparatus for the utilization of electric current for light, heat or power in the City of Onalaska, without first
having procured a contractor’s license as provided by Sec. 101.862 Wis. Stat. unless an exception
identified in Sec. 101.862(4)am-q (5)(6) Wis. Stat. applies. The City of Onalaska requires that only
licensed electrical contractors may perform the aforementioned work in all single and two family
dwellings. Any equipment owned or controlled by any customer shall be subject to inspection and shall
not be considered as part of regular operations of the utility.
C. Electrical Contractor Responsibility. An electrical contractor licensed under SPS 305.41 shall utilize
the appropriately licensed or registered individuals to construct, install, repair or maintain electrical wiring.
15.01.54 Permits, Fees and Inspections
A. Low Voltage Permit Required.
1. An unlicensed individual may perform work on non-UDC residential parcels without an Electrical
Contractors license upon obtaining a Low Voltage Permit if the work meets one of the licensing
exceptions under 101.862(4)(am-q).
2. Low Voltage Permit Application. Application for low voltage (one hundred (100) volts or less)
shall be made by the installer on forms provided by the Inspection Department and shall include such
plans, specifications, and other information as requested by the Inspection Department. No permits
shall be issued to any installer who does not have a current certificate of insurance on file, or any
installer who has ignored orders to correct code deficiencies or has fees, fines or penalties
outstanding. Permits shall be invalid if work is not commenced within one (1) year of permit issuance
and shall expire one (1) year after permit issuance. The Inspection Department may extend the
period not more than two (2) times for up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days each.
B. Electrical Permit Required. Except for electrical wiring projects described in Sec. 101.875(2) Wis. Stats.
and as provided below, no electrical wiring project may commence unless the owner of the premises
where the installation is to occur or their agent holds a permit from the City of Onalaska if the project
involves the installation of new or an addition to any electrical services, feeder, or branch circuit serving
any of the following:
1. A farm;
2. A public building, structure or premises;
3. A place of employment;
4. A campground;
5. A manufactured home community;
6. A public marina, pier, dock or wharf; or
7. A recreational vehicle park.
Under emergency conditions, the necessary electrical wiring may commence without obtaining a permit,
provided the owner of the premises where the installation is to occur or their agent submits a permit
application to the Inspection Department for the installation no later than the next business day after
commencement of the installation.
C. Electrical Permit Application. All work requiring an electrical permit shall submit an application form
provided by the City that complies with SPS 361.012(2).
D. Permit Fees. Permit fees shall be based upon the square footage of the work to be done, as determined
by the Inspection Department on the basis of current costs as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee
Schedule. Fees shall be due at the time of application.
1. The permit fee shall be doubled when work is commenced before a permit is obtained and in addition
the City may issue citations pursuant to Division 5 of the Building Code herein.
2. There shall be a re-inspection fee for each occurrence as set forth on the City of Onalaska Fee
Schedule.
E. Electrical Inspections:
1. Inspections. Electrical wiring shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes and may
not be energized. The City shall be notified that electrical wiring installation is ready for final
inspection when all electrical fixtures, outlets and face plates are in place and the installation or that
portion of the installation is energized.
2. Concealment Prior to Inspection(s). The concealment or energizing of electrical wiring, other than
an electrical service, may proceed if inspection has not been completed within two (2) business days
after notification is received by the City or as otherwise agreed between the wiring installer and the
Inspection Department.
3. Orders for Incompleteness and Non-Compliance. The Inspection Department shall issue orders
requiring that electrical code violations be corrected within a specified time. A written order to correct
electrical code violations must be complied with as stated in the written order, the order itself shall
remain active for twenty-four (24) months from the date of issuance, meaning that any subsequent
violations during the twenty-four (24) month period may result in an immediate issuance of a
municipal citation. A continued failure to correct a violation identified in an order may result in the
issuance of a municipal citation to the person to whom the order was issued.
a. Content of Orders. Whenever the Inspection Department determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe a violation of any provision of this Chapter exists, they shall order the person
responsible to correct the violation. The order shall be in writing and shall:
i. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
ii. Specify the violation which exists and the remedial action required;
iii. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; and
iv. Include the following disclaimer: “The findings of this inspection report are intended to identify
code violations that are readily apparent at the time of inspection. The inspection did not
involve a detailed examination of the electrical systems or the closed structural or
nonstructural elements of the buildings and premises. No warranty of the operation, use or
durability of equipment and materials not specifically cited herein is expressed or implied.”
b. Service and Timeline for Correction Orders. Orders to correct electrical violations shall be
served upon the Permit Holder and such corrections shall be made within ten (10) days.
Concealment of electrical work before inspection shall constitute an offense punishable in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
4. Compliance. Upon the failure of any inspection due to code deficiencies or the electrical work
scheduled to be inspected has not complete at the time of inspection, a re-inspection fee shall be
assessed against the permit holder. If the Inspection Department determines that the work conforms
to this Code, a certificate of compliance may be issued. All wiring and equipment covered under the
Scope of this Electrical Code shall be inspected and approved by the Inspection Department before
the installation or equipment is put into normal or permanent service.
5. Notice to Purchasers. An owner shall notify a purchaser, in writing, that an order has been issued
concerning a violation of this Electrical Code, whenever the condition of the property giving rise to the
order has not been corrected. Any owner who fails to give written notice to a purchaser, prior to
acceptance of a written offer to purchase, of any order concerning this property shall be subject to a
forfeiture as provided below. No owner may accept an offer to purchase which was made prior to the
disclosure required by this Subsection, unless the purchaser acknowledges receipt of a notice of
outstanding orders and a willingness to proceed despite such knowledge.
6. Liability for Damages. This Code shall not affect the responsibility or liability of any party owning,
operating, controlling or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or property
caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City be held as assuming any such liability by reason of
the inspection or re-inspection authorized herein or the certificate of approval issued as herein
provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein.
D. Investigations. The Inspection Department may investigate any charges or complaints filed which may
be brought against the holder of any permit, for noncompliance with any provision of this code on the part
of the permit holder or any person performing any work under their direction. Any licensed Electrical
Contractor who knowingly and willfully procures a permit for electrical work which is to be performed by
anyone not properly licensed by the State of Wisconsin shall be subject to the maximum penalty
prescribed by in Division 6 of this Building Code. No person may obtain a permit for electrical work in the
City of Onalaska while that person is failing or refusing to correct an electrical violation after having been
convicted of that violation.
15.01.55 Electrical Inspector
A. Qualification. The City employs Building Inspectors I, II, III and a Lead Building Inspector to perform
electrical inspections. Those Building Inspectors in the Inspection Department with the appropriate
certifications and licenses for UDC and Commercial Electrical shall perform inspections under this
Division.
B. Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any Building Inspector to engage in the installation of electrical
wiring and appliances for hire, either directly or indirectly, and such Building Inspectors shall have no
financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the City of Onalaska at any time while
employed in the Inspection Department. Any violation of any provisions of this Subsection by an
employee of the Inspection Department shall be sufficient cause for dismissal.
C. Duties. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspectors to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. Complete
records of all permits issued and inspections made and other official work performed under the provisions
of this Electrical Code shall be kept and so arranged as to afford prompt information concerning electrical
installations.
D. Right of Access. The Inspection Department shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any
public or private buildings, structures, or premises in the discharge of his official duties or for the purpose
of making any inspection or test of electrical wires or appliances contained therein. The BuildInspection
Department shall be given prompt access to any premises upon notification to the proper authority.
E. Right to Cut Off Current. The Inspection Department shall have the authority to cause the turning off of
all electrical currents to any equipment which they find to be in an unsafe condition, and cut off or
discontinue electrical service in case of emergency and where such electrical currents are dangerous to
life or property, or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department. No person, firm or corporation shall
reconnect any equipment thus cut off until written permission is given by the Inspection Department.
15.01.56 Standards for the Installation of Electrical Equipment
A. Standards for the installation of electrical conductors and equipment in the City of Onalaska shall conform
to and comply with the applicable provisions of this Code, Chapters SPS 305, SPS 316 and SPS 320 of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code and all subsequent amendments, the Statutes of the State of
Wisconsin, and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof, and with approved electrical
standards for safety to persons and property. Where no specific standards for safety are prescribed by
this ordinance or by the State Electrical Code, conformity with the regulations set forth in the National
Electrical Code and in the National Electrical Safety Code shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with
approved standards for safety to persons and property.
B. Only that equipment which has been expressly made for electrical, control, voice, data, CATV, fire alarm
and security system purposes shall be installed for said purpose. All heat, light, power, control, voice,
data, CATV, fire alarm, security system equipment and other low voltage system equipment shall be
installed and used in the exact manner and for the exact purpose indicated by the equipment’s listings,
labels and the manufacturer's markings and instructions. The original manufacturer's listings, labels,
ratings and markings shall be visible and the equipment shall not be changed or altered in any manner,
except that normal replacements and repairs may be made to such equipment if the replacements and
repairs do not change the listing, original characteristics or design.
C. All materials and construction methods shall adhere to SPS 316.022 (1)(2)(3).
D. The City of Onalaska may require existing installations to be brought into compliance with the minimum
wiring requirements of the Building Code or Uniform Dwelling Code and within the time determined by the
City.
E. Interpretation of this Code shall be at the discretion of the Inspection Department. Written requests for
formal interpretations or variances of SPS 316 shall be directed to the Wisconsin Department of Safety
and Buildings Division, Electrical Unit.
15.01.57 Public Liability Insurance and Completed Operations Insurance
A. Permit holders, except those residential owner occupied permit holders for low voltage work (defined as
installing, repairing, or maintaining equipment or systems that operate at one hundred (100) volts or less),
shall carry insurance having aggregate coverage of not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00)
covering all of the following risks: public liability, personal injuries, property damage, and completed
operations. Insurance for completed operations coverage shall be sufficiently broad to cover installation,
service and repair of equipment sold by the permit holder and servicing, installation and repair of
equipment not sold by the permit holder. Permit holder shall submit a certificate of insurance indicating
such coverage at the time the application for license or renewal thereof is made.
15.01.58 Unsafe or Illegal Electrical Equipment
A. When the Inspection Department finds any electrical equipment to be unsafe or dangerous to persons or
property, the person owning, using or selling such electrical equipment shall be notified in writing to
remove or cause to be removed, or to make any changes or repairs or cease to sell, so as to restore such
electrical equipment to a safe condition. Failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in
such notice shall be sufficient cause for the Inspection Department to disconnect or order the removal of,
or order the discontinuance of, electrical service to said electrical equipment. In any case of emergency
affecting the safety of persons or property, or where electrical equipment interferes with the work of the
fire department, or where electrical equipment is not installed in conformity with the regulations of this
Electrical Code, the Inspection Department shall have the authority to disconnect immediately or cause
the removal of or disconnection of any such electrical equipment. When the Inspection Department
disconnects or causes to be disconnected electric current from electrical equipment, an official notice,
tag, lock or seal shall be attached to such electrical equipment to prevent the use of electricity. It shall be
unlawful for any unauthorized person to attach such official notice, tag, lock or seal, or to break open,
change, remove, destroy, tear, alter, mutilate, cover or otherwise deface or injure any such official notice,
tag, lock or seal. The Inspection Department shall have the power and authority to seize and take
possession of any electrical equipment or materials which, in its opinion, are dangerous to life or property,
or which are suspected or found to have been the cause of any fire, accident, injury or fatality and to
retain possession for the purpose of making an investigation, an examination or for official evidence. After
such electrical equipment and materials have served their purpose, they shall be returned to the owner.
Division 6 Enforcement and Penalties
15.01.61 Violations and Stop Work Orders
A. Any building or structure hereafter erected, enlarged, altered or repaired or any use hereafter established
in violation of the provisions of the Building Code, the Electrical Code, Plumbing Code and Heating,
Ventilating and Air Conditioning Code (all included within the definition of "this Chapter" for purposes of
this Section), shall be deemed an unlawful building, structure or use. The Inspection Department shall
promptly report all such violations to the City Attorney who shall bring an action to enjoin the erection,
enlargement, alteration, repair or moving of such building or structure or the establishment of such use of
buildings in violation of this Chapter or to cause such building, structure or use to be removed and may
also be subject to a penalty as set forth below. Any person who fails to obtain a building permit before
starting construction shall be charged double the regular rate for this late filing violation. In any such
action, the fact that a permit was issued shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or
dereliction of duty on the part of the Inspection Department or other City officials constitute a defense.
Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter may also be enforced by injunctional order at the suit of
the owner or owners of any real estate within the jurisdiction of this Chapter.
1. If an inspection reveals a noncompliance with this Chapter or the Uniform Dwelling Code, the
Inspection Department shall notify the applicant and the owner, electronically, if allowed, otherwise in
writing, of the violation to be corrected. All cited violations shall be corrected within thirty (30) days
after written notification unless an extension of time is granted pursuant to Sec. SPS 320.10(4) Wis.
Adm. Code.
2. If, after written notification, the violation is not corrected within thirty (30) days, a Stop-Work order
may be served on the owner or their representative and a copy thereof shall be posted at the
construction site. Such stop-work order shall not be removed except by written notice of the
Inspection Department after satisfactory evidence has been supplied that the cited violation has been
corrected.
3. Each day each violation continues after the thirty (30) day written notice period has run shall
constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the City from maintaining any
appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Chapter or the Uniform
Dwelling Code.
4. If any construction or work governed by the provisions of this Chapter or the Uniform Dwelling Code
is commenced prior to the issuance of a permit, double fees shall be charged.
B. Any person feeling aggrieved by an order or a determination of the Inspection Department may appeal
from such order or determination to the Board of Zoning Appeals or as provided by State Law. Those
procedures customarily used to effectuate an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals shall apply.
C. Except as may otherwise be provided by the Statute or Ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of the
City of Onalaska charged with the enforcement of this Chapter shall render themselves personally liable
for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this Chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the
City as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this Chapter shall be
defended by the legal representative of the City until the final determination of the proceedings therein.
15.01.62 Severability
A. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Chapter, or of the Wisconsin Administrative Code
adopted by reference, is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions shall not be affected.
15.01.63 Penalties and Enforcement Actions
A. Forfeiture. Any person who violates any provision of this Title, or fails to comply with a lawful order of the
Inspection Department to correct a violation of this Chapter shall, upon conviction of the violation, pay a
forfeiture of not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) and not more than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) for each violation together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the County jail until such forfeiture and costs of
prosecution are paid, but not exceeding ninety (90) days for a first offense. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. Refusal to Issue Permits. No person may obtain permits to do construction work in the City of Onalaska
while that person is failing or refusing to correct a violation after having been convicted of that violation.
C. Suspension or Revocation of a Permit. The Inspection Department may revoke or suspend a permit if
the Inspection Department finds that the permit holder has:
1. Made a material misstatement in the application for a permit or renewal thereof; or
2. Has failed to correct a code violation within thirty (30) days after having received notice of the
violation.
D. Action to Enjoin. The City Attorney may, in addition to, or in lieu of other remedies provided by law, bring
an action to enjoin a person from committing repeated violations of this Chapter.
Chapter 02 Construction Site / Excavation Erosion Control
Division 1 Administration
15.02.11 Authority
A. This Chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Sec. 62.234, Wis. Stats, as may be amended and
supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under Sec. 62.23, Wis. Stats., relating to
construction site erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in Sec. 62.234, Wis. Stats., Sec. 62.23
Wis. Stats., applies to this Chapter and to any amendments thereof. The provisions of this Chapter are
deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body. The City Common
Council hereby designates the City Engineer or Designated Agent to administer and enforce the
provisions of this Chapter. The requirements of this Chapter do not pre-empt more stringent erosion and
sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any of the following:
1. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) administrative rules, permits or approvals
including those authorized under Sec. 281.16 and 283.33, Wis. Stats.;
2. Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources under Sec. NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.; or
3. La Crosse Sewer Service Area Water Quality Management Plan through cooperative agreement with
La Crosse County Land Conservation Department.
15.02.12 Statement of Findings and Purpose
A. The finds that runoff from land disturbing construction activity carries a significant amount of sediment
and other pollutants to neighboring properties, public holdings, and waters of the State. It is the purpose
of this Chapter to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water
pollution; prevent and control soil erosion; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building
sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote
sound economic growth, by minimizing the amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or
discharged from land disturbing construction activity to waters of the state in the City of Onalaska.
15.02.13 Applicability and Jurisdiction
A. Applicability. This Chapter applies to a construction site with land disturbing construction activity except
as follows:
1. A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or regulations from the requirement to
have a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued under Chapter 40, Code of
Federal Regulations, Part 122, for land disturbing construction activity.
2. Land development and land disturbing activities exempted by State or Federal law, including highway
construction projects.
3. Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
4. Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
5. Agricultural or horticultural activities, landscaping activities of one half (0.5) acre or less, the
construction or maintenance of a septic system or associated drain field or any project involving
excavation or fill of less than one hundred (100) cubic yards of earth and quarry operations are
governed by Title 7 related to Regulation of Nonmetallic Mining.
B. Notwithstanding the exceptions noted above, this Chapter applies to construction sites of any size that, in
the opinion of the City Engineer or Designated Agent, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe
capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion,
that increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or that endangers
property or public safety.
C. Jurisdiction. This Chapter applies to land disturbing activity located within the boundaries and
jurisdiction of the City of Onalaska.
D. Exclusions. This Chapter is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under
Sec. 227.01 (1), Wis. Stats., but also including the Office of District Attorney, which is subject to the state
plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered into under Sec. 281.33 (2), Wis. Stats.
Division 2 Standards, Permitting Requirements, and Erosion and Sediment Control
Plans
15.02.21 Technical Standards
A. Design Criteria, Standards and Specifications. All drainage facilities and practices required to comply
with this ordinance shall incorporate technical standards and design methods specified in the document
City of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements, maintained and
periodically updated by the City Engineer. Where not superseded by stricter requirements in City of
Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements, the following standards are also
incorporated by reference:
1. Applicable design criteria, standards and specifications identified in the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources Stormwater Technical Standards; and
2. Other design guidance and technical standards identified or developed by the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources under Subchapter V of Chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Other Standards. Other technical standards not identified or developed above, may be used provided
that the methods have been approved by the City Engineer or Designated Agent.
15.02.22 Performance Standards
A. Responsible Party. The responsible party shall implement an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan,
developed in accordance with this Chapter that incorporates the requirements of this Chapter.
B. Plan. A written plan shall be developed in accordance with Section 15.02.24 and implemented for each
construction site.
C. Erosion and Sediment Control Performance Standards. All drainage facilities and practices required
to comply with this ordinance shall meet performance standards specified in the document City of
Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements, maintained and periodically
updated by the City Engineer.
D. Alternate Requirements. The City Engineer or Designated Agent may establish erosion and sediment
control requirements more stringent than those set forth in City of Onalaska Erosion Control Stormwater
Management Requirements, if the City Engineer or Designated Agent determines that an added level of
protection is needed to address downstream stormwater management issues.
15.02.23 Permitting Requirements
A. Permit Required. No responsible party may commence a land disturbing construction or excavation/fill
activity subject to this ordinance without receiving prior approval of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
for the site and a permit from the City Engineer or Designated Agent. The City Engineer may issue a
written waiver of the permit requirement if it is satisfied that the nature or size of the excavating/grading
project will not result in erosion or be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare.
B. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources Permits. All land disturbance activities of greater than
one (1) acre in size shall obtain any necessary permits as required by NR 216, Wis. Adm. Code. unless
sites are construction of public buildings or places of employment, then permit must be issued by the
Wisconsin Department of Commerce. Copies of any needed permits or supporting documents shall be
given to the City of Onalaska as part of the Erosion Control Permit.
C. Permit Application and Fees. At least one (1) responsible party desiring to undertake a land disturbing
construction activity subject to this ordinance shall submit an application for a permit and an Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan that meets the requirements of Section 15.02.31 and shall pay an application fee
identified in the Fee Schedule. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the City Engineer
or Designated Agent to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of the Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan.
D. Review and Approval of Permit Application. The City Engineer or Designated Agent shall review any
permit application that is submitted with Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, and the required fee. The
following approval procedure shall be used:
1. All proposed applications for grading and/or excavating which involve ten thousand (10,000) cubic
yards or less shall be reviewed by the City Engineer or Designated Agent prior to the issuance of any
permit.
2. The City Engineer or Designated Agent may request additional information if required for a complete
application within fifteen (15) business days of receipt of any permit application. Within forty-five (45)
business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, the City Engineer or Designated Agent
shall inform the applicant whether the application and plan are approved or disapproved based on the
requirements of this Chapter.
3. If the permit application and plan are approved, the City Engineer or Designated Agent shall issue the
permit. If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the City Engineer or Designated Agent shall
state in writing the reasons for disapproval.
4. The City Engineer or Designated Agent may request additional information from the applicant. If
additional information is submitted, the City Engineer or Designated Agent shall have thirty (30)
business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan
is either approved or disapproved.
5. All proposed project applications for grading and/or excavating in excess of ten thousand (10,000)
cubic yards shall be reviewed by the Common Council prior to issuance of any permit. Said review
shall be made after consideration of the application by the City Engineer, Zoning Administrator or
Designated Agent and the Plan Commission, if applicable.
E. Permit Standards and Provisions. The standards and provisions for all permits granted herein are as
follows:
1. All fill material added to an approved site shall be clean, noncombustible and non-deleterious.
2. All decisions made by the City Engineer or Designated Agent under this Chapter shall be made to
affect the purpose of controlling erosion to the extent that this is reasonable under the circumstances.
Under no circumstances shall a permit be issued for disturbance or excavation of lands having slopes
in excess of thirty percent (30%) or any area within ten (10) foot prior to the start of thirty percent
(30%) slope except for the following purposes (per La Crosse Sanitary Service agreement):
a. Access road developments for residential and non-residential purposes where an Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan has been submitted to and approved by the City Engineer; and / or
b. Quarry operations where an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan has been submitted to and
approved by the City Engineer or Designated Agent.
3. The recipient of a permit agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Onalaska, its employees,
agents, or officers, from any cost, suit, liability or award which might come or be brought or assessed
because of the issuance or exercise of the permit, or because of any adverse effect upon any person
or property attributed to a partially or entirely completed project of the applicant.
4. The City Engineer or Designated Agent may require at any time that a surety bond or irrevocable
letter of credit be secured by the owner, applicant, contractor, or developer holding the permit; such
bond or irrevocable letter of credit amount and conditions thereto are to be made and approved by
the City Engineer or Designated Agent to effectuate the purpose of this Chapter.
5. If conditions arise during development or construction which require the taking of measures or
precautions of the imposition of limits or restraints to control erosion, the City Engineer or Designated
Agent, at their discretion, may require that such be taken. When, during development or construction,
it appears that measures or precautions previously required are unnecessary, the City Engineer or
Designated Agent may choose to waive them in writing.
6. Any permit issued under this chapter is limited to the stated project, description, time frame and cubic
yardage granted in the permit. The permit shall be invalid if work is not commenced within one (1)
year of permit issuance and shall expire two (2) years after permit issuance for residential
construction or one (1) year after issuance for commercial construction. The City Engineer or
Designated Agent may extend the period one (1) or more times for up to an additional one hundred
and eighty (180) days each.
7. As a condition of granting the permit, the applicant agrees that the site may be inspected by the City
Engineer or Designated Agent.
8. The City Engineer or Designated Agent may require that the owner/developer comply with the
recommendations of officials or agencies designated by the City Engineer or Designated Agent which
may:
a. Require where appropriate and reasonable under the circumstances, erosion control practices set
forth in the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources Stormwater Technical Standards,
including but not limited to the construction of silt traps, the mulching and temporary or permanent
planting of areas exposed by grading, the construction of diversions, channel linings, grade
stabilization structures and bank protection structures;
b. Place limits on the area of land which may be exposed and staging timetables; and/or
c. Require all acts and impose all other limits and restraints which are necessary and reasonable to
control erosion.
9. No permit shall be issued for more than one (1) excavation season. The permit shall set forth all time
limitations with which the permit holder is required to comply. All restoration of top soil and/or revegetation
must be completed in the fall season (target date should be September 15th) in order that
the seeding is effective before the commencement of the winter season. The City Engineer or
Designated Agent shall have the authority to waive re-vegetation requirements in no set
circumstances in which the City Engineer or Designated Agent determines that re-vegetation is not
necessary to meet the purposes of this Chapter. If it is determined that delays have occurred due to
an act of God and topsoil spreading and re-vegetation is impossible, then the contractor/developer is
required to take appropriate action to eliminate erosion during the seasons that the site will remain
uncovered.
10. Construction excavating/disturbance beginning on or after September 15th and/or prior to April 1st of
each year shall include dormant seeding, and erosion control measures per Wisconsin Department of
Transportation Erosion Control (PAL) Product Acceptability List or approved equal.
F. Financial Guarantee. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the City Engineer or
Designated Agent may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to
guarantee a good faith execution of the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and any permit
conditions.
G. Permit Requirements. All permits shall require the responsible party to:
1. Notify the City Engineer or Designated Agent two (2) full business days prior to commencing any land
disturbing construction activity.
2. Notify the City Engineer or Designated Agent of completion of any Best Management Practices
(BMP) within three (3) full business days after their installation and prior to the start of any excavating
or land disturbance.
3. Obtain finalized permit from the City Engineer or Designated Agent prior to any modification pursuant
to Section 15.02.24.B.3 of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
4. Install all BMPs as identified in the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan prior to construction
or excavation activity.
5. Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, BMPs and other facilities identified
in the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
6. Inspect and or repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainage ways
resulting from land disturbing activities and document said inspection and repairs in a site erosion
control log, weekly. Any displaced sediment must be removed from downstream culverts, streets,
adjoining properties, storm sewers, and other drainage facilities within twenty-four (24) hours.
7. Inspect the BMPs within twenty-four (24) hours after each rain of one half (0.5) inches or more which
results in runoff during active construction periods, and at least once each week, make needed
repairs and document the findings of the inspections in a site erosion control log with the date of
inspection, the name of the person conducting the inspection and any needed corrections, and a
description of the present phase of the construction at the site.
8. Allow the City Engineer or Designated Agent to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting
compliance with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan or for performing any work necessary to
bring the site into compliance with the approved plan. Keep a copy of the Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan at the construction site.
H. Permit Conditions. Permits issued under this section may include conditions established by City
Engineer or Designated Agent in addition to the requirements set forth in Subsection E. above, where
needed to assure compliance with the performance standards in Section 15.02.22.
I. Maintenance. The responsible party throughout the duration of the construction activities shall maintain
and inspect all BMPs weekly or within twenty-four (24) hours of a rain event in a necessary methodology
to meet the requirements of this Chapter until the site has undergone final stabilization.
15.02.24 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
A. Plan Requirements. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be prepared and submitted to the City
Engineer or Designated Agent. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall include, at a minimum,
information required in the City of Onalaska Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Requirements,
maintained and periodically updated by the City Engineer. The City Engineer or Designated Agent may
waive certain submittal requirements, if determined to be unnecessary to demonstrate compliance with
the Chapter standards.
B. Amendments. The applicant shall amend the plan if any of the following occur:
1. There is a change in design, construction, operation or maintenance at the site which has the
reasonable potential for the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and which has not otherwise
been addressed in the plan.
2. The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants carried by construction site
runoff.
3. The City Engineer or Designated Agent or designee notifies the applicant of changes needed in the
plan.
Division 3 Enforcement
15.02.31 Inspection and Enforcement
A. If land disturbing construction activities are being carried out without a permit required by this Chapter,
the City Engineer or Designated Agent may enter the land pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 66.0119,
Wis. Stats.
B. The City of Onalaska shall inspect construction sites weekly during the period starting March 1 and
ending October 21 and at least two (2) times during the period starting November 1 and ending February
28 or after a rain event of equal to or greater than one half (.5) inch, to ensure compliance with the
approved plan.
C. After official notice has been given for a violation of nonconformance to the Erosion and Sediment Control
Plan, the property owner or land developer shall be given forty-eight (48) hours to correct a minor
nonconformance and twenty-four (24) hours to correct a major nonconformance. The City shall adopt
rules and regulations regarding what shall constitute a “major” and “minor” nonconformance.
D. The City Engineer or Designated Agent may post a Stop-Work order if any of the following occurs:
1. Any land disturbing construction activity regulated under this Chapter is being undertaken without a
permit.
2. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan is not being implemented in a good faith manner.
3. The conditions of the permit are not being met.
E. If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a Stop-Work order posted under this
Chapter or fails to comply with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan or permit conditions, the City
Engineer or Designated Agent may revoke the permit.
F. If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not cease the activity after being notified
by the City Engineer or Designated Agent, or if a responsible party violates a stop-work order posted
under Subsection D. above, the City Engineer or Designated Agent may request the City Attorney to
obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
G. The City Engineer or Designated Agent may retract the stop-work order issued under Subsection D.
above or the permit revocation under Subsection E. above.
H. After posting a stop-work order under Subsection D. above, the City Engineer or Designated Agent may
issue a notice of intent and to the responsible party of its intent to perform work necessary to comply with
this ordinance and complete such work. The costs of the work performed under this Subsection by the
City Engineer or Designated Agent, plus interest at the rate Common Council shall be billed to the
responsible party. In the event a responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the Finance Director shall
enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment against the property pursuant
to Sub Chapter VII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
I. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to penalties as outlined in
Section 15.02.33. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
J. Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance may also be enforced by injunction in any court with
jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before
resorting to injunctional proceedings.
15.02.32 Appeals
A. Board of Zoning Appeals.
1. Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or
determination made by the City Engineer or Designated Agent in administering this Chapter except
for cease and desist orders obtained under Section 15.02.31.F.
2. Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this Chapter which are not contrary to
the public interest and where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the
ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship; and
3. Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding
appeals and authorizing variances.
B. Who May Appeal. Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by
any office, department, board, or bureau of the City of Onalaska affected by any decision of the City
Engineer or Designated Agent.
15.02.33 Violations and Penalties
A. It is a violation of this Chapter:
1. To fail to meet any time limits imposed by regulation under this Chapter, except failure caused by an
act of God; or
2. To fail to do any act required by this Chapter or any regulation imposed hereunder; or
3. To do any act prohibited by this Chapter or any regulation imposed hereunder; or
4. To continue any construction or development work on a site, except to correct a violation while a Stop
Work order is in effect; or
5. To suffer or permit any violation to continue in existence, except continuance caused by an act of
God.
B. Any person, firm, or corporation violating this Chapter or any part thereof shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and
the cost of prosecution and, in default of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until
payment of such forfeiture and the costs for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days for each violation.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
C. In addition to the aforementioned penalties, no Plat submitted to the City and no Site Plan or Certified
Survey required by the City shall be approved unless it shows all improvements reasonably required to
prevent erosion after completion of development as required in this Chapter and the subdivision code of
the City of Onalaska.
Chapter 03 Fair Housing
Division 1 Authority
15.03.11 Statement on Fair Housing
A. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Onalaska, pursuant to the United States and Wisconsin
Constitutions, and also its power to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, that all persons,
regardless of sex, race, color, disability, as defined in Sec. 106.50 (1m) (g) Wis. Stats., sexual orientation,
as defined in Sec. 111.32 (13m), religion, national origin, marital status, family status, as defined in
Sec. 106.50 (1m) (k) Wis. Stats., status as a victim of domestic abuse, sexual assault, or stalking, as
defined in Sec. 106.50 (1m) (u) Wis. Stats., lawful source of income, age, or ancestry are assured equal
opportunity to live in adequate housing facilities and, to that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing by
any persons.
15.03.12 Unlawful Practices
A. In connection with any of the transactions set forth in this Section which affect any housing
accommodation on the open market, or in connection with any public sale, purchase, rental or lease
of any accommodation, it shall be unlawful within the City for a person, owner, financial institution, real
estate broker or real estate salesman, or any representative of the above, to:
1. Refuse to sell, purchase, rent or lease, or deny to or withhold any housing accommodation
from a person because of their race, color, religion, family status, ancestry, national origin,
handicap, marital status, sexual orientation or preference, sex, age, or place of birth;
2. To discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, purchase, rental or
lease of any housing accommodation, or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection
therewith;
3. To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase, rent or lease any housing
accommodation from or to a person because of their race, color, religion, family status,
ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital status, sexual orientation or preference, sex, age, or
place of birth ;
4. To refuse to negotiate for the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation to
a person because of their race, color, religion, family status, ancestry, national origin, handicap,
marital status, sexual orientation or preference, sex, age, or place of birth;
5. To represent to a person that any housing accommodation is not available for inspection, sale,
purchase, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to refuse to permit a person to inspect
any housing accommodation, because of their race, color, religion, family status, ancestry, national
origin, handicap, marital status, sexual orientation or preference, sex, age, or place of birth;
6. To make, publish, print, circulate, post or mail, or cause to be made, published, printed, circulated,
posted, or mailed, any notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy or to sign or to
use a form of application for the sale, purchase; rental, lease or financing of any housing
accommodation, which indicates and discrimination or any intent to make discrimination;
7. To offer, solicit, accept or use a list of any homing accommodation for sale: purchase, rental or
lease with the understanding that a person may be subjected to discrimination in connection with such
sale, purchase, rental or lease, or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith;
8. To induce directly or indirectly, or attempt to induce directly or indirectly, the sale, purchase, rental or
lease, or the listing for any of the above, of any housing accommodation by representing that
the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race, color, religion, family
status, ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital status, sexual orientation or preference, sex,
age, or place of birth in the area to be affected by such sale, purchase, rental or lease will or may
result in either:
a. The lowering of property values in the area;
b. An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area; or
c. A decline in the quality of schools serving the area.
9. To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale, purchase, rental or lease, or the
anticipated listing of any of the above, or the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any homing
accommodation in any area in the City for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce any
such listing or any of the above transactions;
10. To engage in or hire to be done, or to conspire with others to commit acts or activities of any
nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause panic, incite unrest or create or play upon fear,
with the purpose of either discouraging or inducing, or attempting to induce, the sale, purchase,
rental or lease, or the listing for any of the above, of any housing accommodation;
11. To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person because he has opposed a practice
declared unlawful by this Chapter, or because he has filed a complaint, testified, assisted or
participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, hearing or conference under this
Chapter;
12. To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the practices prohibited
by this Chapter; or to obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this
Chapter; or any orders issued thereunder;
13. By canvassing, to commit any unlawful practices prohibited by this Chapter;
14. Otherwise to deny to, or withhold any housing accommodation from, a person because of their
race, color, religion, family status, ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital status, sexual
orientation or preference, sex, age, or place of birth;
15. For any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association,
firm or enterprise whose business consists m whole or in part, in the making of commercial real
estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to
discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or
conditions of such loans or other financial assistance because of the race, color, religion, family
status, ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital status, sexual orientation or preference, sex,
age, or place of birth of such person or of any person associated with them in connection with such
loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance which is
to be made or given; or
16. To deny any qualified person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing
service, real estate brokers organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in their terms or conditions of
such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion, family status,
ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital status, sexual orientation or preference, sex, age, or
place of birth.
15.03.13 Exemptions
A. This Chapter shall not apply to the following:
1. A religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or organization
operation supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association,
or society, which limits the sale, rental, or occupancy, of dwellings which it owns or operates for
other than commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or which gives preference to
such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, religion,
family status, ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital status, sexual orientation or preference,
sex, age, or place of birth.
2. A private club not open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes,
provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purposes, and which limits
the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or gives preference to its members.
3. Any single family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that such private individual owner
does not own more than three (3) such single family houses at any one time; provided further, that in
the case of the sale of any such single family house by a private individual not residing in such
house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to
such sale the exemption shall apply only with respect to one (1) such sale within any twenty-four
(24) month period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any
interest in, nor is there owned or served on their behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement,
title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3)
such single family houses at one (1) time; provided further, the sale or rental of any such single family
house shall be exempted from the application of this Chapter only if such house is sold or rented:
a. Without the use of any money of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of
any real estate broker, agent, or salesman or of such facilities or services of any person in the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker,
agent, salesman, or person; and
b. Without the publication, posting or mailing after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in
violation of the provisions of 42 United States Code Section 3604; and
c. Without the violation of Section 15.03.12 of this Chapter; but nothing in this provision shall
prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
4. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no
more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one (1) of such living quarters as their residence.
15.03.14 Enforcement
A. Any person aggrieved by any unlawful practice prohibited by this Chapter may file a complaint with the
Board of Zoning Appeals within thirty (30) days after the aggrieved person becomes aware of the
alleged unlawful practice and no event more than sixty (60) days after the alleged unlawful practice has
occurred. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall receive each complaint and attempt to resolve each
complaint. Failure to achieve a resolution acceptable to both parties and compliance with this Chapter
shall cause the Board of Zoning Appeals to forward the complaint and findings to appropriate state and
federal in this Chapter shall be deemed to prohibit an owner or agent from requiring that a person who
seeks to buy, rent or lease housing supply information concerning family marital, financial and business
status but not concerning race, color, physical condition, disability as defined in Sec. 106.50(1m)(g)Wis.
Stats., or creed.
Chapter 04 Minimum Residential Housing Code
Division 1 Administration
15.04.11 Intent and Purpose
A. This Chapter is adopted for the purpose of preserving and promoting the public health, safety, morals,
comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the people of the City and environs. This
includes, among others, physical, aesthetic, spiritual and monetary values.
B. It is recognized that there may now be, or may in the future be, residential and residential-related
buildings, structures, yards or vacant areas and combinations thereof which are so dilapidated, unsafe,
dangerous, unhygienic, overcrowded, inadequately maintained or lacking in basic equipment or facilities,
light, ventilation and heating so as to constitute a menace to the health, safety and general welfare of the
people. The establishment and enforcement of minimum housing and property maintenance standards is
necessary to preserve and promote the private and public interest.
15.04.12 Board of Zoning Appeals
A. Hearing and Opportunity to Be Heard. Upon filing a written petition for hearing in connection with any
order or notice pursuant to this Chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the person
affected may request a hearing by filing a written petition on a form provided therefor in the Planning
Department. Such petition shall set forth a statement of the grounds therefor and be filed with the
Planning Department within twenty (20) days after the day on which the notice or order was served. The
petition shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the City of Onalaska Fee Schedule. Within forty-five
(45) days of receipt of the petition, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a hearing. At such hearing the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and show cause why such notice should be modified
or withdrawn. The Board of Zoning Appeals, may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time
beyond such forty-five (45) day period, if, in its judgment, the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient
reason for such postponement
B. Board of Zoning Appeals to Sustain, Modify or Withdraw Notices. After such hearing, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon its findings as to whether
the provisions of this Chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been
complied with. The Board of Zoning Appeals may also modify any notice so as to authorize a variance
from the provisions of this Chapter when, because of special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, provided that the spirit
of this Chapter will be observed, public health and welfare secured and substantial justice done. If the
Board of Zoning Appeals sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order and the
owner, operator or occupant, as the case may require, shall comply with all provisions of such order
within six (6) months, as determined by the said Board of Zoning Appeals. The proceedings of any such
hearing, including the findings and decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals, shall be set forth in writing
and maintained as a matter of public record in its office. A copy of the Decision shall be mailed to the
person who filed the petition.
C. Court Review. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Zoning Appeals, or any resident, or any officer, department, board or commission of the municipality may
seek relief therefrom by having the decision reviewed by the Circuit Court by certiorari, provided the
petition for the writ is presented to the Court within thirty (30) days after the date on which said Board of
Zoning Appeal's decision was mailed to the person who filed the petition for the hearing. Persons seeking
such a writ shall give notice of intention to do so by serving on the Board of Zoning Appeals a written
notice within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the Board of Zoning Appeals’s decision. The petition
to the Court duly verified shall set forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part and does not
comply with the provisions of Subsection (b) and shall specify the grounds thereof.
Division 2 Minimum Standards for Dwelling Units
15.04.21 Minimum Standards for Plumbing
A. Connection to City Services. Each dwelling or other building used for human habitation or other
buildings where human beings are in need of sewer and water facilities which is located upon or adjacent
to any street in and along which sewer and water pipes have been laid or which has reasonable access to
sewer or water mains shall be connected with the sewer and water systems; except that when a private
well is in compliance with the Wisconsin Well Code, is adequate and safe, this supply may be continued
in operation until such time as it is in need of repair. If the owner fails to comply with a notice in writing
served upon him or his agent or tenant requiring him to connect with the public sewer or water within
thirty (30) days, the Board of Health may cause a connection to be made and necessary fixtures to be
installed and the cost shall be assessed as a special tax against the property. The owner may file, within
thirty (30) days, a claim of inability to pay the amount in one (1) sum, and ask that the levy be made in
five (5) equal installments with interest at eleven and one-half percent (11.5%).
B. Connection to Septic Tank. The owners of all premises used for human habitation which are not located
upon or adjacent to any street in and along which sewer and water pipes have been laid or which have no
reasonable access to sewer or water mains must provide a septic tank-seepage pit system therefor,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this Code. All other privy vaults,
cesspools and dry wells shall be removed or abated and the use thereof discontinued. Where no City
sewer facilities are available to service a dwelling unit, the following shall apply:
1. No person shall construct a septic tank, seepage pit or disposal field within the City without first
having obtained a permit from the La Crosse County Health Department.
2. No person shall build, erect or construct any seepage pit, septic tank or cesspool within five (5) feet of
the property line or fence of the adjacent lot, or within twenty (20) feet of any building in which people
live or work.
3. Whenever a seepage pit or septic tank is cleaned, the contents must be disposed of in the facilities at
a municipal disposal plant.
15.04.22 Minimum Standards for Electrical
A. Every habitable room, bathroom and kitchen shall contain at least one (1) fully operational electrified
outlet and one (1) switched lighting outlet properly installed and maintained in good and safe working
condition and connected to an approved source of power in a safe and approved manner as per the
Wisconsin Electrical Code.
15.04.23 Minimum Standards for Heat, Light, and Ventilation
A. Natural Light. Every habitable room shall be provided with natural light by means of glazed openings per
Sec. 321.05(1) Wis. Admin. Code.
B. Adequate Ventilation. Every habitable room shall be provided with natural ventilation per Sec. 321.05(2)
Wis. Admin. Code.
C. Electric Outlets Required. Every electrical receptacle, switch and fixture shall be maintained in
reasonably good working condition, and shall be installed according to applicable electrical codes and
manufacturer’s instructions.
D. Heating Facilities. Every dwelling shall be equipped with a heating system. The system shall be properly
installed, maintained in reasonably good working condition, and capable of adequately heating all
habitable rooms, kitchens, bathrooms, and toilet rooms contained therein, or intended for use by the
occupants thereof, to a temperature of at least seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit, at a distance three (3)
feet above floor level when the outdoor temperature is at or above fifteen (15) degrees below zero (0)
degrees Fahrenheit. Every central heating system must be listed by a recognized testing agency and
shall comply with all of the following requirements:
1. The central heating unit shall be in reasonably good operating condition;
2. Every heat duct, steam pipe and hot water pipe shall be free of leaks and shall function so that an
adequate amount of heat is delivered where intended;
3. Every seal between the sections of a hot air furnace shall be tight so noxious gases will not escape
into heat ducts. Every supplied space heater must be listed by a recognized testing agency and shall
comply with all of the following requirements:
a. No space heater burning solid, liquid, or gaseous fuels shall be a portable type;
b. Every space heater burning solid, liquid or gaseous fuels shall be properly vented to a chimney or
duct leading to outdoor space;
c. Every coal, wood or other approved combustible material burning space heater shall have a fireresistant
panel, extending a minimum of eighteen (18) inches on all sides, beneath it;
d. Every space heater location shall comply with Wis. Admin. Code SPS 323.04; and
e. Every space heater chimney connector shall comply with Wis. Admin. Code SPS 323.045(4).
E. Lighting of Public Halls and Stairways. Every public stairway, passageway or exit door in every
dwelling containing four (4) or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted by means of properly
located electric light fixtures from one (1) hour before sunset to one hour after sunrise. Every public hall
and stairway in dwellings containing two (2) or three (3) dwelling units shall be supplied with convenient
light switches controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of
full-time lighting.
15.04.24 Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities
A. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let another for occupancy, and dwelling or dwelling unit,
for the purposes of living, sleeping, cooking, and/or eating of meals therein, which does not comply with
the following minimum requirements:
1. Kitchen. Every dwelling unit shall have a kitchen equipped with the following:
a. A kitchen sink in good working condition that is properly connected to heated and unheated water
supplies and waste pipes. Any provided dishwasher and components of the sink, including
disposal and water filtration devices, shall be in good working condition and properly connected.
b. A counter for food preparation and cabinets and/or shelves sufficient to store occupants’ food that
does not require refrigeration and eating, drinking, and food preparation equipment. Cabinets
shall be of sound construction and furnished with surfaces that are impervious to water, smooth,
and cleanable.
c. A range for cooking food. The range shall be properly installed with all necessary connections for
safe and efficient operation and shall be maintained in good working condition. The range shall
include an oven unless both a separate oven, other than a microwave oven, and a cooktop are
provided. A hot plate is not an acceptable substitute for burners on a range or cooktop. The range
or cooktop shall have a vertical clearance of not less than thirty (30) inches from above its surface
to unprotected combustible material. Reduced clearances are permitted in accordance with the
listing and labeling of the range hood.
i. Exception. If the lease or rental agreement does not provide for a range for cooking food,
adequate connections for the occupant’s installation and operation of a range shall be
provided.
d. Ventilation which shall be maintained in good working condition, of sufficient capacity to deliver
fresh air and to remove moisture-laden or otherwise contaminated air generated during cooking.
Range hoods shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications.
e. A refrigerator with a freezer which shall be in good working condition and capable of maintaining
a temperature less than forty-one (41) degrees Fahrenheit but more than thirty-two (32) degrees
Fahrenheit. The freezer section shall be capable of maintaining a temperature below zero (0)
degrees Fahrenheit.
i. Exception. If the lease or rental agreement does not provide for a refrigerator, adequate
connections for the occupant’s installation and operation of a refrigerator shall be provided.
f. A kitchen floor in good condition with a sealed, water-resistant, nonabsorbent and cleanable
surface.
2. Bathroom. Every dwelling unit shall have a private bathroom equipped with the following:
a. A toilet in good working condition that is sealed to the waste pipe and affixed to the floor and
properly connected to both the dwelling’s water supply and a waste pipe leading to an approved
sewage system or private waste disposal system.
b. A sink in good working condition, with a stable connection to the wall or secure attachment to the
floor that is properly connected to the heated and unheated potable water supply and a sealed
trap leading to a waste pipe.
c. A bathtub or shower in good working condition that is properly connected to the heated and
unheated potable water supply and a waste pipe. Every bathtub shall have a wall covering
extending at least forty-eight (48) inches above the joint between the bathtub and wall, and every
shower shall have a wall covering extending at least seventy-two (72) inches above the floor of
the shower stall, which is cleanable, nonabsorbent, and reasonably impervious to moisture. Such
materials shall form a watertight joint with each other and with the bathtub or shower.
d. A bathroom floor that is so constructed and maintained as to be reasonably impervious to
moisture and all such floor and floor coverings shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
e. Bathroom ventilation in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code SPS 323.02(3)(d).
3. Maintenance of Supplied Plumbing Fixtures. Every supplied plumbing fixture, water distribution
system and waste or vent pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good, sanitary working
condition.
4. Safe and Effective Functioning of Supplied Facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment,
or utility which is required under this Chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function
properly and shall be maintained in reasonably good working condition.
5. Discontinuance of Required Services, Facilities, Equipment, or Utilities. No owner or operator
shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required to be supplied under the
provisions of this Chapter to be removed from, or shut off from, or discontinued for any occupied
dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him/her, except for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while actual repairs, replacements, or alterations are in the process of being made.
6. Garbage Disposal Facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or
garbage containers.
15.04.25 Minimum Standards for Space Requirements
A. No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy and dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein,
which does not comply with the following requirements:
1. Minimum Ceiling Height. The minimum ceiling height of every dwelling unit shall be in accordance
with Wis. Admin. Code SPS 321.06, and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling
height is less than five (5) feet shall not be considered a part of the floor area in computing the total
floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
2. Minimum Floor Area for Dwelling Unit. Every dwelling unit consisting of only one (1) habitable
room shall contain at least one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of habitable room floor area.
3. Minimum Floor Area for Occupancy by More than One Occupant. No dwelling unit containing
less than one hundred and seventy (170) square feet of habitable room floor area shall be occupied
by more than one (1) occupant; provided, that if a dwelling unit consisting of only one (1) habitable
room has a closet with a minimum ceiling height of six (6) feet, contained within the dwelling unit and
connected thereto with a doorway or other similar opening, the actual floor area of the closet, up to
and including a maximum of twenty (20) square feet, shall be included in computing the habitable
room floor area of the dwelling unit.
4. Maximum Occupancy for One-Room Dwelling Unit. No dwelling unit consisting of only one (1)
habitable room shall be occupied by more than two (2) occupants.
5. Maximum Occupancy for Dwelling Units of Two (2) or More Rooms. No dwelling unit consisting
of two (2) or more rooms shall be occupied by more occupants than the total number which is
calculated on the following basis:
Type of Room Occupancy Subtotal
Kitchen 0
Each habitable room containing less than seventy (70) square feet of
floor area
0
Each habitable room containing at least seventy (70) but less than one
hundred (100) square feet of floor area
1
Each habitable room containing one hundred (100) or more square feet
of floor area
2
6. Arrangement of Sleeping, Bath and Toilet Rooms. No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2)
or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or toilet room
intended for use by occupants of more than one (1) sleeping room can be had only by going through
another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be
had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or toilet room.
7. Cellar Space Not Habitable. No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.
8. Basement Space May Be Habitable. No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or
dwelling unit unless:
a. The floor and walls are of waterproof and damp proof construction;
b. The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum window area sizes as
required in Wis. Admin. Code SPS 321.05(1);
c. Exiting from the basement shall be in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code SPS 321.03(5) and/or
(6);
d. The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required
under Wis. Admin. Code SPS 321.05(2), except where there is supplied some other approved
device affording adequate ventilation.
9. Occupants to Have Access to Sanitary Facilities. Every occupant of every dwelling shall have
unrestricted access to a kitchen sink, toilet, bath and lavatory basin, required in accordance with the
provisions 15.04.24.
Division 3 Minimum Standards and Owner Responsibilities
15.04.31 Minimum Standards for Interior Structure
A. It shall be a violation of this section to own a building which does not comply with the requirements of this
Section:
1. Interior Surfaces. Interior surfaces, including walls, windows and doors, shall be maintained in good,
clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or
covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, and other defective surface conditions shall be
corrected. Every interior wall or partition shall be capable of affording privacy, be structurally sound,
and be kept in good, clean and sanitary condition.
2. Stairs and Walking Surfaces. Every interior stair, ramp, landing, or other walking surface shall be
maintained in sound condition and good repair.
a. Any flight of stairs having more than three (3) risers shall be provided with at least one (1)
handrail for the full length of the flight.
b. Guards shall be provided on all open sides of stairs consisting of more than three (3) risers and
on all open sides of areas that are elevated more than twenty-four (24) inches above the floor or
exterior grade.
3. Handrails and Guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
4. Interior Doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of
being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as
intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
5. Exits. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a
building or structure to the public way. Exits shall be provided to meet requirements of local and State
building codes.
a. Any flight of stairs having more than three (3) risers shall be provided with at least one (1)
handrail for the full length of the flight.
b. Guards shall be provided on all open sides of stairs consisting of more than three (3) risers and
on all open sides of areas that are elevated more than twenty-four (24) inches above the floor or
exterior grade.
15.04.32 Minimum Standards for Building Maintenance
A. It shall be a violation of this section to own a building which does not comply with the requirements of this
Section.
1. General. All structures shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be structurally sound and
sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
2. Protective Treatment. Exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, siding, doors, door and window
frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition.
Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and
decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall
be eliminated and surfaces repainted. Siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be maintained weather
resistant and water tight. Metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such
rust and corrosion, and surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future
rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for
stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. Use of moisture barriers and insulation
materials as a method of permanent protective treatment is prohibited and shall be allowed for no
more than thirty (30) days unless an extension is authorized by the Inspection Department.
3. Premises Identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast
with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall
not be less than three (3) inches in height with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch.
4. Foundation Walls. Foundation walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials;
and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
5. Roofs and Drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that might
admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or
interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good
repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a
public nuisance.
6. Chimneys. Every chimney, cooling tower, smokestack and similar appurtenances shall be
adequately supported, reasonably clean, protected from deterioration and maintained in good
condition.
7. Stairways, Decks, Porches and Balconies. Every exterior stairway, ramp, deck, porch and balcony,
and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with
proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
a. Any flight of stairs having more than three (3) risers shall be provided with at least one (1)
handrail for the full length of the flight.
b. Guards shall be provided on all open sides of stairs consisting of more than three (3) risers and
on all open sides of areas that are elevated more than twenty-four (24) inches above the floor or
exterior grade.
8. Handrails and Guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
9. Windows and Skylights. Every window and skylight shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and
rodent proof and shall be kept in reasonably good working condition. Every window, other than a fixed
window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
Windows located in whole or in part within six feet above ground level or a walking surface below that
provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall
be equipped with a window sash locking device. Every openable window and storm door shall be
supplied with adequate sixteen (16)-gauge screens to prevent entry of pests. Glazing materials shall
be maintained free from cracks and holes. Every dwelling having a bedroom in the basement shall
have at least one (1) window which meets the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code SPS 321.03(6) and
SPS 321.05(1) and (2).
10. Doors and Door Assemblies. Exterior doors, door assemblies, operator systems, if provided, and
hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping
units shall tightly secure the door. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased, or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be
readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special
knowledge or effort and shall have a minimum lock through of one inch. Such deadbolt locks shall be
installed according to manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in good working order. For
purposes of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.
11. Basement Hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units
from unauthorized entry.
12. Accessory Structures. Accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, storage
sheds, kennels, play houses, tree houses, and similar structures shall be structurally sound, clean,
sanitary, and maintained in good repair.
15.04.33 Owner Responsibilities
A. Owners of buildings containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a
clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the building and premises.
B. Occupants of dwellings or dwelling units shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the
building and premises which they occupy and control.
C. Occupants of dwellings or dwelling units shall be responsible for hanging all screens and double or storm
doors and storm windows whenever the same are required under the provision of this Chapter or any rule
or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, except where the owner has agreed to supply such service.
D. Occupants of dwellings containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of
insects, rodents or other pests. The occupants of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one
(1) dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever their dwelling unit is the only one
(1) infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of the Subsection, whenever infestation is caused
by the failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rat-proof or reasonably insect-proof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more of
the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two (2) or
more dwelling units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
E. Occupants of dwelling units shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein clean and sanitary and shall be
responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their use and operation.
F. Every owner of any dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units shall appoint, in the manner and
form the Inspection Department prescribes, as agent, a person who is eighteen (18) years of age or over
and resident of La Crosse County, Wisconsin, and shall vest in the agent full authority and control of the
building and premises, described in the appointment document and of the conduct of all business on the
premises relative to any and all regulations contained in this Code. The name, address and phone
number of said agent shall be posted in the dwelling in a conspicuous place. Such appointment shall be
made annually on or before January 1 of each year.
Division 4 Designation of Unfit Dwellings
15.04.41 Designation of Unfit Dwellings
A. Any dwelling or dwelling unit found to have any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for
human habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the Inspection Department and/or Health
Officer:
1. One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin-infested that it creates
a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public;
2. One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety
of the occupants or of the public;
3. One which, because of its general condition or location, is unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the
health or safety of the occupants or of the public; and/or
4. Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation and so designated and
placarded by the Inspection Department or Health Officer shall be vacated within a reasonable time
as specified by the Inspection Department or Health Officer.
B. No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall
again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed
by, the Inspection Department. The Inspection Department shall remove such placard whenever the
defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding were based have been eliminated.
C. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been
condemned as unfit for human habitation.
D. Whenever the Inspection Department and/or Health Officer determines that a violation exists or has
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this Chapter or any rule
or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, they shall give or cause to be given notice of such violation or
alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor; such notice shall be in writing, including a
description of the real estate involved, including a statement of the violations and corrective actions
required and allowing a reasonable time for the performance of any act required. Such notice shall be
served upon the owner, operator or occupant as the case may require and may be served by ordinary
mail or in the manner provided by the Wisconsin Statutes. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial
action which, if taken, will affect compliance with the provisions of this Section and with rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
E. Any person affected by any notice or order relating to a dwelling or dwelling unit under the provisions of
this Chapter may request and shall be granted, upon request, a hearing in the matter before the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
Division 5 Enforcement and Penalties
15.04.51 Enforcement, Services of Notices and Orders and Hearing
A. Service of Notices. Whenever the Inspection Department determines that there has been a violation, or
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation, of any provision of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Inspection Department shall give notice
of such violation or alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor. Such notice shall:
1. Be written;
2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
3. Include a statement of the reason(s) why it is being issued;
4. Allow for a reasonable time for the performance of any act required; and
5. Be served upon the owner, owner’s agent, or the occupant, as the case may require. Such notice
shall be deemed properly served upon such owner or occupant if a copy thereof is delivered to
him/her personally; or by leaving a copy thereof at his/her usual place of abode, in the presence of a
family member of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the content thereof; or by
sending a copy thereof by first class or certified mail, with return receipt requested to his/her last
known address; or, if the mailed copy is returned with a receipt showing that it was not delivered to
the intended recipient, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling
affected by the notice. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
B. Enforcement – Notices, Orders and Hearings. Any person affected by any notice issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, may request in writing, and shall be granted, a hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals on
the matter. Any request shall set forth the grounds therefor, shall be filed within 20 days after the day the
notice was served and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth on the City’s Fee Schedule.
Within 10 days of receiving such request, the Inspection Department shall set a time and place for such
hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof and an opportunity to be heard.
C. Exception. The appeals process set forth in this subsection does not apply to citations or to convictions
for offenses cited.
D. Board of Zoning Appeals to Sustain, Modify or Withdraw Notices. After such hearing the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice, depending upon their finding as to whether
the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been
complied with. The Board shall be guided by a policy of reasonable compliance in order to promote the
public health and may, at its discretion, permit exceptions to provisions of this chapter so long as such
exceptions are not contrary to the spirit of the chapter as a whole. The proceedings at such hearing,
including the findings and decision of the Board, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as
a matter of public record in the office of the City Clerk. Such record shall also include a copy of every
notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board
may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of this State.
E. Adoption of Rules and Regulations by Inspection Department. The Inspection Department is hereby
authorized and empowered to make and adopt written rules and regulations necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted by said
Inspection Department, after consultation with the City Attorney, to the Common Council and, if approved
by a vote of a majority of the members thereof, shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of
this chapter, and the penalty for violation thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the
provisions of this chapter, as hereinafter provided. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be kept on
file in the City Clerk’s office and in the Inspection Department.
15.04.52 Penalties
A. Penalties. Violations of this section shall be punishable by a forfeiture of not more than Two Thousand
Dollars ($2,000.00). Each day a violation exists or continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 5 Definitions
Division 1 Definitions
15.05.11 Definitions
A. The following definitions shall be applicable in this Title:
1. Accessory Building. A detached building or structure not used as a dwelling unit but is incidental to
that of the main building and which is located on the same lot. Accessory building does not mean
farm building.
2. Accommodation. Any room, apartment, house, building or structure, any part of which is used for
human habitation on a temporary or permanent basis.
3. Addition. New construction performed on a dwelling which increases the outside dimensions of the
dwelling.
4. Agricultural Facilities and Practices. See Sec. 281.16(1), Wis. Stats.
5. Air Conditioning. The process of treating air to control simultaneously its temperature, humidity,
cleanliness and distribution to meet the requirements of the conditioned space.
6. Alteration. An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or modification other than an addition
or repair to a swelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other
systems within a dwelling.
7. Apprentice. A person other than a master or journeyman plumber, registered as such with state
division of health in compliance with the rules and regulations governing apprentices.
8. Basement. A portion of a building partly underground, but having less than half of its clear floor-toceiling
height below the average grade of adjoining ground.
9. Best Management Practice (BMP). Structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or
devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the
state.
10. Building System. Plans, specifications and documentation for a system of manufactured building or
for a type or system of building components, which may include structural, electrical, mechanical,
plumbing and variations which are submitted as part of the building system.
11. Business Day. Any day other than Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday.
12. Cease and Desist Order. A court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction activity that is
being conducted without the required permit.
13. Ceiling Height. The clear vertical distance from the finished floor to the finished ceiling.
14. Cellar. A portion of a building partly or wholly underground, with half or more than half of it clear
floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of adjoining ground.
15. Construction Site. An area upon which one or more land disturbing construction activities occur,
including areas that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale where multiple separate
and distinct land disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different times on different
schedules but under one (1) plan.
16. Department. The Department of Safety and Professional Services.
17. Detached Building. Any building which is not physically connected to the dwelling.
18. Discrimination/Discriminatory Housing Practice. Any difference in treatment based upon race,
color, religion, sex, sexual preference, ancestry, handicap, marital status, place of birth or national
origin; or any act that is unlawful under
19. Dwelling. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed for
occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or
lease for the construction thereof of any such buildings or structure.
20. Dwelling Unit. Any room or group of rooms located with a dwelling and forming a single habitable
unit, with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
21. Electrical Apprentice. A person registered by the State of Wisconsin as an Electrical Apprentice
under 305.46 of the Administrative Code.
22. Electrical Contractor (active). Any person who is skilled in the installation, planning, designing,
superintending or inspection of electrical wiring and equipment and who is engaged in this work.
Before any person shall be licensed as an electrical contractor such person must have served at least
two years as a journeyman electrician and meet all other qualifications for an electrical contractor’s
license as determined by the Board of Electrical Examiners.
23. Electrical Wiring. All equipment, wiring ,material, fittings, devices, appliance, fixtures, and apparatus
used for the production, modification, regulation, control, distribution, utilization, or safeguarding of
electrical energy for mechanical, chemical, cosmetic, heating, lighting, or similar purposes, as
specified under the state electrical wiring code. “Electrical wiring” does not include the equipment,
wiring, material, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures and apparatus used by a public utility, an
electric cooperative or a wholesale merchant operator for the purpose of generating, transmitting,
distributing or controlling heath, light, power or natural gas to its customers or members.
24. Electrical Work. The installation, superintending or inspection of electrical material, fittings, devices,
appliances, fixtures, apparatus, wiring and equipment for the production, modification, regulation,
control, distribution, utilization, or safeguarding of electrical energy for mechanical, chemical,
cosmetic, heating, lighting or similar purposes.
25. Electrician, Beginning. A person registered by the State of Wisconsin as a Beginning Electrician
under 305.45 of the Administrative Code.
26. Electrician, Journeyman (active). Any person other than an electrical contractor who is skilled in the
installation of electrical wiring and equipment for the production, modification, control, distribution,
utilization or safeguarding of electrical energy for mechanical, chemical, cosmetic, heating, lighting, or
similar purposes, and who is engaged in this work. They shall have had at least four years’ practical
experience. Two (2) or more years in an accredited trade school shall be equivalent to the first two
years. They shall be at least 18 years of age and shall pass such examination as determined by the
Board of Electrical Examiners. In no case shall a licensed journeyman electrician do electrical work in
the City of Onalaska unless under the supervision of a licensed electrical contractor, who shall be
responsible in accordance with this Electrical Code. A person licensed by the State of Wisconsin as a
Journeyman Electrician under 305.44 of the Administrative Code.
27. Electrician, Journeyman Industrial. A person licensed by the State of Wisconsin as an Industrial
Journeyman Electrician under 305.443 of the Administrative Code.
28. Electrician, Journeyman Residential. A Residential Journeyman Electrician is a person licensed by
the State of Wisconsin as a Residential Journeyman Electrician under 305.447 of the Administrative
Code.
29. Electrician, Master. A person licensed by the State of Wisconsin as a Master Electrician under
305.43 of the Administrative Code.
30. Electrician, Registered Master. A person licensed by the State of Wisconsin as a Registered Master
Electrician under 305.437 of the Administrative Code.
31. Electrician, Residential Master. A person licensed by the State of Wisconsin as a Residential
Master Electrician under 305.435 of the Administrative Code.
32. Erosion. The process by which the land’s surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or
gravity.
33. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A comprehensive plan developed to address pollution caused
by erosion and sedimentation of soil particles or rock fragments during construction.
34. Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their
harborage places, by removing materials that serve as food source or by other authorized elimination
methods approved by the Health Officer.
35. Extraterritorial. The unincorporated area within three (3) miles of the corporate limits of a first,
second, or third class city.
36. Family. One (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations,
legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated
organizations, trustees, trustees m bankruptcy and receivers.
37. Final stabilization. That all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been
completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at
least seventy percent (70%) of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures, or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
38. Financial Institution. Any person as defined herein, engaged in the business of lending money or
guaranteeing loans.
39. Foundation. The structural system used to transfer the weight of the building to the earth.
40. Furnace. A completely self-contained direct-fired automatically controlled, vented appliance for
heating air by transfer of heat of combustion through metal to air and designed to supply heated air
through ducts to spaces remote from the appliance location.
41. Governing body. The City of Onalaska Common Council.
42. Habitable Room. Any room used for sleeping, living or dining purposes, excluding such places as
kitchens, closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, hallways, laundries, storage spaces, utility rooms and
similar spaces.
43. Heating System. Any combination of building construction, machines, devices or equipment, so
proportioned, arranged, installed, operated and maintained as to produce and deliver in place the
required amount and character of heating service.
44. Homeowner. A person owning and occupying as their permanent address a single-family dwelling or
two-family dwelling.
45. Hot Water. An adequate supply kept at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty (120)
degrees Fahrenheit.
46. House Sanitary Drain. All underground piping inside the building and to a point three to five feet
outside the building designed to convey sanitary sewage to the house sanitary sewer.
47. House Sanitary Sewer. That part of the sanitary drainage system extending from the sewer service
lateral or other disposal terminal to within three to five feet outside the building designed to convey
sanitary sewage to the house sanitary sewer.
48. House Storm Drain. All underground piping inside the building and to a point three feet to five feet
outside the building designed to convey sanitary sewage to the house sanitary sewer.
49. House Storm Sewer. All underground piping designed to convey the discharge of the house storm
drain, surface drains, yard drains, cistern overflows and all other clear water drains to the storm
sewer service lateral at the curb or other disposal terminal.
50. Housing. Any improved property, including any mobile home as defined in Sec. 66.0435, Wis. Stats.,
which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as a home or
residence.
51. Infestation. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or other pests.
52. Journeyman, Contractor (inactive). An inactive contractor or journeyman holds a valid license but
is not actively engaged in the trade. At any time upon payment of an annual fee the license shall
become active.
53. Land disturbing construction activity. Any man-made alteration of the land surface resulting in a
change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff
and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land
disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench
dewatering, filling and grading activities.
54. Low Voltage Installer. Any person engaged in installing, repairing, or maintaining equipment or
systems that operate at one hundred (100) volts or less.
55. Manufacture. The process of making, fabricating, constructing, forming or assembling a product from
raw, unfinished, semi-finished or finished materials.
56. Minor Repair. Repair performed for maintenance on replacement purposes on any existing one (1)
or two (2) family dwelling which does not affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or
efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection or exterior aesthetic appearance and which
does not increase a given occupancy and use. No building permit is required for work to be
performed which is deemed minor repair.
57. Mortgage Broker. An individual who is engaged in or who performs the business or services of a
mortgage broker as defined by Wisconsin Statutes.
58. Multiple Dwelling. One consisting of more than two (2) dwelling units.
59. Occupant. Any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having actual possession of a
dwelling unit.
60. Open Construction. Any building, building component, assembly or system manufactured in such a
manner that it can be readily inspected at the building site without disassembly, damage or
destruction.
61. Open Market. The market which is informed of the availability for sale, purchase, rental or lease of
any housing accommodation, whether informed through a real estate broker or by advertising by
publication, signs or by other advertising methods directed to the public or any portion thereof,
indicating that the property is available for sale, purchase, rental or lease.
62. Operator. Any person or group who has charge, care or control of a building or part thereof in which
dwelling units or rooming units are let.
63. Ordinary Minimum Winter Conditions. The temperature fifteen (15) degrees Fahrenheit above the
lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten (10) year period.
64. Owner Occupied Dwelling. A building used for human habitation in which the owner thereof
maintains their permanent living quarters.
65. Owner. Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have legal title of any
dwelling, dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or shall have charge,
care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner, or agent of the owner, or as executor,
executrix, administrator, administratrix, personal representative, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner.
66. Performance Standard. A narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable
outcome for a facility or practice.
67. Permit. A written authorization made by the City of Onalaska to the applicant to conduct land
disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
68. Person. Individuals, children, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts,
business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups or combinations.
69. Plumbers. Master and journeyman plumbers licensed by the state division of health.
70. Plumbing.
a. All piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtences in connection with the water supply and drainage
system within a building and to a point from three to five feet outside of the building.
b. The construction and connection of any drain or waste pipe carrying domestic sewage from a
point three to five feet outside the foundation walls of any building and the connection to any
sewer service lateral at the curb or other disposal terminal, including private domestic sewage
treatment and disposal systems and the alteration of any such system, drain or waste pipe except
minor repairs to faucets, valves, pipes, appliances and the removal of stoppages.
c. The water service piping from the building to the curb box at the street curb, alley or other
terminal, and the connection of domestic hot water storage tanks, water softeners and water
heaters with the water supply system
d. Water supply piping and plumbing appliances including water pressure systems other than the
City system and water mains and appurtenances in connection therewith.
e. The construction of all stormwater drains from a point within three to five feet outside of the
foundation wall of any building to the storm sewer at the curb or other disposal terminal. The
construction and connection of all piping and appurtenances in connection with the stormwater
drains within a building and to a point three to five feet outside the building.
71. Pollutant. See Sec. 283.01 (13), Wis. Stats.
72. Pollution. See Sec. 281.01 (10), Wis. Stats.
73. Probable Cause. Reasonable grounds to believe that a violation may have occurred or may be
occurring.
74. Real Estate Broker/Real Estate Salesman. Any individual qualified by law, who, for a fee,
commission, salary or for other valuable consideration, or who with the intention or expectation
of receiving or collecting same, lists, sells, purchases, rents or leases any housing
accommodations, including options thereupon, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a
loan, secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance, upon transfer of any housing accommodation;
or who is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for collection of a fee
in connection with a contract whereby he undertakes to promote the sale, purchase, rental or
lease of any housing accommodation through its listing in a publication issued primarily for
such purpose; or an individual employed or acting on behalf of any of these.
75. Real Property. Buildings, structures, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives
76. Repair. The act or process of restoring to original soundness, including redecorating, refinishing,
nonstructural repairs or maintenance, or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment
with the equivalent fixture, system or equipment.
77. Responsible Party. Any entity holding fee title to the property or performing services to meet the
performance standards of this Title through a contract or other agreement.
78. Rooming House/Rooming Unit. Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one (1) or more
rooming units in which space is let to three (3) or more persons who are not related to the owner or
operator. A rooming unit refers to any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for preparation of food.
79. Runoff. Storm water or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on
the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
80. Sediment. Settleable solid material that is transported by runoff, suspended within runoff or
deposited by runoff away from its original location.
81. Sewer Service Lateral. That part of the drainage system extending from the curb to the connection
with the main sewer.
82. Single Occupancy Room. Any room which the owner has leased or rented, or in any way offered to
lease or rent, to a sole individual, provided, however, that the owner permanently occupies living
quarters in the same dwelling.
83. Storm Sewer Service Lateral. That part of the stormwater drainage system extending from the curb
to the main in the street.
84. Site. The entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land disturbing
construction activity is proposed in the permit application.
85. Stop Work Order. An order issued by the City of Onalaska which requires that all construction
activity on the site be stopped.
86. Story. That portion of a building located above the basement, between the floor and the ceiling.
87. Stress. Internal resistance to an external force expressed in load per unit area; stresses acting
perpendicular (compression or tension) to the surface, shear stresses acting in the plane of the
surface or bending stresses which cause curving.
88. Supplied. Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator.
89. Technical standard. A document that specifies design, predicted performance and operation and
maintenance specifications for a material, device or method.
90. Temporary Housing. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to
be transportable.
91. Uniform Dwelling Code. See Ch. SPS 320 to 325 of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code.
92. Ventilating. The process of supplying or removing air by natural or mechanical means, to or from any
space.
Title 16 Property Maintenance, Public Nuisance and Vacant Building
Code
Chapter 01 Property Maintenance
Administration
16.01.11 Property Maintenance
A. This Chapter shall be known, referred to, and cited as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Onalaska.
16.01.12 Intent
A. The intent of this Chapter is to ensure public health, safety, and welfare to the degree that they are
affected by the occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. It is also the intent of this
section to help prevent the continuation, extension, and aggravation of blight in Onalaska. This Chapter
is enacted pursuant to the authorization contained in Sec. 62.23, Wis. Stats. and applies to all structures
and premises in the City of Onalaska. The provisions of this Chapter shall not limit the authority of the
City or other applicable jurisdictions to abate problems on improperly maintained and unsafe structures
or premises pursuant to other applicable laws.
16.01.13 Interpretation
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to the minimum
requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this Chapter are either more or less restrictive than
comparable standards imposed by any other provisions of this Chapter or of any other applicable law,
Code, Ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any kind, the regulation that is more restrictive or that
imposes higher standards or requirements shall govern.
16.01.14 Severability and Conflict
A. The provisions of this Chapter are severable. If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase or portion of this Property Maintenance Code is found to be unlawful or unenforceable, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions. If any part of this Chapter is found to be in conflict with any other
Chapter or with any other part of this Chapter, the most restrictive or highest standard shall prevail. If
any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Chapter to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect any other provision of this Chapter not specifically included in said judgment;
and if any court or competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this
Chapter to a particular property, building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of
said provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in said judgment.
16.01.15 Responsibility
A. The responsible person, as defined herein, shall maintain their structures and premises in compliance
with this Chapter. The responsible person is the property owner of record according to the La Crosse
County Land Records System. A person shall not occupy, or permit another person to occupy, a
structure or premises that does not comply with the provisions of this Chapter. Occupants, including
owner occupants and tenants, of a structure or premises are responsible for caring for and maintaining
that part of the structure or premises that they occupy or control. All responsible persons shall be jointly
and severally responsible for securing compliance of their structure or premises with this Chapter.
16.01.16 Inspection Authority and Access Procedures
A. Person authorized to conduct inspections. Agents of the City authorized to conduct inspections
pursuant to this Section shall include the Planning Department, Inspection Department, Police
Department, Fire Department, Public Works Department and/or other authorized agents.
B. Inspections with consent. Authorized agents of the City, upon display of proper identification and the
consent of the owner, owner’s agent, occupant, or other responsible person, may enter any structure or
premises (locked or unlocked) at any reasonable time to determine whether said structures or premises
comply with the provisions of this Chapter. No person shall obstruct or resist any authorized agent of
the City acting in their official capacity and with lawful authority.
C. Special Inspection Warrant. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to allow an
authorized agent of the City to inspect structures or premises without the consent of the owner, owner’s
agent, occupant, or other responsible person. If said person refuses to permit an inspection, an
authorized agent of the City may apply to a court for a warrant to inspect the structure and premises
pursuant to Sec. 66.0119, Wis. Stats.. In cases of emergency, a Special Inspection Warrant shall not be
required.
D. Access by owner or operator. The provisions of this section shall not restrict the owner, owner’s agent,
or other responsible person lawful access to structures or premises for the purpose of inspecting,
maintaining, repairing, or altering the structure or premises as necessary to comply with the provisions of
this Chapter.
E. Confidentiality of complaints. In the event that the City receives a complaint regarding the
maintenance of a structure or premises, the City may request contact information of the complainant.
However, the City shall endeavor to keep the identity of all complainants confidential unless a
complainant desires their name to be revealed. The City shall reveal a complainant’s identity if so
ordered by a court or required by law and/or as required in Chapter 3 of Title 3: Public Records of the
City of Onalaska Code of Ordinances.
F. Inspections resulting from anonymous complaints. Anonymous complaints shall not cause the City
to inspect the interior of a structure unless there is reason to believe there is immediate and grave
danger to the occupants of the structure or to the occupants of structures on adjacent properties.
16.01.17 Penalties for Violation of This Chapter and Failure to Maintain Property
A. Penalties. If any responsible person, as defined herein, fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter
a citation will be issued to the responsible person for the violation. The violation shall be referred to the
City Attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction,
forfeit to the City a penalty of not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) per offense, together with the taxable costs of such action plus reasonable attorney’s fees.
Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this Chapter is a
public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined, and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit
of the City, the State of Wisconsin, or any citizen thereof. Any subsequent and similar violations of this
Chapter within a twenty-six (26) month period shall be considered a continued offense and as such may
cause the usual penalty to double for each subsequent and continued offense up to the maximum
allowed by this Section.
B. Responsible person’s liability to City for costs of correction of violation.
1. Notification of failure to maintain property. An authorized agent of the City shall serve written
correction orders upon the owner, the owner’s agent, or other responsible person, by certified mail
or by delivering the order to them personally. In the event that the owner, their agent, or other
responsible person cannot be found, an authorized agent of the City shall do one (1) or more of the
following:
a. Deliver and describe the written correction order to a person of suitable age and discretion at the
owner’s or owner’s agent’s regular place of abode; and/or
b. Post the written correction in a conspicuous place on the structure or property affected by the
order.
2. Collection of costs incurred by the City. If any owner, owner’s agent, or other responsible person
fails to comply with this Chapter; and after written notice given by an authorized agent of the City as
described in the foregoing subsection, has not complied with the correction orders within the time
specified in the written notice, the City may cause such maintenance to be performed. The City
Treasurer or other authorized agent shall certify to the County Treasurer of La Crosse County, a
statement of the cost incurred by the City to correct the deficiencies. Costs will include all expenses
incurred associated with bringing the property into compliance with this Chapter, including but not
limited to administrative and clerical costs, notification and publication fees, equipment charges,
tipping fees, contractor fees, and other related expenses. The cost thereof shall be a lien upon such
real estate and shall be a personal liability of the owner of said real estate, collectable as any other
money judgment. Such amount, together with interest, shall be entered as a special assessment
against such lot or parcel of land and may be collected in the same manner as real estate taxes.
C. Enforcement of other ordinances and codes. The provisions in this Chapter are intended to be
coordinated with the enforcement of other City ordinances and codes including the adopted Building
Code.
16.01.18 Procedures for Razing and Vacating Structures
A. Structures may be raised pursuant to Sec. 66.0413, Wis. Stats. and the provisions set forth in the City of
Onalaska Building Code.
Maintenance of Exterior Landscaping
16.01.21 Clean, Safe, Sanitary and Attractive
A. All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, free from any
accumulation of rubbish, brush, clothing, garbage, recyclables or other refuse.
16.01.22 Vegetation and Landscaping
A. Vegetation and landscaping shall present an attractive appearance in accordance with generally
accepted landscaping practices and as follows:
1. Exposed soils, except exposed soil that is associated with a garden or cultivated farmland, shall be
vegetated, landscaped, or paved consistent with this Chapter to prevent soil erosion.
2. The Common Council finds that lawns, grasses and noxious weeds on lots or parcels of land which
exceed eight (8) inches in length adversely affect the public health and safety of the public in that they
tend to emit pollen and other discomforting bits of plants, constitute a fire hazard and safety hazard in
that debris can be hidden in the grass, interferes with the public convenience, and adversely affects
property values of other land within the City. For that reason, any lawn, grass or weed on a lot or
other parcel of land which exceeds eight (8) inches in length is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, except for property located in a designated floodplain area, wetland area, or where the
parcel of land is located within a subdivision where more than seventy percent (70%) of the parcels
are unbuilt/vacant, or where natural landscaping as described below has been appropriately utilized.
Native grasses and forbs that are part of a managed natural landscape are exempt from the height
requirement of this provision.
3. Natural landscapes shall be permitted in all zoning districts. However, unmanaged vegetation that
constitutes a nuisance or hazard shall be prohibited. The Building Inspector/ Zoning Administrator or
other authorized agent shall determine whether an existing landscape is a natural landscape or
unmanaged vegetation that constitutes a nuisance or hazard. Natural landscapes include existing
wooded areas, wetlands, prairies, and similar areas that are generally characterized by a diversity of
species native to the area. Natural landscapes also include restored and managed plant
communities and wildlife habitats that are comprised primarily of native ferns, grasses, forbs, aquatic
plants, trees and shrubs. Where a natural landscape abuts a property or right-of-way that does not
have a natural landscape, the property owner with the natural landscape shall provide an adequate
grass lawn buffer or other acceptable buffer between the natural landscape and the adjacent property
or right-of-way so as to prevent the natural landscape from being a nuisance or hazard or
encroachment. Wherein the City is an adjoining property owner, the Public Works Director or other
authorized agent shall act as a signatory to the waiver, so long as the vision triangle, public safety,
and visibility of public infrastructure are not impacted.
4. When in the opinion of the Fire Chief or their designee, the presence of a natural lawn may constitute
a fire or safety hazard due to weather and/or other conditions, the Fire Chief or their designee may
order the cutting of natural lawns to a safe condition by written order. A property owner shall be
required to cut the natural lawn within three (3) days upon receiving direction from the Fire Chief or
their designee.
5. Natural lawns shall not be removed through the process of burning unless approval is received form
the Fire Chief or their designee and a written permit to burn is issued by the Fire Chief or their
designee. The Fire Chief shall establish a written list of requirements for considering each request to
burn natural lawns, thereby insuring the public safety. In addition, the property owner requesting
permission to burn the natural lawn shall produce evidence of property damage and liability insurance
identifying the City as a party insured. A minimum amount of acceptable insurance shall be Three
Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00).
6. Vegetation that may impede the proper functioning of a drainage swale shall be removed unless
specifically approved in writing by an authorized agent of the City.
7. Vegetation (including gardens) shall be properly and routinely maintained or removed so that it does
not present a hazard to structures, persons, or vehicles, impact vision triangles, and visibility/utility of
public infrastructure. No person shall maintain, plant, or permit to remain on any private property
situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets/alleys in the City any tree, shrub, or other growth
which may obstruct the view or life safety of the operator of any motor vehicle or pedestrian
approaching such intersection. No obstructions shall be permitted between the heights of two and a
half (2.5) feet and ten (10) feet at an intersection measured ten (10) feet along both streets/alleys and
forming a triangle by striking an imaginary line between said points. It is unlawful for any person to
plant, cause to grow, allow to grow or maintain any trees, bushes, shrubbery, or vegetation of any
kind which is an obstruction to the clear and complete vision of any traffic sign or driveway approach
to a street in the City. It shall be the duty of every owner of such tree, bush, shrubbery or vegetation
to remove such obstruction.
8. Any trees/bushes/shrubbery located upon any private premises adjacent to any public way or public
property/areas shall be kept trimmed so not to impede travel. Trees and shrubs shall be kept trimmed
so that the lowest branches projecting over the public right-of-way provide a clearance of a minimum
of fourteen (14) feet. Clearance from sidewalk to lower branches shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet
above the level of a sidewalk.
9. Brush. Piles of brush (tree branches, yard waste, etc.) shall not be allowed to accumulate and/or be
stored on parcels of residentially-zoned land as said brush becomes habitat for vermin and other
associated animals and can become a public nuisance.
16.01.23 Noxious Weeds, Nuisance Weeds and Invasive Species
A. The species listed herein are not native to Onalaska and have a tendency to prohibit the successful
growth of native plant communities. These plants are not naturally occurring in Onalaska and become
capable of spreading and developing a significant population that destroys ecologic relationships,
habitats, and create an overall loss in plant diversity.
B. As listed herein, some of these species are prohibited while others are encouraged to be eradicated. In
situations where the Building Inspector/ Zoning Administrator or other authorized agent determines that a
plant is causing or has the potential to cause negative impacts on neighboring properties, said plant(s)
shall be properly removed and disposed.
C. Noxious Weeds. Pursuant to Sec. 66.0407, Wis. Stats., a person owning, occupying, or controlling land
shall destroy and remove all noxious weeds on said land. View Sec. 66.0407, Wis. Stats., for an updated
list of noxious weeds in the State of Wisconsin.
D. Nuisance Weeds. Pursuant to Sec. 23.235, Wis. Stats., it is prohibited to sell, distribute, plant, or
cultivate Nuisance Weeds. View Sec. 23.235, Wis. Stats., for an updated list of nuisance weeds in the
State of Wisconsin.
E. Prohibited & Restricted Invasive Species. Pursuant to NR 40, Wisconsin Administrative Code, the
listed prohibited invasive species of terrestrial plants are currently not found in Wisconsin with the
exception of small pioneer stands and are prohibited. They shall be eradicated from properties and may
not be transported, possessed, transferred (including sale), or introduced. Pursuant to NR 40, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, the listed restrictive invasive species of terrestrial plants are already established in
the state and are restricted. They may not be transported, transferred (including sale), or introduced. If
they are already on your property, you are encouraged, but not required to remove them. View NR 40,
Wisconsin Administrative Code, for an updated list of prohibited invasive species and restrictive invasive
species in the State of Wisconsin.
Maintenance of Exterior Uses And Storage
16.01.31 Composting
A. Composting shall be allowed in all residential zoning districts subject to the following conditions:
1. Composting shall be conducted within an enclosed container (or containers) not to exceed a sum
total of one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet per parcel. A compost container shall be made of durable
material such as wood, block, plastic, or sturdy metal fencing and shall have been constructed
exclusively for composting.
2. Compost containers shall not present an aesthetic, health, or odiferous nuisance to neighboring
properties.
3. Compost containers are prohibited in any front or side yard. Compost containers shall not be located
in any drainage swale. Further, compost containers shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet from
parcel lines, five (5) feet from an alley right-of-way; ten (10) feet from a principal structure; and three
(3) feet from another neighboring accessory structure.
4. Only kitchen wastes or other products labeled “compostable” that break down in compost containers
and yard waste (free of logs, large branches, and diseased plants) may be placed in compost
containers.
5. Meat, bones, fat, oil, dairy products and other kitchen wastes that do not break down in compost
containers, as well as plastic synthetic fibers, and human or pet waste shall not be placed in compost
containers.
6. Compost shall be maintained within the container to keep the material aerated, minimize odor, reduce
potential rodent harborage, and promote effective decomposition of the material.
16.01.32 Harborage of Pests
A. All premises shall be kept free from non-domesticated rodents, vermin, insect infestation, rock doves
(feral pigeons), starlings, skunks and other pests as determined by the Building Inspector/Zoning
Administrator or other authorized agent of the City. Where such pests are found, they shall be promptly
exterminated or removed in a lawful manner that will not be injurious to human health. After
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to control harborage of pests and to prevent
reinfestation. Bats shall be removed from a structure as determined by Animal Control in consultation with
the Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator when they cause a health or structural issues to a residence.
Eradication methods of bats shall be consistent with WDNR rules.
16.01.33 Animals, Animal Enclosures and Feces
A. All animal pens, runs, exercise areas, fenced areas, structures, and enclosures shall comply with the
provisions of this Chapter and shall be kept clean, sanitary, and free from odor, feces, insects, and other
unsightly or objectionable matters, which constitute a public nuisance or are otherwise detrimental to
public health, safety, or welfare.
B. The owner or person in charge of any dog or other animal shall not permit solid fecal matter of such
animal to deposit on any street, alley or other public or private property, unless such matter is immediately
removed therefrom by said owner or person in charge. This Section shall not apply to a person who is
visually or physically handicapped.
C. Domestic animal feces shall be removed regularly and disposed of properly so not to attract insects or
rodents, become unsightly or cause objectionable odors. Property owners are required to prevent the
overall accumulation of domestic animal feces on private property.
16.01.34 Fences
A. All fences shall be maintained in good repair, not lean, be structurally sound and plumb. Fences shall be
free of rust, corrosion, deterioration, decay, missing parts, peeling, flaking, and chipped paint. Wood
surfaces, other than decay-resistant wood, must be protected from the elements and decay by paint or
other protective covering or treatment. The finished side or decorative side of a fence shall face the
adjoining property.
16.01.35 Miscellaneous Outdoor Storage
A. All furniture, furnishings, appliances, household goods (except those items designed and intended for
outdoor use), clothing, vehicle parts, tools, equipment, and similar items shall be stored within a
completely enclosed structure or properly and promptly disposed of. Furniture may be placed for use on
a covered porch, so long as said furniture is protected from the elements and kept in good repair. Further,
in particular, the following may not be stored outdoors:
1. Outdoor Storage. No person shall store junked or discarded property including automobiles,
automobile parts, trucks, tractors, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or
machinery parts, wood, bricks, cement blocks, implements and/or equipment or other unsightly debris
which substantially depreciates property values in the neighborhood. The applicable provisions of
Sec. 175.25, Wis. Stats. entitled “Storage of junked automobiles,” including any revisions or
amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference. A motor vehicle shall include but not be
limited to, an automobile, truck, recreational vehicle, motor home, bus and trailer that can be licensed.
The term “junked automobile” shall mean any automobile or motor vehicle which is incapable of
operation or use upon a highway including failure to register the vehicle or which has been
dismantled for parts or scrap.
2. Tires. No person shall store tires outside where they may collect rain and harbor a breeding place for
the mosquito species that carries La Crosse Encephalitis, a serious viral disease.
3. Building waste/Construction materials. All waste resulting from remodeling, construction or
removal of a building, roadway or sidewalk shall be disposed of by the owner, builder or contractor
and is not permitted to be stored outdoors.
4. Ice box, freezer, or similar items. No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling,
building, or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other
structure under their control in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or
discarded ice box, refrigerator, freezer or other containers which has an airtight door or lid having a
capacity of one and one half (1 ½) cubic feet or more, without first removing the door and/or chaining
the door with a padlock.
16.01.36 Graffiti
A. No person may write, paint, or draw any inscription, figure, or mark of any type of any public building,
structure or property or other real or personal property owned by another person, business or entity
unless the express permission of the owner or proper authority has been obtained. The existence of
graffiti on any real property within the City is expressly declared a public nuisance affecting the public
health, safety and welfare.
1. Definition. When used in this Section, the term “graffiti” shall mean marks, symbols, signs, letters,
names, phrases, writings, drawings or sentences which are inscribed or placed on real property
without the consent of the owner or occupant that are not otherwise permitted by law.
a. Every owner of a structure or real property defaced by graffiti shall report the defacing to the City
of Onalaska Police Department upon discovery. The owner shall also comply with the terms of a
written notice to abate served on the property owner by the Police Department order the removal
or covering of such graffiti. The notice to abate shall be served personally or by certified mail. If a
property owner fails to comply with the notice to abate within seventy-two (72) hours, the City
shall have the graffiti covered or removed and all costs, fees, and expenses shall be entered into
the tax roll as a special charge, pursuant to Sec. 66.0627, Wis. Stats., against the parcel of land
on which the property is defaced by the graffiti is located. Extensions to the seventy-two (72) hour
correction period may be granted by the Chief of Police or their designee.
B. Therefore, it is the responsibility of the owner, owner’s agent, occupant, or other responsible person of
the property to which the graffiti has been applied, to at all times, keep the property clear of graffiti.
16.01.37 Firewood Storage
A. Firewood storage associated with permitted outdoor sales shall be consistent with the outdoor sales
provisions of the appropriate zoning district. All other stored firewood shall be used on premises and
shall be stored pursuant to the following conditions:
1. No person shall store firewood in the front yard on residentially zoned property, except that firewood
may be temporarily stored in the front yard for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of delivery.
2. Firewood should be neatly stacked and may not be stacked closer than two (2) feet to any lot line and
not higher than eight (8) feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence where firewood can be stacked
as high as the fence. Fences as used in this section shall not include hedges or other vegetation.
3. All brush, debris, and refuse from processing of firewood shall be promptly and properly disposed of
and shall not be allowed to remain on the premises.
4. Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting disease to healthy trees and
woodpiles that harbor or are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are public nuisances and
may be abated pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
5. Any tarp or similar material used to cover a firewood stack shall be made of durable and wind/waterresistant
materials, shall be properly tied or anchored down, and shall be repaired or replaced when
necessary.
16.01.38 Dumping and Littering
A. Dumping of any garabe, rubbish, furniture or furnishings, brush, junk, stone, construction materials,
appliances, grease, solvents, petroleum products, vehicles and vehicle parts, in any place in any manner
is prohibited in all zoning districts unless such dumping is within an approved landfill or recycling center.
No person shall throw any glass, refuse or waste, filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways,
public parks or other property of the City, or upon property within the City owned by the Onalaska School
District or any private person, or upon the surface of any body of water within the City. Further, all
waste/refuse containers and their storage areas shall be maintained in a nuisance and odor-free condition
and so as to prevent the scattering of contents by weather conditions or animals. Litter shall not be
allowed to accumulate.
1. No person shall throw any glass, refuse or waste, filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys,
highways, public parks or other property of the City or upon property within the City owned by the
Onalaska School District, or upon the surface of any body of water within the City.
2. Litter from Conduct of Commercial Enterprise.
a. Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all sales, promotions and other commercial
ventures that result in litter being deposited on any street, alley or other public way.
b. Litter to be cleaned up. Any person, firm, corporation or association carrying on an enterprise
that results in litter being deposited on any street, alley or other public way shall clean up the
same within twelve (12) hours of the time the same is deposited. If any such litter is subject to
being blown about, it shall be picked up immediately. If any such litter is likely to attract animals or
vermin, such litter shall be picked up immediately.
c. Litter picked up at litterer’s expense. If any person, firm, corporation or association fails to pick
up any litter as required above within the time specified, the City shall arrange to have the same
picked up by City crews or by private enterprise. Applicable bidding procedures shall be used for
any arrangement for the use of private enterprise to pick up such litter. The entire expense of
picking up such litter, together with an additional charge of twenty percent (20%) for
administrative expenses, shall be charged to the person, firm, corporation or association that did
the littering. If such sum is not promptly paid, steps shall be taken, with the advice of the City
Attorney’s office, to collect the same. This charge shall be in addition to any forfeiture or other
penalty for violation of this section.
3. Handbills.
a. Scattering Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to deliver any handbills or advertising material to any
premises in the City except by being handed to the recipient, placed on the porch, stoop or
entrance way of the building or firmly affixed to a building so as to prevent any such articles from
being blown about, becoming scattered or in any way causing litter.
b. Papers in Public Places Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to leave any handbills, advertising
material or newspapers unattended in any street, alley, public building or other public place,
provided that this shall not prohibit the sale of newspapers in vending machines.
Maintenance of Vehicles
16.01.41 Vehicles
A. Parking and storage of vehicles in all residential zoning districts.
1. Parking and storage of registered, licensed, and operable vehicles. Vehicles shall be kept fully
operational, licensed and used on a regular basis. Oil and other vehicle fluids shall not be permitted
to spill onto the ground, which may create an aesthetic nuisance and/or migrate into the City’s rightof-
way or utility systems. In all districts, parking and/or storage of registered, licensed and operable
vehicles, including automobiles, vehicles and trailers used for recreational purposes over twenty-five
(25) feet in length (not including trailer tongue) and commercial vehicles under twenty-five (25) feet in
length, shall be consistent with the following:
a. All vehicles shall be appropriately parked on an approved hard surface (including, but not limited
to: gravel, asphalt, concrete or similar surface), or stored in an enclosed structure, or on a
driveway.
b. No person shall park or store, or permit any other person to park or store, a vehicle on
lawn/grassed surface.
2. Parking of vehicles and trailers. Vehicles and trailers under twenty-five (25) feet in length (not
including trailer tongue) not required by the State of Wisconsin to be licensed or registered, including
cargo trailers, travel trailers, boats, and other such items, as well as registered and licensed vehicles
and trailers used for recreational purposes, including snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles, shall not
be parked on front yards (excluding corner properties) unless parked on a driveway or parking area
described pursuant to the provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance. Such vehicles if parked
in the driveway shall not extend over a public sidewalk and/or City Right-of-Way. Such
vehicles/trailers may be parked in rear and side yards.
3. All recreational vehicles stored on a property shall be owned by the resident on whose property the
unit is parked for storage.
4. Vehicles or trailer used for storage of goods. No vehicle, trailer, or similar device shall be used for
the storage of goods, materials or equipment other than those items considered to be part of the unit
or essential for its immediate use.
5. Parking or storage of unregistered, unlicensed, or inoperable vehicles on private property. Any
unregistered, unlicensed, or inoperable vehicles (including automobiles and vehicles and trailers used
for recreational purposes) shall not be stored for more than ten (10) days on private property on an
approved hard surface, unless stored within an enclosed structure.
6. Parking or storage of unregistered, unlicensed, or inoperable vehicles on public property.
Except as permitted on State of Wisconsin property, no person shall park any unregistered,
unlicensed, or inoperable vehicle upon any public street, alley, highway, or public property.
7. Abandoned vehicles. A vehicle is considered abandoned if the vehicle is parked and left
unattended in the same place for forty-eight (48) consecutive hours without the permission of the
owner of the premises and is in public view. The City of Onalaska Police Department shall be
responsible for the removal and disposition of vehicles abandoned on public premises. Vehicles
abandoned on public property shall be disposed of per Sec.342.40, Wis. Stats. For private
properties, the Onalaska Police Department’s involvement is limited to issuing appropriate parking
tickets and it is the responsibility of the property owner to appropriately remove and dispose of
vehicles abandoned on private property. Any person who abandons a vehicle on public or private
premises may be punished by imposition of forfeiture as detailed in this Chapter.
8. Responsibility for parking violations on premises. The registered owner of a vehicle shall be
responsible for any violations of the parking provisions of this Chapter. If a vehicle has been
abandoned or the owner of the vehicle is unknown, then the owner of the property on which the
vehicle is located shall be responsible for any violation of the parking provisions of this Chapter.
16.01.42 Propane Fuel Tanks
A. Fuel tanks shall not be stored in any front or side yard.
Maintenance of Public Right of Ways
16.01.51 Rubbish in Public Rights-of-Way
A. To protect the City’s storm water system, pedestrian safety, and vehicular traffic in public rights-of-way,
dirt, mud, rocks, leaves, grass clippings, and/or rubbish/refuse of any kind may not be dropped, deposited, or
directed towards the public right-of-way. Dirt, mud, rocks, leaves, grass clippings, and/or other rubbish/refuse
unintentionally directed towards the public right-of-way shall be removed and properly disposed of.
B. Removal of debris and dirt from sidewalks, streets and public grounds.
1. No abutting property owner shall, upon any sidewalk, street, alley or public ground, so maintain their
land or any building situated thereon so that, by erosion, by travel or by act of the responsible person,
parts of the soil or other substance shall be deposited upon the abutting sidewalk, street, alley or any
public ground, and if such deposit by erosion or otherwise shall take place, the sidewalk, street, alley
or public ground shall be cleaned and made passable by such abutting owner within twenty-four (24)
hours after receiving notice thereof.
2. No abutting property owner shall maintain their adjacent land within three (3) feet of any sidewalk,
street, alley or public ground so that by erosion, debris, or other substances creates a public nuisance
or that the maintenance of the adjoining lands shall be such that over time said conditions will cause
destruction and disrepair of the sidewalk, street, alley or public grounds. That within the twenty-four
(24) hours after receiving notice thereof, said property owner shall remedy any public nuisance or
conditions which may cause destruction and disrepair of sidewalks, streets, alleys or public grounds.
16.01.52 Snow/Ice Removal and Storage
A. Removal from Sidewalks. The owner, occupant or person in charge of any parcel or lot which fronts
upon or abuts any sidewalk shall keep said sidewalk clear of all snow and ice. In the event of snow
accumulating on said sidewalk due to natural means and/or by any other means, said sidewalks shall be
cleared of all accumulated snow and/or ice within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the snow ceases to
accumulate on said sidewalk. Sidewalks are to be kept clear of snow and ice to the width of the sidewalk.
In the event that ice has formed on any sidewalk in such a manner than it cannot be removed, the owner,
occupant or person in charge of the parcel or lot which fronts upon or adjoins said sidewalk shall keep the
sidewalk sprinkled with material to accelerate melting or prevent slipping. In case snow shall continue to
fall for some time, then it shall be removed immediately after it shall cease to fall. If snow should begin to
fall again within the initial twenty-four (24) hours, the twenty-four (24) hour time shall be reset to when the
snow ceases to fall the following time. The owner, agent, occupant or person in charge of a corner lot
shall also clear, sand or salt, as set forth herein, to the curb that portion of the sidewalk commonly
referred to as the corner crosswalk. A corner lot is defined as a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets.
B. Public Works Department to Remove.
1. In any case where any sidewalk in front of or adjoining any lot or parcel of land shall remain covered
in any part with snow or ice after twenty-four (24) hours when it cased to fall, the Public Works
Department, may grant a courtesy notice to the owner, agent or occupant to remove said snow. It
shall be the duty of the Public Works Department, to thereafter cause such snow or ice to be so
removed from the full width of such sidewalk. The costs incurred by the City for the removal of snow
and/or ice shall be fully accounted and charged to the parcel of land adjoining said sidewalk. If the
costs and expenses remain unpaid, the City Treasurer shall enter those charges onto the tax roll as a
special charge and shall be collected as other taxes upon real estate are collected.
2. The charge for said service shall be lineal foot of frontage cleared with costs outline in the City Fee
Schedule including an administrative fee.
C. Snow and Ice Not to Encroach. No person shall push, shove, plow, throw or in any way deposit any
snow or ice onto any public streets, alley, sidewalk, or public lands dedicated to public use except for
parcels or lots where existing buildings are constructed within five (5) feet of the street right-of-way and
the sidewalks exists from the City right-of-way to the curb line. In such instances, the owners, occupants
and/or employees of parcels or lots shall be permitted to deposit snow and ice from their sidewalks only
onto the public streets. Snow from public sidewalks shall not be stored in any manner which will obstruct
or limit vehicular or pedestrian vision, movement or access. The deposit of any snow or ice upon any
sidewalk, alley or public street of the City, contrary to the provisions of this Section, is a nuisance; and the
City may summarily remove any snow or ice so deposited and cause the cost of said removal to be
charged to the owner of the property from which said snow or ice had been removed.
D. Enforcement. The Public Works Department officers are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this Section.
E. Continued Violations. Each twenty-four (24) hour period where a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense under this Section for enforcement purposes. Repeated violations or subsequent
additional accumulations of snow and/or ice shall not nullify any pending notice issued under this Section.
F. Penalty. In addition to the provisions set forth in this Section, any person, firm or corporation which
violates the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Title 1 and per Sec.
66.60(16) and 66.615(3)(f) and (5), Wis. Stats.
16.01.53 Obstructions/Encroachments into the Right of Way
A. No person shall encroach upon or cause an encroachment/obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk, or
public grounds.
Maintenance of Manufactured and Mobile Homes
16.01.61 Maintenance Standards for Manufactured and Mobile Homes
1. Wrecked, damaged or dilapidated manufactured and mobile homes shall not be kept or stored in any
manufactured or mobile home district or upon any premises in the City. The Planning and Inspection
Departments shall determine if a mobile home is damaged or dilapidated to a point which makes it unfit
for human occupancy. Such manufactured or mobile homes are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
Whenever the Planning and Inspection Departments so determines, it shall notify the licensee or
landowner and owner of the manufactured or mobile home in writing that such public nuisance exists
within the district or on lands owned by them giving the findings upon which its determination is based
and shall order such home removed from the district or site or repaired to a safe, sanitary and wholesome
condition of occupancy within a reasonable time, but not less than thirty (30) days.
2. The Planning, Inspection, and Fire Departments or other applicable City staff are authorized to inspect
manufactured or mobile home a minimum of one (1) time in every twelve (12) month period to determine
the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of the district and inhabitants of the City for compliance
with the City Code and State Statutes.
3. All manufactured or mobile homes shall be skirted unless the unit is placed within one (1) foot vertically of
the stand with soil or other material completely closing such space from view and entry by rodents and
vermin. Areas enclosed by such skirting shall be maintained free of rodents and fire hazards.
4. Storage under manufactured or mobile homes is prohibited.
Chapter 02 Public Nuisances
Nuisances
16.02.11 Public Nuisances Prohibited
A. No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within
the City of Onalaska.
16.02.12 Public Nuisances Defined
A. A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for such
length of time as to:
1. Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public;
2. In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property;
3. Greatly offend the public morals or decency;
4. Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for
passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way or
the use of public property.
16.02.13 Public Nuisances Affecting Health
A. Definitions. For purposes of this Section:
1. Human Health Hazard. A substance, activity or condition that is known to have the potential to cause
acute or chronic illness, to endanger life, to generate or spread infectious diseases, or otherwise
injuriously to affect the health of the public, pursuant to Sec. 254.01(2) Wis. Stats.
2. Immediate Health Hazard. A health hazard that exists, or has the potential to exist, which should, in
the opinion of the La Crosse County Health Officer, be abated or corrected immediately, or at least
within a twenty-four (24) hour period, to prevent possibly injury or damage to human health or the
environment.
3. Pollution. The contaminating or rendering unclean or impure the air, land or waters in the City, or
making the same injurious to public health, harmful or commercial or recreational use or deleterious
to fish, animal or plant life.
4. Toxic and Hazardous Materials. Any chemical or biological material that is stored, deposited, used
or disposed of in such quantity or manner that it is or has the potential to create a health hazard.
B. Public Health Nuisances. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be constructed to
exclude other nuisances coming from within the definitions set forth above:
1. Adulterated Food. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered
for sale to the public. No person shall take or permit to remain any dog, cat or other live animal on or
upon the interior of any premises where food is sold, offered for sale or processed for consumption by
the general public.
2. Air Pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial
dust within the limits or within one (1) mile therefrom in such quantities as to endanger the health of
persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property.
3. Animals at Large. All animals running at large.
4. Animal Welfare. Intentional abuse or prolonged confinement of any domestic or wide animal or fowl
such that a decline in the health or well-being of the animal occurs.
5. Accumulation of Refuse. Accumulation of old cans, lumber, firewood, and other refuse or trash.
6. Clean Air Act. The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to indoor
smoking contained in Sec. 101.123, Wis. Stats., known as the Clean Indoor Air Act, exclusive of any
provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes,
are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act
required to be performed or prohibited by Sec. 101.123, Wis. Stats., and incorporated herein by
reference is required or prohibited by this section. Penalties for violation of this section shall be as
provided in Section 1-1-7 of this Code of Ordinances.
7. Garbage Cans and Recycling Cans. Garbage cans and recycling bins which are not fly tight.
8. Human Health Hazard. No person shall erect, create, cause, continue, maintain or permit any human
health hazard within the City. Any person who shall cause, create or maintain a human health hazard,
or who shall, in any way, aid or contribute to the causing, creating or maintenance thereof, shall be
guilty of violation of this Section.
9. Noxious Odors, Etc. Any use of property, substances or things within the City or within four (4) miles
thereof or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, gases,
effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy,
discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the City.
10. Stagnant Water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply.
11. Storage of Potentially Polluting Substances. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to store any potentially polluting substances unless such substances are stored in such manner as to
securely prevent them from escaping onto the ground surface and/or into any street, sewer, ditch or
drainageway, lake or stream within the jurisdiction of the City.
12. Street Pollution. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome liquid or
substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place within the City.
13. Unburied Carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human consumption or
foods which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within twenty-four (24)
hours after death.
14. Water Pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body of water
by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances.
C. Cleanup of Spilled or Accidentally Discharged Wastes.
1. Cleanup Required. All persons, firms, or corporations delivering, hauling disposing, storing,
discharging or otherwise handling potentially polluting substances, solid or liquid, such as, but not
limited to, the following: fuel oil, gasoline, solvents, industrial liquids or fluids, milk, grease trap and
septic tank wastes, sewage sludge, sanitary sewer wastes, storm sewer catch-basin wastes, oil or
petroleum wastes, shall immediately clean up any such spilled material to prevent its becoming a
hazard to health or safety or directly or indirectly causing pollution to the lakes and streams under the
jurisdiction of the City.
2. Notification. Spills or accidental release of hazardous materials or pollutants at a site or of a quantity
or nature that cannot adequately be cleaned up by the responsible party or parties shall be
immediately reported to the Police Department so that assistance can be given by the proper agency.
3. Financial Liability. The party or parties responsible for the release, escape or discharge of wastes
shall be held financially liable for the cost of any cleanup or attempted cleanup deemed necessary or
desirable and undertaken by the City, or its designated agent, in an effort to minimize the pollutional
effects of the discharged waste.
16.02.14 Public Nuisances Offending Morals and Decency
A. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public
nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be constructed to
exclude other nuisances coming from within the definition of Section 16.01.56:
1. Disorderly Houses. All disorderly houses or resorts, houses of ill fame, gambling houses and
buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual
intercourse or gambling unless said device is authorized by State Law.
2. Gambling Places and Devices. All gambling devices and slot machines unless specifically
authorized by State Law. Any gambling place defined in Sec. 945.01(4)(a) Wis. Stats. pursuant to the
restrictions and abatement process under Sec. 823.20 Wis. Stats.
3. Unlicensed Sale of Liquor and Beer. All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or
license as provided for the Ordinances of the City.
4. Illegal Drinking. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws of the State of Wisconsin or ordinances of the City.
5. Drug and Gang Houses. Any building, structure or dwelling unit or portion of any building that is
used to facilitate the delivery, distribution or manufacture of controlled substance as prohibited by
State Statute and as further defined in Sec. 823.113, Wis. Stats., or any building, structure or portion
thereof that is used as a meeting place of a criminal gang or that is used to facilitate the activities of a
criminal gang in accordance with this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be
proceeded against under this section. The provisions of Sec. 823.113, Wis. Stats., is hereby adopted
and by reference made a part of this code as is fully set forth herein. Any act required to be
performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited in
this Chapter.
16.02.15 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety
A. General Public Nuisances. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be
constructed to exclude other nuisances coming from within the definition of Section 16.01.56:
1. Flammable Liquids. Repeated or continuous violations of the Ordinances of the City or laws of the
State relating to the storage of flammable liquids.
2. Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the State of Wisconsin
and Ordinances of the City.
3. Noisy Animals or Fowl. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl which, by frequent or
habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises shall greatly annoy or disturb a
neighborhood or any considerable number of persons within the City.
4. Obstructions of Streets and Excavations. All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalks
or bike paths and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the Ordinances of the
City or which, although made in accordance with such Ordinances, are kept or maintained for an
unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished, or which do
not conform to the permit. No person shall undertake any activity, resulting in the placement of mud,
dirt, clay, sediment or other similar substance upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or bike path
within the City, which creates a condition hazardous to others using the street, gutter, alley, sidewalk
or bike path.
5. Open Excavations. All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements
accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
6. Wires over streets. All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than fifteen
(15) feet above the surface thereof.
7. Continuous Violation of City Ordinances. Any place or premises within the City where City
Ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly,
continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.
B. Dangerous Dogs.
1. Authorization. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the general police power, the authorities
granted to cities by the Wisconsin State Constitution and set forth under Sec. 66.0101 Wis. Stats.,
and the express authority under of Sec.174.12(3), Wis. Stats., as may be amended.
2. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Section is to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Onalaska.
3. Definitions. When used in this Section, words have their common meaning and in addition the
following words, terms and phrases, and their derivations have the following meaning:
a. Animal Control Officer. Any person employed, contracted with or appointed by the City who is
authorized to investigate and enforce violations relating to animal control or cruelty under the
provision of this Section.
b. At Large. A dog that is not on its owner’s property and not leashed.
c. Bite Injury. Any contact between an animal’s mouth and teeth and the skin of a bite victim which
causes visible trauma, such as a puncture wound, laceration, or other piercing of the skin.
d. Dangerous Dog. Any dog that has caused a bite injury and is not a vicious dog.
e. Director. The Director of Animal Control.
f. Domestic Animal. An animal of a tamed species that is commonly kept as pets and includes
livestock.
g. Enclosure. A fenced or walled area having a fence or wall height of at least six (6) feet suitable
to prevent the entry of young children and suitable to confine a dog.
h. Impoundment. Seizing and confining a dog by any police officer, animal control officer or any
other public officer under the provisions of this Section.
i. Muzzle. A device construct of strong, soft material of or metal, designed to fasten over the mouth
of a dog that prevents the dog from biting any person or other animal and that does not interfere
with its respiration.
j. Potentially Dangerous Dog. Any dog that while at large: (1) behaves in a manner that a
reasonable person would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious
physical injury or death to a person or domestic animal, or (2) causes injury to a domestic animal.
k. Provocation. Any action or activity, whether intentional or unintentional which would be
reasonably expected to cause a normal dog in similar circumstances to react in a manner similar
to that shown by evidence.
l. Owner. Any person, partnership or corporation having a right of property in an animal, or who
keeps or harbors a dog, or who has in their care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly
permits a dog to remain on any premises occupied by them.
m. Sanitary Condition. A condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of
disease transmission.
n. Serious Physical Injury. Disfigurement, protracted impairment of health, or impairment of the
function of any bodily organ.
o. Vicious Dog. A dog that without provocation or justification bites or attacks a person and causes
serious physical injury or death or is declared vicious under this Section.
4. Declaration of Status.
a. An animal control officer or police officer may find and declare a dog potentially dangerous,
dangerous or vicious after the officer has probably cause to believe that the dog falls within the
definition of “vicious dog”, “dangerous dog” or “potentially dangerous dog”. The finding must be
based on:
i. The written complaint of a person who is willing to testify that the dog has acted in a manner
in which causes it to fall within the definition of “vicious dog”, “dangerous dog” or “potentially
dangerous dog”;
ii. Dog bite reports filed with the animal control officer or City of Onalaska;
iii. Action of the dog witnessed by any animal control officer or law enforcement officer; or
iv. Other substantial evidence admissible in court.
b. The declaration shall be in writing and shall be served by the City:
i. On the owner if known using regular mail to the owner’s last known address or by certified
mail directed to the owner at the owner’s last known address, personally, or if the owner
cannot be located by publication of a Class 1 notice and posting a notice on the property of
the owner.
c. The declaration shall contain the following information:
i. The name and address of the owner of the dog if known and if not known that fact;
ii. A description of the dog;
iii. Whereabouts of the dog;
iv. Facts upon which the declaration is based;
v. Restrictions placed upon the dog and when the owner is not known the intended disposition
of the dog;
vi. Penalties for violation of the restrictions, including possibility of destruction of the dog and any
fine or imprisonment of owner; and
vii. Availability of a hearing to contest the declaration by submitting a written request to the
Common Council within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the declaration or if notice is given by
publication or posting within fifteen days of the earlier of the date the notice appears in the
newspaper or the property is posted.
d. A dog may be declared dangerous under this section if the dog has within a twelve (12) month
period attacked and killed a domestic animal on more than one occasion. For purposes of this
subsection only, a domestic animal does not include any feral animal or does not apply where the
attack was upon a domestic animal that was at large or upon a domestic animal that was
tormenting or attacking the dog.
e. Dogs shall not be declared dangerous, potentially dangerous or vicious if the threat, injury, or
damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other
tor upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing, provoking
or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused,
provoked or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
f. Notice. When notice is given by regular mail to the owner’s last known address, notice is
effective on the third day after the notice was placed in the mail, postage prepaid, to the owner’s
last known address. When notice is given by certified mail, notice is effective when received;
provided however, if certified mail delivery has been refused, notice is effective by publication or
posting and whenever notice is accomplished by publication or posting the notice is effective and
deemed received on the earlier of the day the property is posted or the newspaper is published.
5. Potentially Dangerous Dogs.
a. Prohibited. No person shall maintain a potentially dangerous dog in violation of Title 7 or
otherwise in violation of this Section.
b. No person owning, harboring or having the care or custody of a potentially dangerous dog shall
permit the dog to go at large or leave the owner’s property unless the dog is securely leashed and
muzzled.
c. Spaying/Neutering. All owners of potentially dangerous dogs must spay or neuter the dog and
provide proof of sterilization to the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days of the animal control officer
declaring the dog potentially dangerous.
d. In addition to any other penalty for a violation of this Section, a court may revoke the authority of
a person to keep a potentially dangerous dog within the city.
e. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog may apply to the Chief of Police and Director of Animal
Control to have the declaration waived after two (2) years upon meeting the following conditions:
i. The owner and offending dog has no subsequent violations of this Chapter; and
ii. The owner of the dog has complied with all the provisions of this ordinance for a period of two
(2) years; and
iii. The owner provides proof to the Chief of Police of successful completion of a behavior
modification program administered by a Certified Pet Dog Trainer (CPDT), Certified Dog
Behavior Consultant (CDBC), or Veterinary Behaviorist, certified through the American
College of Veterinary Behaviorists (ACVB) or equivalent training.
iv. If the Chief of Police and Director of Animal Control finds sufficient evidence that the dog
owner has complied with all conditions in this subsection, the application to rescind the
potentially dangerous dog declaration shall be approved.
6. Dangerous Dogs.
a. No person shall maintain a dangerous dog in violation of this Section.
b. Keeping of a Dangerous Dog. Once a dog has been declared dangerous, it shall be kept in a
secure enclosure subject to the following requirements:
i. Leash. No person having charge, custody, control or possession of a dangerous dog shall
allow the dog to exit its enclosure unless such dog is securely attached to a leash not more
than four (4) feet in length and walked by a person who is both over the age of eighteen (18)
and who has the physical ability to restrain the dog at all times. No owner shall keep or
permit a dangerous dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its
enclosure unless a person capable of controlling the dog is in physical control of the leash.
ii. Muzzle. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dangerous dog to allow the dog to
be outside of its proper enclosure unless it is necessary for the dog to receive veterinary care
or exercise. In such cases, the dog shall wear a properly fitted muzzle to prevent it from
biting humans or other animals. Such muzzle shall not interfere with the dog’s breathing or
vision.
iii. Confinement. Except when leashed and muzzled as provided in this Section, a dangerous
dog shall be securely confined in a residence or confined in a locked pen or other secure
enclosure that is suitable to prevent the entry of children and is designed to prevent the dog
from escaping. The enclosure shall include shelter and protection from the elements and
shall provide adequate exercise room, light, and ventilation. The enclosed structure shall be
kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall meet the following requirements:
1. The structure must have secure sides and a secure top, or all sides must be at least six
(6) feet high;
2. The structure must have a bottom permanently attached to the sides or the sides must be
embedded not less than one (1) foot into the ground; and
3. The structure must be of such material and closed in such a manner that the dog cannot
exit the enclosure on its own.
v. Indoor Confinement. No dangerous dog shall be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a
house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In
addition, no such dogs shall be kept in a house or structure when the windows or screen
doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure.
vi. Signs. All owners, keepers or harborers of dangerous dogs shall display in a prominent place
on their premise a sign easily readable by the public using the words “Beware of Dog.”
vii. Liability Insurance, Surety Bond. Subject to the City’s discretion, the owner of a dangerous
dog may be required to present to the City Clerk proof that the owner has procured liability
insurance or a surety bond in the amount of not less than One Hundred Thousand Dollars
($100,000.00) covering any damage or injury that may be caused by such dangerous dog.
The policy shall contain a provision requiring that the City be notified immediately by the
agent issuing it if the insurance policy is canceled, terminated or expires. The liability
insurance or surety bond shall be obtained prior to the issuing of a permit to keep a
dangerous dog. The dog owner shall sign a statement attesting that the owner shall maintain
and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance policy following the determination of the
status of dangerous dog unless the owner ceases to own or keep the dog prior to the
expiration date of the permit period.
viii. Identification Photographs. All owners, keepers or harborers of dangerous dogs must
within ten (10) days of determination by the City provide to the City Clerk’s office and Director
of Animal Control, each two color photographs of the registered dog clearly showing the color
and approximate size of the dog.
ix. Microchip. All owners, keeps or harborers of dangerous dogs must within ten (10) days of
determination of such status microchip the dog and provide the microchip information to the
City Clerk and Director of Animal Control.
x. Sale or Transfer of Ownership Prohibited. No person shall sell, barter or in any other way
dispose of a dangerous dog registered with the City to any person within the city unless the
recipient person resides permanently in the same household and on the same premises as
the owner of such dog, provided that the owner of a dangerous dog may sell or otherwise
dispose of a registered dog to persons who do not reside within the city. Owner must disclose
dog’s status as a dangerous dog to anyone to whom the owner transfers custody or care of
the dog.
xi. Notification of Escape. The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog shall notify the Onalaska
Police Department and Animal Control immediately if such dog escapes from its enclosure or
restraint and is at large. Such immediate notification shall also be required if the dog bites or
attacks a person or domestic animal.
xii. Failure to Comply. It shall be a separate offense to fail to comply with the restrictions in this
section. Any dog found to be in violation of this Section shall be subject to immediate seizure
and impoundment as set forth below. In addition, failure to comply with the requirements and
conditions set forth in this Chapter shall result in the revocation of the dog’s license providing
for the keeping of such dog.
xiii. A dangerous dog owner may apply to the Chief of Police and Director of Animal Control to
have the declaration waived after three (3) years upon meeting the following conditions:
1. The Owner and offending dog has no subsequent violations of this Chapter;
2. The Owner of the dog has complied with all of the provisions of this act for a period of
three (3) years; and successful completion of a behavior modification program
administered by a Certified Pet Dog Trainer (CPDT), Certified Dog Behavior Consultant
(CDBC), or Veterinary Behaviorist, certified through the American College of Veterinary
Behaviorists (ACVB) or equivalent training; and
3. If the Chief of Police and Director of Animal Control finds sufficient evidence that the dog
has complied with all conditions in this subsection, and has sufficient evidence that the
dog’s behavior has changed, the application shall be approved to rescind the dangerous
dog declaration.
7. Vicious Dogs. It shall be unlawful to keep, possess or harbor a vicious dog within the City limits.
a. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a police dog being used to assist one (1) or more
Law Enforcement officers acting an official capacity.
b. The Director of Animal Control, Chief of Police or their designee may seek a Court order to have
a dog euthanized that has been declared vicious.
c. The Owner of a dog that has been declared to be vicious may appeal that determination to the
Common Council within fifteen (15) days of the declaration. If an appeal is timely filed, the order
to destroy the animal is suspended pending the final determination of the Common Council
except when the Director declares that the public health and safety require the immediate
destruction of the animal as in the case of rabies.
d. The Owner of a vicious dog shall be liable for and shall pay all costs associated with
impoundment, removal or euthanasia of said animal. The Owner shall pay any other associates
costs incurred.
8. Immediate Impoundment.
a. A dog suspected of being dangerous or vicious may be immediately impounded when the
Director of Animal Control, Chief of Police or the Director’s designee determines such immediate
impoundment is necessary for the protection of public health or safety.
b. If the owner of the dog impounded is not reasonably ascertainable at the time of impoundment,
Animal Control in conjunction with the City shall immediately notify the owner by mail sent to the
owner’s last known address postage prepaid which upon the passage of three days be deemed
complete or by personal service within five (5) business days after the dog’s impoundment.
c. The notice of impoundment shall inform the owner of the dog that the owner may request, in
writing, a hearing to contest the impoundment. Upon receipt of the notice of impoundment either
through personal service or by mail (receipt is complete three days after mailing to the last known
address of owner postage prepaid), the owner has five (5) business days to request a hearing by
serving on the City Clerk a written request for the hearing.
d. Upon request by the Owner of the dog for a hearing, a hearing must be held within ten (10)
business days after receipt of the request. Notice of the date, time and location of the hearing
shall be provided by regular mail to the dog owner requesting the hearing. The impoundment
hearing shall determine if the dog poses a risk to public health and safety or if the dog could be
released. If the trier of fact determines the dog does not pose a risk to public health and safety,
the dog shall be immediately released back to the owner pending further proceedings either
administrative or judicial.
e. The Owner must pay all of the cost of the impoundment and upon request must post sufficient
funds to cover the anticipated costs for continued impoundment. In the alternative, the owner
may propose a suitable facility where the dog could be contained and maintained at the sole cost
of the Owner and upon approval of the Director the dog may be impounded at that facility under
the terms and conditions set by the director. Failure to post funds sufficient to pay for the costs of
impoundment constitutes a waiver of any rights the owner may have to a hearing under this
Section.
f. If the Owner is successful in appealing the decision to impound the dog, the Director must refund
to the Owner any costs paid for the impoundment.
9. Continuation of Dangerous Dog Declaration. Any dog that has been declared dangerous or
vicious by any agency or department of this City, another municipality, county, or state shall be
subject to the provisions of this Chapter. The person owning or having custody of any dog
designated as potentially dangerous or dangerous by any municipality, county, or state government
shall notify the City Clerk’s Office and Animal Control of the dog’s address and conditions of
maintenance within ten (10) days of moving the animal into the City of Onalaska. The restrictions and
conditions of maintenance of any dog declared dangerous by this City, another municipality, county,
or state shall remain in force while the dog remains in the City. No dog declared a potentially
dangerous, dangerous, or vicious dog by any other designation agency or department of another
municipality, county, or state based solely on size, breed, mix of breeds, or appearance shall be
subject to this Section.
10. Reckless Dog Owner.
a. Any person convicted of:
i. a violation of the City of Onalaska Code of Ordinances Title 7, Chapter 1 relating to the
licensing and regulation of Animals or Title 11 nuisances ordinances three (3) or more times
in any twenty-four (24) month period; or
ii. a violation of this Division two (2) or more times in any five (5) year period, shall be declared
a reckless dog owner.
b. The City Attorney’s office in consultation with the Police Department and Animal Control office
shall issue a notification to the declaration of Reckless Dog Owner to the person with the
following:
i. Name and address of the person subject to the declaration, and;
ii. The description, violation and conviction that led to the declaration, and;
iii. The name, description and license number of all dogs subject to the effects of such
declaration, and
iv. Instructions on appealing the declaration to the Common Council.
c. Once declared a reckless dog owner, the person shall now own, keep, possess or harbor a dog
for a period of five (5) full years from the date of declaration.
d. A person declared to be a reckless dog owner may apply to have the declaration waived after two
(2) years upon meeting the following conditions:
i. The person has son subsequent violations of this Chapter or Title 7, Chapter 1; and
ii. The person has complied with all provision of this Chapter for a period of two (2) years; and
iii. The person provides proof to the City of a successful completion of a program designed to
improve the person’s understanding of dog ownership responsibilities and based upon an
interview with Animal Control and City appropriate City Officials as determined by the City
Administrator establishes that understanding.
e. If the City finds sufficient evidence that the person has complied with all conditions in this
subsection, the City may rescind the reckless owner declaration subject to conditions that can
help to ensure no future violations.
11. Penalties. Any person violating this Division, shall upon conviction, forfeit a fine of not less than One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the La
Crosse County Jail for up to sixty (60) days or both. For each subsequent violation of this section
within twenty-four (24) months after committing a previous violation the forfeiture shall be not less
than Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
12. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision under this Section may appeal that decision to Circuit
Court in accordance with and pursuant to Wisconsin state laws and Circuit Court rules.
Deer and Wildlife Feeding Ban
16.02.21 Feeding of Deer Prohibited
A. No person may feed deer through the placement of any salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable material
outdoors on any public or private property. The following acts shall constitute deer feeding:
1. The placement of salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable material in an aggregate quantity of greater
than one-half (1/2) gallon at the height of less than six (6) feet off the ground.
2. The placement of salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable material in an aggregate quantity of greater
than one-half (1/2) gallon in a drop feeder, automatic feeder, or similar device regardless of the height
of the grain, fruit, or vegetable material.
3. Any other method of placing salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable material out of doors, or allowing
salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable materials to remain out of doors in a manner that would
encourage consumption by deer.
4. Any feeder placed fifty (50) feet or more from any deeded residence.
B. Exceptions. This Section shall not apply to the following situations:
1. Hunting. The placement of bait for the purpose of hunting deer subject to all other laws, ordinances,
rules, and regulations governing hunting and the discharge of hunting weapons.
2. Naturally Growing Materials. Naturally growing grain, fruit, or vegetable material, including gardens.
3. Bird Feeders. Unmodified commercially purchased bird feeders or their equivalent.
4. Authorized by the City of Onalaska. Deer feeding may be authorized on a temporary basis by the
Common Council for a specific purpose as determined by the Common Council.
16.02.22 Feeding of Other Wildlife Prohibited
A. Per Sec. NR 19.60, Wis. Adm. Code, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as
though fully set forth herein for all other animals except deer which are outlined in Section 16.02.21.
above.
16.02.23 Penalty
A. Any person violating any provision of this Division shall forfeit not less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00)
nor more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each offense, together with prosecution. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part of each day during which a violation occurs or
continues. Any person who defaults in the payment of forfeiture or the costs of prosecution may be
imprisoned in the county jail until the forfeiture and costs are paid, but such imprisonment shall not
exceed thirty (30) days. This paragraph does not preclude the City from taking any appropriate action to
abate, prevent or remedy a violation of any provision of this Section.
Chronic Nuisance Premises
16.02.31 Definitions
A. Definitions shall have the following meaning:
1. Chief. The Chief of Police or their designee.
2. Enforcement Action. Arrest, issuance of a citation or the issuance of a written or verbal warning.
3. Nuisance Activity. Any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct occurring on a premises:
a. An Act of Harassment, as defined in Sec.947.013 Wis. Stats.
b. Disorderly Conduct, as defined in Sec. 947.01 Wis. Stats.
c. Battery, Substantial Battery or Aggravated Battery, as defined in Sec. 940.19 Wis. Stats.
d. Lewd and Lascivious Behavior, as defined in Sec. 944.20 Wis. Stats.
e. Prostitution, as defined in Sec. 944.30 Wis. Stats.
f. Theft, as defined in Sec. 943.20 Wis. Stats.
g. Receiving Stolen Property, as defined in Sec. 943.34 Wis. Stats.
h. Arson, as defined in Sec. 943.02 Wis. Stats.
i. Possession, Manufacture, or Delivery of a Controlled Substance or related offenses, as defined in
Ch. 961 of Wis. Stats.
j. Gambling, as defined in Sec. 945.02 Wis. Stats.
k. Violations of regulations related to Animals under Chapter 1 of Title 7 of the City of Onalaska
Code of Ordinances.
l. Trespassing, as defined in Sec. 943.13 Wis. Stats. and Sec. 943.14 Wis. Stats.
m. Violations of City regulations related to Firearms, Explosives and Weapons under Chapter 2 of
Title 11 of the City of Onalaska Code of Ordinances.
n. Noise violations as defined in Chapter 2 of Title 11 of the City of Onalaska Code of Ordinances.
o. Any Conspiracy to Commit, as defined in Sec. 939.31, Wis. Stats., or attempt to commit, as
defined in Sec. 939.32, Wis. Stats., any of the activities, behaviors, or conduct enumerated in
Subdivision 3.a. through n. above.
p. The execution of arrest or search warrants at a particular location.
q. Alcohol violations regulated in Chapter 4 of the City of Onalaska Code of Ordinances and Sec.
125.07, Wis. Stats.
r. City of Onalaska Inspection/Planning/Zoning-related calls where the Police Department responds.
4. Owner. The owner of the premises and their agents.
5. Premises. An individual dwelling unit, an apartment building (all units included as one premises), or
an individual business premises and associated common areas.
B. Statutory References. All references to Wisconsin Statutes in this section are to statutes as may be
amended or replaced.
C. Notice of Chronic Nuisance. Whenever the Chief determines that three (3) or more nuisance activities
resulting in enforcement action have occurred at a premise during a twelve (12) month period, the Chief
may notify the premises owner in writing of the chronic nuisance. In calculating the requisite nuisance
activities, the Chief may count separate qualifying nuisance incidents resulting in enforcement action
occurring on the same day (as long as they are distinct in time) or different days, but shall never count
nuisance activities that were reported by the owner of the premises. The notice shall contain the street
address or legal description sufficient to identify the premises, a description of the nuisance activities that
have occurred at the premises, a statement indicating that the cost of future enforcement may be
assessed as a special charge against the premises, and a notice as to the appeal rights of the owner.
The notice shall be delivered by personal service. If personal service is unsuccessful or impractical, the
Chief or their designee shall post a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises where the
nuisance exists and send notice by first class mail to the last-known address of the owner or the agent of
the owner.
D. Abatement Plan. Any owner receiving notice subject to Section 16.02.31.C. above shall meet with the
City Attorney and Chief or their designee, within five (5) days of receipt of such notice. The parties shall
review the problems occurring at the property. Within ten (10) days of this meeting, the owner shall submit
to the Chief or their designee, an abatement plan to end the nuisance activity on the property. The plan
shall also specify a name, address, and telephone number of a person living within sixty (60) miles of the
property that can be contacted in the event of further police, fire or inspection contact.
E. Additional Nuisance Activity. Whenever the Chief determines that additional nuisance activity has
occurred at a premise for which notice has been issued pursuant to Section 16.02.31.C. above, that this
nuisance activity has occurred not less than fifteen (15) days after notice has been issued, and that
reasonable efforts have not been made to abate the nuisance activity, the Chief may calculate the cost of
police responses and enforcement for this and any subsequent nuisance activities and cause such
charges and administrative costs to be assessed and collected as a special charge.
F. Appeal. Appeal of the determination of the Chief under this Division may be submitted to the Common
Council. Ch. 68 Wis. Stats. shall not apply to such an appeal.
Abatement of Nuisances
16.02.41 Public Nuisances Prohibited
A. Enforcement. The Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department, the Director of Public Works, Zoning
Administrator, County Health Officer, Building Inspector or their enforcement designees shall enforce
those provisions of this Chapter that come within the jurisdiction of their offices, and they shall make
periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to insure that such provisions are not violated. No
action shall be taken under this Section to abate a nuisance unless the officer shall have inspected or
caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and has satisfied himself or
herself that a nuisance does in fact exist. Inspection authority and administration for public nuisances
shall follow the requirements set forth in Property Maintenance Code Section 16.01.16.
B. Summary Abatement. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a nuisance exists within the City and
that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, notice to
abate the nuisance may be issued and served by the officer pursuant to Subsection (e) below. The notice
shall order abatement of the nuisance within a period of not less than twenty-four (24) hours or greater
than seven calendar days and shall state that unless the nuisance is so abated, the City will cause the
same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or person causing,
maintaining or permitting the nuisance; and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner,
such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
C. Nonsummary Abatement. If an officer determines that a public nuisance exists but that the nature of
such nuisance is not such as to threaten imminent danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or
decency, notice to abate the nuisance may be issued and served by the officer pursuant Subsection
16.02.41.D. below. If the public nuisance activity involves felony drug type conduct, a notice to abate the
nuisance shall be mandatory. The notice shall order abatement of the nuisance within a period of not less
than fifteen (15) calendar days and shall state that unless the nuisance is so abated, the City will cause
the same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or person causing,
maintaining or permitting the nuisance; and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner,
such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
D. Abatement Plan. If an officer determines that a public nuisance exists but the nature of such nuisance is
not such as to threaten imminent danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the officer
may order the owner, occupant or person causing, maintaining, or permitting the nuisance to appear for a
hearing to discuss the abatement of the nuisance. If the public nuisance involves felony drug type
conduct, the officer shall order the owner, occupant or person causing, maintaining or permitting the
nuisance to appear for a hearing to discuss abatement of the nuisance. The hearing shall include the
officer and a representative of the City’s Police Department and the City Attorney. Notice of the hearing
shall be issued and served pursuant to Subsection 16.02.41.E. below. The parties may formulate an
abatement plan which indicates the measures to be taken by the owner, occupant or person causing,
maintaining or permitting the nuisance to abate the nuisance, such plan shall be in writing and signed by
the parties.
E. Notice to Abate. The officer may attempt personal service on the owner, agent of the owner, occupant or
other person causing, maintaining or permitting the nuisances at such person’s last known address. If this
attempt is unsuccessful the officer shall post or cause to post a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place
in or about the building where the nuisance exists and send notice by first class mail to the last-known
address of the owner or agent of the owner.
F. Remedy from Abatement Order. Any person affected by an order under Subsections 16.02.41.B. and
C. above shall, prior to the abatement date, apply to the circuit court for an order restraining the City from
entering on the premises and abating or removing the nuisance, or be forever barred.
G. Non-Abatement Prohibited.
1. Failure to Comply with Order to Abate. No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order to abate a
public nuisance pursuant to this section. Each day of non-compliance with a lawful order to abate
issued pursuant to this section is a separate violation.
2. Failure to Appear for Hearing. No person shall fail to comply with an order to appear for an
abatement hearing pursuant to Section 16.02.31.D. of this Chapter.
3. Failure to Observe Abatement Plan. No person shall fail to comply with the terms of an abatement
plan.
H. Abatement by Court Action. If an officer determines that a public nuisance exists, the officer may refer
the nuisance to the City Attorney for review. If the City Attorney determines that alternative enforcement
methods have failed to abate the nuisance or would be ineffective in doing so, the Common Council may
cause an action to abate such nuisance be commenced in the name of the City in the Circuit Court for La
Crosse County in accordance with the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes.
I. Other Methods Not Excluded. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement
of nuisances by the City or its officials in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
16.02.42 Cost of Abatement and Penalties
A. Cost of Abatement. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public
nuisance by the City shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting
or maintaining the nuisance, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
B. Penalties. Except as otherwise outlined elsewhere in this chapter, any person, firm or corporation who
fails to follow the provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction thereof forfeit as follows:
1. First Offense. Not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00).
2. Subsequent Offenses. For each subsequent violation of any provision of this Chapter or any
regulation, rule or order made hereunder within twenty-four (24) months after committing a previous
violation of this Chapter, the forfeiture shall be not less than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) nor more
than Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00).
Chapter 03 Vacant Building Code
Introductory Provisions
16.03.11 Vacant Buildings
A. This Chapter shall be known as, referred to and cited as the “Vacant Buildings Code”, and is hereinafter
referred to as the “Vacant Buildings Code” or “Chapter”.
16.03.12 Purpose
A. This Chapter is enacted to facilitate the identification of, inspection of, and property maintenance of
vacant buildings for purposes of preserving and promoting the public health, safety, prosperity and
general welfare, and to abate and prevent property maintenance issues, public and private nuisances and
potential fire hazards.
B. The Common Council of the City of Onalaska, finds that there are now, and may in the future, be vacant
buildings which are dilapidated, unsafe, unhygienic and inadequately maintained so as to create or
contribute to blight and so as to jeopardize the health, safety, prosperity and general welfare, and so as to
create a public and/or private nuisance.
C. Intent. The purpose of this Code is to establish the measures and requirements reasonably necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public from public nuisances, blight and negative market
impact of vacant or abandoned buildings and structures.
16.03.13 Public Records
A. Finding. In addition to the purposes in Section 16.02.12. above, the City finds that vacant buildings are
targets for vandalism, arson, squatting, and other illegal activities. The City still further finds that the public
disclosure of the identification of any or all vacant buildings would provide to persons with criminal
intentions a data source to locate vacant buildings in which to carry out illegal activity. While the City
acknowledges the requirements of the Wisconsin Public Records Law embodied in Sec. 9.31-19.39, Wis.
Stats., and the strong public policy underpinning those statutes that all persons are entitled to the greatest
possible information regarding the affairs of government, the City also recognizes that against that strong
public policy, records custodians must balance contrary public policy that would weigh against disclosure
of a particular document.
B. Policy. Prior to releasing any records that are received, created, or maintained pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter or are received, created, or maintained to accomplish the purpose of this Chapter, the
records custodian will consider the intent of the City articulated in this Section.
Interpretation
16.03.21 Rules of Interpretation and Definitions
A. Rules of Interpretation:
1. Tense. Words used in the present tense shall be interpreted to include the future tense.
2. Gender. Words used stating or implying gender shall be interpreted to include the masculine,
feminine and neuter.
3. Number. Words used implying the singular shall be interpreted to include the plural, where
appropriate, and vice versa.
4. May and Shall.
a. The word "may" is permissive.
b. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
5. "Used For". The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for",
"intended for", "maintained for", and "arranged for".
B. Definitions:
1. Accessory Building/Structure. A detached building or structure on the same lot, with and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or structure or use of the land;
i.e., a child's playhouse, garden house, greenhouse, garage, carport, shed, fence, or retaining wall.
2. Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. For
multi-unit structures, each non-residential unit is deemed a separate "building" subject to this
chapter; in multi-unit structures, individual residential units are to be considered a part of the larger
building that encompasses the other residential units.
3. Code of Ordinances. The Code of Ordinances for the City of Onalaska, Wisconsin, which includes
the Vacant Building Code.
4. Code Official. Those individuals as set forth in the City of Onalaska Property Maintenance Code
Section 16.01.16.A.
5. Department. The Planning and/or Inspection Departments of the City of Onalaska, Wisconsin.
6. Exterior Premises. The open space on the premises or the portion of the premises upon which
there is not a structure.
7. Garbage. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
8. Good Repair. Free from blighting and hazardous conditions, clean and sanitary, in a safe condition
and meeting applicable building codes.
9. Imminent Hazard. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any
time.
10. Mixed Occupancy. Occupancy of a structure in part for residential use and in part for some other
lawful use under the Unified Development Code, not accessory thereto.
11. Occupied. A building is occupied when it is open to the public, when a business or manufacturing
activity is performed therein, when people reside therein, or when any personal property is moved
therein. Any building or structure shall be deemed to be occupied if one or more persons actually
conducts a lawful business or resides in all or any part of the building as the licensed businessoccupant,
or as the legal or equitable owner/occupant(s) or tenant(s) on a permanent, non-transient
basis, or any combination of the same. For purposes of this Chapter, evidence offered to prove that
a building is so occupied may include, but shall not be limited to, the regular receipt of delivery of
regular mail through the U.S. Postal Service; proof of continual cable television or internet service,
electric, gas, heating, water and sewer.
12. Owner. Every person, partnership, limited partnership, corporation, service corporation, limited
liability company or partnership, or other legally-recognized entity or association, who alone or jointly
or severally with others:
a. Has the legal title to a Building or Structure;
b. Has legal right or obligation to the care, charge, or control of any Building or Structure, in any
capacity including, but not limited to, agent; executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, or
personal representative of the estate of the holder of legal title; or an agent, trustee, receiver or
other person appointed by court order with authority to have possession or control of the Building
or Structure;
c. Is a mortgagee, where either:
i. The mortgagee has obtained a judgment of foreclosure against the mortgagor with regard to
the premises containing the Vacant Building or Structure;
ii. The mortgage or note secured by the mortgage contains a provision authorizing the
mortgagee to act to secure or repair the property of the mortgagor, and the mortgagor no
longer maintains the vacant Building or Structure; or
d. Is a land contract vendor, where either:
i. The land contract vendor has obtained a judgment of foreclosure against the land contract
vendee with regard to the premises containing the vacant Building or Structure; or
ii. The land contract contains a provision authorizing the land contract vendor to act to secure or
repair the property of the vendee, and the vendee no longer maintains the Vacant Building or
Structure.
e. "Owner" does not include any real estate licensee providing brokerage services in accordance
with Ch. 452, Wis. Stats.
13. Partially Vacant. A multi-storied building or structure that has one (1) or more stories or suites
vacant.
14. Responsible Person. A natural person who is the owner, operator or manager of any structure or
premises.
15. Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. The term shall include
the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust and other similar materials.
16. Secured. A Building that has a permanent door or window in each appropriate building opening that
is secured to prevent unauthorized entry and has all of its door and window components, including
frames, jambs, rails, stiles, muntins, mullions, panels, sashes, lights and panels intact and unbroken.
17. Structure. Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attached to
something having location on the ground.
18. Unified Development Code (UDC). The Unified Development Code for the City of Onalaska.
19. Vacant. A building or structure shall be deemed to be vacant if no person or persons, currently
conducts a lawfully licensed business, or lawfully resides or lives in any part of the building as the
legal or equitable owner(s), tenant- occupant(s), owner-occupants or tenant(s) on a permanent, nontransient
basis. Vacant status is determined from a totality of circumstances. For purposes of this
chapter only, rebuttable evidence of vacancy includes, but is not be limited to, low or no utility usage,
lack of customary furnishing consistent with occupancy, accumulation of newspapers or fliers, and
fixtures or window coverings which are not secured.
20. Waste. Garbage, ashes, rubbish and trash, but not of an earthly or construction nature.
21. Weeds. Those weeds as set forth in Sec. 23.235, Wis. Stats.
C. Terms Defined Elsewhere. Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined in other City
Ordinances, Codes or ASHRAE and NFPA 70, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them
therein.
D. Terms Not Defined. Where terms are not defined herein, or through the methods of interpretation
authorized by this Section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings, such as the context
indicates.
16.03.22 Applicability
A. General. The provisions of this Vacant Building Code shall apply to all residential single and two-family
dwellings vacant for one-hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and all manufacturing, commercial,
institutional, multi-family residential and mixed occupancy buildings vacant for three hundred sixty five (365)
consecutive days. Upon application to the Planning Department, an exemption from the provisions of this
code may be granted for a period of up to 365 days for residential and two (2) years for all other property
types. In the event an exemption is granted the premises must be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition with grass/weeds cut and snow removed and the building maintained in good condition during
the exemption period consistent with Code of Ordinances. The exemption may be revoked for a failure of
the applicant to maintain the Building or the premises associated with the Building free from violation of
law. Any one of the following circumstances may be a basis for an exemption from the provisions of this
Chapter:
1. A Building under active construction, rehabilitation, renovation or repair for which a Building Permit
has been obtained.
2. A Building with a raze permit or with a raze order pending from the City of Onalaska.
3. A Building whose owner is actively seeking in good faith to rent or sell the building, which good faith is
supported by evidence to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Department of such activity.
B. Conflict. In any case where a provision of this Chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of the
UDC or any other provisions of the Code of Ordinances, the provision which established the higher
standard for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail.
C. Application of Other Ordinances. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to authorize the use of a
structure or premises contrary to any other provision of the Code of Ordinances or the UDC. Repairs,
additions or alterations to a structure shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of
State law, Title 15 of the Code of Ordinances, and NFPA 70. Nothing in this Vacant Building Code shall
be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the UDC.
D. Existing Remedies. The provisions in this Chapter shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the City, or its officers or agencies, under State laws or other City Ordinances or UDC
relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary, or the
abatement of public nuisances.
E. Historic Buildings. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to structures designated by the Federal
Government, State or City as historic buildings. Any work to said structures shall also comply with the
UDC and Sec. 101.121, Wis. Stats.
F. Referenced Statutes, Ordinances, Codes and Standards. The Statutes, Ordinances, Codes and
standards referenced in this Chapter shall be incorporated herein by reference and be a part of the
requirements of this Chapter to the prescribed extent of each such reference, and include amendments,
renumbering and successor acts.
G. Requirements Not Covered By This Chapter. The requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or
proper operation of an existing structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general
welfare, not specifically covered by this Chapter, shall be determined by the Code Official, subject to a
right of appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
16.03.23 Severability
A. If any provision of this Chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions
of this Code, which shall remain in full force and effect.
B. If the application of any provision of this Chapter is for any reason held to be an invalid application to a
particular premises or structure by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provision shall continue to
apply and remain in full force and effect to any premises or structure not specifically included in said
judgment.
Administration
16.03.31 Code Official
A. Code Official. The Code Official shall have the authority to exercise the powers and duties of the position
specified in this Chapter. The Code Official shall administer and enforce this Chapter.
B. Inspections. The Code Official has the power to inspect Premises and structures to determine
compliance with this Code. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing, signed or initialed and dated.
The Code Official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon
unusual technical issues that arise in the course of their duties, in accordance with Department policy.
C. Right of Entry. The Code Official is authorized to enter structures or Premises, at reasonable times, with
the express or implied consent of the owner, operator or occupant, to conduct administrative interior and
exterior inspections for Code administration and enforcement and Licensing/Permitting purposes
specified in other ordinances. If entry is refused or not obtained, the Code Official is authorized to pursue
recourse to obtain entry as provided by law.
D. Reinspections. Every owner, operator and occupant of a premises shall cooperate with and facilitate
reinspections of Premises at reasonable times pursuant to reasonable notice by the Code Official to
determine Code compliance with an Order to Repair. Failure by said owner, operator or occupant to
cooperate with and facilitate such reinspections by the Code Official shall be a violation of this Chapter.
E. Obstruction. No owner or operator of a [remises may deny the Code Official the right to enter and
inspect any portion thereof under the control of a lawful occupant where such occupant has consented to
said entry and inspection.
F. Denial of Entrance. No occupant of a premises shall obstruct the owner thereof from complying with any
order(s) of the Code Official made under authority of this Chapter. Obstruction shall include the denial of
entrance into a premises at reasonable times pursuant to reasonable notice.
G. Identification. The Code Official shall carry Department issued identification when entering and
inspecting premises in the performance of their duties under this Chapter and display such identification,
when asked.
H. Notices and Orders. The Code Official shall, as necessary, issue notices and orders to responsible
persons and tenants, where relevant, to obtain compliance with this Chapter.
I. Department Records. The Inspecting Department is responsible for keeping official records of all
business and activities of the Department specified in the provisions of this Chapter in accordance with
State and City record keeping requirements.
Regulation
16.03.41 Vacant or Abandoned Building or Structure Requirements
A. Vacant Building Permit. The owner of a vacant building or structure subject to this Code shall obtain a
Vacant Building Permit for the period during which it is vacant. When a building or structure becomes
vacant, as defined by this Chapter for the period of time greater than allowed under Section 16.02.22, the
owner of the building or structure shall apply for and obtain an annual Vacant Building Permit.
Upon the expiration of a Vacant Building Permit, if the building or structure is still vacant, the owner shall
arrange for an inspection of the building and premises with the Code Official pursuant to Section
14.03.42., and renew the permit within fifteen (15) days of expiration in the same manner as the expired
permit. All renewed permits shall be subject to all conditions and obligations imposed by this Chapter.
B. Code Compliance. The owner of a vacant building or structure shall comply with all building, fire,
property maintenance, UDC, and other applicable Codes or Ordinances, and shall apply for all necessary
building, fire prevention and zoning permits upon application for a Vacant Building Permit.
C. Waste Removal. The owner of a vacant building or structure shall immediately remove all waste from the
interior of the structure. The owner of a vacant building or structure shall also immediately remove any
waste, debris or excessive vegetation from the exterior premises surrounding the vacant building or
structure in accordance with the vacant building maintenance standards of this Code and the Code of
Ordinances.
D. Owner’s Responsibility. The owner of a vacant building or structure shall immediately lock, barricade or
secure all doors, windows and other openings in the building or structure to prohibit entry by unauthorized
persons in accordance with the Vacant Building Maintenance Standards of this Code.
If the owner does not reside within the State, the owner shall provide to the Code Official, the name,
address and telephone number of an agent who is available for service of process within the State of
Wisconsin. The owner shall provide to the Code Official, the name, address and telephone number of a
manager who is a natural person who is available for contact by the Code Official at all times for
emergency repairs and maintenance, and who will respond to the vacant building or structure when
required by the Code Official. The agent and manager may be the same person, and/or either may be a
Responsible Person. The owner shall notify the Code Official within thirty (30) business days of any
changes to the name, address or telephone number of the agent or manager.
E. Owner’s Obligations Continuous Through Term of Vacancy. The obligations of owners of a vacant
building or structure are continuing obligations which are effective throughout the time of vacancy, as that
term is defined in this Code.
16.03.42 Vacant Building Permit; Inspection; Maintenance Standards
A. Permit Application. Application by the owner of a vacant building or structure for a Vacant Building
Permit shall be made on a form provided by the Planning Department. Applicants shall disclose all
measures to be taken to ensure that the building will be kept weathertight, secure from trespassers and
safe for entry by police officers and firefighters in times of exigent circumstances or emergency. The
application shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Contact information for each owner. If the owner is other than a natural person or persons, the
following shall apply, as appropriate:
a. If the owner is a corporation, limited liability company, limited or liability partnership, the
registration statement shall provide the names and residence addresses of all responsible
persons and the name and business address of the registered agent for service of process
appointed pursuant to Wisconsin State Statutes.
b. If an estate, the name and business address of the personal representative of the estate.
c. If a trust, the names and addresses of the trustee or trustees.
d. If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partner or partners.
e. If another form of unincorporated association, the name and residence address of a responsible
person.
f. If an individual person, the name and residence address of that individual person.
2. Any rehabilitation or demolition plans.
3. An acknowledgment by the owner that grass and weeds shall not exceed a height of eight (8) inches,
and that snow and ice shall be removed from the public right-of-way within twenty-four (24) hours of a
snowfall.
B. Inspection of Premises.
1. Purpose. The Code Official, or their designee, may inspect vacant buildings to determine the
structural integrity of the building, the repairs necessary to maintain structural integrity, to determine
what repair actions must be undertaken to maintain the premises safe for entry of police officers and
firefighters in times of exigent circumstances or emergency, that the building and its contents do not
present an imminent hazard to the public during the time that the building remains vacant, and that
the building and structure are in compliance with the Vacant Building Maintenance Standards.
2. Inspector. The Code Official, or their designee, may conduct inspections made pursuant to the
provisions of this Vacant Building Code in conjunction with other officials of the City, police officers,
firefighters, or inspectors from other governmental bodies.
3. Types of Inspections:
a. Code Official Directed.
i. Implied Consent. Any owner of a building, which is either the subject of a Vacant Building
Permit or an application filed by a responsible person, for a Vacant Building Permit, is
deemed to have given consent to inspections of the building.
ii. Reinspections. At any time subsequent to the issuance of an Order to Repair, the Code
Official may conduct reinspections to determine compliance with the Order to Repair. Such
reinspections will be conducted only after a reasonable time has been afforded to a
responsible party to comply with portions of the Order. Reinspections are subject to
reinspection fees under Section 16.02.51.
iii. Emergency Inspections/Emergency Repairs. If, at any time, the Code Official has reason
to believe than an emergency situation exists with respect to the building, which tends to
create an imminent hazard to health, welfare or safety of the general public, the Code Official
may enter the building to inspect the premises, without notifying the responsible party or
obtaining a warrant. If the Code Official finds an emergency situation exists in fact, which
presents an imminent hazard to the health, welfare or safety of the general public, the
maintenance of which, until such time as the responsible party could conduct the repairs,
would be unreasonable, the Code Official may cause any reasonable action, including the
employment of necessary labor and materials, to perform emergency repairs. Costs incurred
in the performance of emergency repairs shall be paid by the City and the Code Official shall
recover the costs through special assessments levied against the benefited property. A One
Hundred Dollar ($100.00) administrative fee for processing and administering the special
assessment shall be added to the special assessment against the benefited property.
iv. Inspections Made Pursuant To A Special Inspection Warrant. If any responsible party
takes any action contrary to the Implied Consent given by the owner in Section
16.02.42.B.3.a.i., above, the owner hereby consents to the issuance of a Special Inspection
Warrant by a judge of a court of competent jurisdiction, pursuant to Sec. 66.0119, Wis. Stats.,
or any successor thereof. Any interior inspection made pursuant to a Special Inspection
Warrant shall be deemed a reinspection for the purpose of imposition of fees pursuant to
Section 16.02.51.
b. Responsible Party Requests for Inspection. Requests from responsible parties for inspections
of buildings which are both subject to a Vacant Building Permit and are under the control of the
requesting responsible party.
C. Issuance of Orders to Repair. The Code Official, upon inspection, shall issue orders to repair for work
needed to:
1. Adequately protect the building from intrusion by trespassers and from deterioration by the weather in
accordance with the Vacant Building Maintenance Standards set forth in this Chapter; and,
2. Ensure that allowing the building to remain will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare, will not unreasonably interfere with the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other
premises within the neighborhood, and will not pose an extraordinary hazard to police officers or
firefighters entering the premises in times of emergency. When issuing such orders, the Code Official
shall specify the time for completion of the work. All work done pursuant to this Section shall be done
in compliance with the applicable Building, Fire, Property Maintenance, UDC, and other Ordinances.
D. Issuance of Vacant Building Permit. The Code Official shall issue a Vacant Building Permit upon being
satisfied that the building has been inspected and is in compliance with the Vacant Building Maintenance
Standards set forth in this Vacant Building Code, and is adequately protected from intrusion by
trespassers and from deterioration by the weather. This Permit shall be effective for a period of three
hundred sixty five (365) days.
E. Vacant Building Maintenance Standards. A vacant building or structure shall be deemed adequately
protected from intrusion by trespassers and from deterioration by the weather if it satisfies the following
Vacant Building Maintenance Standards:
1. Building Openings. Doors, windows, areaways, and other openings shall be weathertight and
secured against entry by birds, vermin and trespassers. Missing or broken glass in doors, windows
and other such openings shall be repaired/replaced with glass. No building opening shall be boarded.
All first floor or ground level windows, doors and openings shall be free of any posters, paper or fabric
coverings.
2. Roofs. The roof and flashings shall be sound and tight, not admit moisture, or have defects which
might admit moisture, rain or roof draining; and, allow for drainage to prevent dampness or
deterioration in the interior walls or interior of the building.
3. Drainage. The building storm drainage system shall be functional and installed in an approved
manner, and allow discharge in an approved manner.
4. Building Structure. The building shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, and free from
debris, rubbish and garbage. The building shall be maintained in a sanitary manner and in a manner
that does not pose a threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
5. Structural Members. The structural members shall be free of deterioration and capable of safely
bearing imposed dead and live loads.
6. Foundation Walls. The foundation walls shall be maintained structurally sound and in a sanitary
condition so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, shall be capable of
supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be free from open
cracks and breaks, free from leaks, and be animal and rat-proof.
7. Exterior Walls. The exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials.
Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay or
rust by periodic applications of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
8. Decorative Features. The cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar
decorative features shall be safe, anchored and in good repair. Exposed metal, wood or other
surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic applications of
weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
9. Overhanging Extensions. All balconies, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire
escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar features shall be in good repair, anchored, safe and
sound. Exposed metal and wood surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay or
rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
10. Chimneys and Towers. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances shall be
structurally safe and in good repair. Exposed metal and wood surfaces shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as
paint or similar surface treatment.
11. Walkways. Public walkways shall be in good repair, shall be safe for pedestrian travel, and shall be
free of snow and ice. Snow and ice removal shall be completed within twenty-four (24) hours of a
snowfall.
12. Accessory Building/Structures. Accessory buildings/structures such as garages, sheds and fences
shall be free from safety, health and fire hazards; and, shall comply with these Vacant Building
Maintenance Standards.
13. Exterior Premises. The premises upon which the structure or building is located shall be clean, safe,
sanitary, free from waste, rubbish, garbage, excessive vegetation, exterior storage, and shall not
pose a threat to the public health, welfare or safety.
16.03.43 Board of Zoning Appeals
A. Appeal and Fee. Any person receiving a notice of violation and order which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this Code and aggrieved thereby, may appeal
the order and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of Zoning Appeals,
provided that such person shall file in the Planning/Inspection Department a written notice of
appeal and request for hearing, setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor, within
twenty (20) days after the date the notice of violation and order was served. Upon receipt of such
appeal, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the
petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be
heard and to show why such notice of violation and order should be modified or withdrawn. No
appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be deemed perfected or shall be heard until the
appellant shall pay an appeal fee as set forth in the City’s Fee Schedule.
Enforcement
16.03.51 Reinspection Fees
A. To compensate the City for inspection and administrative costs related to the enforcement of this
Chapter, an escalating fee established by the Common Council through resolution, may be charged
for any reinspection following the initial inspection which resulted in an order for corrective action,
and the first reinspection to determine compliance with an order for corrective action issued
hereunder. There shall be no reinspection fee for a final inspection indicating compliance, or for a
reinspection occurring during the period of an approved time extension granted for good cause and
involving a good faith effort on the part of the property owner to comply with the order.
B. Reinspection fees which are not paid by or on behalf of the property owner within thirty (30) days of
mailing an invoice to the property owner of record on the City tax roll shall be charged and collected
as a special assessment against the real estate upon which the reinspections were made, and shall
be a lien upon the real estate until paid in full, with interest accruing on the unpaid balance at the
rate of seven percent (7%) per annum. There shall be an administrative fee as set forth on the City’s
fee schedule added to the charge and special assessment to cover the administrative costs of
charging and specially assessing the property.
16.03.52 Penalties
A. Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a forfeiture of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00); and, in addition, shall
pay the costs and expenses of prosecution. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. Failure to promptly pay said forfeiture shall subject the violator to be sentenced to
the County Jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days.
B. Abatement of Violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
City Attorney from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct business, or utilization
of the structure or premises.
City of Onalaska
Parking Violation Fee Schedule
City
Ordinance Parking Violation Description
Scheduled
Fine
Statute
(if applicable)
10-1-20 ROP-Posted Limitations (24 hour/weight restrictions etc.) $10.00
10-1-21 ROP-During Street Maintenance $10.00
10-1-22 Stopping or Parking in Certain Specified Places $10.00
10-1-23 Parking Reserved for Vehicles Disabled $250.00 346.505(2)(a-c)
10-1-24 Parking Vehicle with Motor Running-Keys in Vehicle $187.00
10-1-27 Parking Restrictions by Location $10.00
10-1-28 Parking in Tow-Away Zones $10.00
10-1-29 Alternate Side Parking $15.00
10-1-30 Parking Vehicles over 12000lbs or 18 feet Restricted $20.00
10-1-31 Parking on School District Grounds (in district lots) $20.00
10-1-35 Inoperable or wrecked vehicles parked $10.00
10-1-36 Year Round Alternate Side Parking $15.00
10-1-37 Parking in School Zone (Neighborhoods around schools) $10.00
10-1-38 Parking in Loading Zone $10.00
3/18/2019
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
CLERK/FINANCE DEPARTMENT FEES
Liquor/Beer
Class A Beer $75.00
Class A Liquor $425.00
Class B Beer $100.00
Class B Liquor $450.00/$10,000.00
Picnic Class B $10.00
Class C Wine $100.00
Outdoor Venue $100.00/$15.00
Publication $10.00
Cigarette $100.00
Operator $25.00/$15.00
Provisionals $3.00/$5.00
Change of Agent $10.00
Transfer of Liquor License $10.00
Hotel/Motel $30.00/ 2 yr
$25.00/1 yr
Mobile Home Parks
1 to 50 $90.00
51 to 75 $180.00
over 100 $270.00
Taxi Cabs $125.00
Weights and Measures $50.00 plus $10.00/device
$7.00 timer device
Pawn Broker $210.00
Second Hand Article Dealer $27.50
Second Hand Jewelry Dealer $30.00
Page 1 of 13
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
Second Hand Article Dealer/
Mall or Flea Market
$165.00
Junk Dealer $125.00
Itinerant Junk Dealer $20.00
Solititors $40.00/$20.00
Firework
Display $0.00
Sales $50.00
Carnival $50.00
Recreational Burn $40.00/ 2 year
Special Events
0-299 people $0.00
300-499 people $250.00
500-999 people $350.00
1,000 or more people $500.00
Events Two (2) or more days additional $100.00/day
Marches and Public Assemblies
0-299 people $0.00
300-499 people $250.00
500-999 people $350.00
1,000 or more people $500.00
Bycicle Registration /Duplicate Registration no charge
Page 2 of 13
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
Cemetery Fees
Plot $860.00
Infant $290.00
Opening Fees Adult
Full Burial M-F (7am-3pm) $725.00
Ashes M-F (7am-3pm) $350.00
Full Burial Outside Business Hours/Saturday/Sunday/Holiday $1,020.00
Ashes Burial Outside Business Hours/Saturday/Sunday/Holiday $485.00
Transfer Fee $65.00
Opening Fees Infant
Full Burial M-F (7am-3pm) $295.00
Ashes M-F (7am-3pm) n/a
Full Burial Outside Business Hours/Saturday/Sunday/Holiday $430.00
Ashes Burial Outside Business Hours/Saturday/Sunday/Holiday n/a
Burial of Ashes in Monument $60.00
Marker and Monument Fee $85/lot
Replacement Animal Tags/
Various Licenses $5.00
Dogs/Cat (spayed or neutered) $14.00
Dogs/Cat (intact) $25.00
Dog/Cat Late Fee (per animal) $25.00
Bees $50.00 /original
$20 / renewal
NSF $30.00
Administration Fee $75.00
Public Records $.03 per page over 100 pages/$5.00 per USB
Title Searches $30.00 ($25.00 Clerk &
$5.00 Water Department)
Special Common
Council Meeting $250.00
Tax Exempt $20.00/parcel
Page 3 of 13
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
PARKS AND RECREATION
FEES
Building
Rowe Park
Shelter #1 (Capacity 100)
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $25.00
Group 3 $55.00
Group 4 $80.00
Shelter #2 (Capacity 90)
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $25.00
Group 3 $55.00
Group 4 $80.00
Community Park
Park Shelter (Capacity 75)
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $25.00
Group 3 $55.00
Group 4 $80.00
Lions Shelter (Capacity 75)
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $25.00
Group 3 $50.00
Group 4 $75.00
Glen Fox Park
Park Shelter (Capacity 75)
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $25.00
Group 3 $55.00
Group 4 $80.00
Van Riper Park
Shelter #1 (Capacity 75)
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $25.00
Group 3 $75.00
Group 4 $100.00
Shelter #2 (Capacity 75)
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $25.00
Group 3 $50.00
Group 4 $75.00
Page 4 of 13
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
Community Center
1/2 Day (4 hours) -Cap. 100
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $25.00
Group 3 $75.00
Group 4 $100.00
Full Day (Capacity 100)
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $50.00
Group 3 $125.00
Group 4 $175.00
Omni Center
Shelter 1/2 Day (Four hours)
(Capacity 200)
Group 1 $25.00
Group 2 $75.00
Group 3 $125.00
Group 4
Shelter Full Day (Capacity 200)
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $50.00
Group 3 $100.00
Group 4 $175.00
Meeting Room (Capacity 75)
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 Call 781-9566 x603 to book
Group 3 Call 781-9566 x603 to book
Group 4 Call 781-9566 x603 to book
Banquet Hall (Capacity 250)
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 Call 781-9566 x603 to book
Group 3 Call 781-9566 x603 to book
Group 4 Call 781-9566 x603 to book
Sports Fields (No Lights)
Community Park
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $20.00
Group 3 $50.00
Group 4 $75.00
Van Riper Park
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $20.00
Group 3 $50.00
Group 4 $75.00
Page 5 of 13
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
Sports Field (Lights)
Community Park
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $25.00
Group 3 $75.00
Group 4 $150.00
Van Riper Park
Group 1 N/C
Group 2 $25.00
Group 3 $75.00
Group 4 $150.00
Page 6 of 13
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
ZONING/PLANNING PERMIT FEES
Preliminary Plat $200 + $25/lot
Final Plat $150 + $10/lot
Certified Survey Map $75 + $10/lot
Rezoning $300.00
PCID/PUD $700.00
Creation of Medical Campus District (MCD) $400.00
Minor Amendment to PUD/PCID/MCD $150.00
Major Amendment to PUD/PCID/MCD $400.00
Downtown Planned Unit Development (D-PUD) $700.00
Conditional Use Permit $250.00
Conditonal Use-Class 1 Collocation $3,000.00
Conditional Use-Class 2 Collocation $250.00
Conditional Use-Radio Broadcast/Antenna $250.00
Variance $300.00
Annexation Petitions $300.00
Vacant Building Registration no charge / registration only
Special Exception for Signs $100.00
Board of Zoning
Administrative Appeals $100.00
Tax Increment Financing (TIF) Application $1,000.00
Street Vacations/Right of Way Discontinuance $300.00
Republication Fee* $100.00
* for CUP, Rezoning/PUD, Variance, Street Vacation/ROW Discontinuance
Zoning Verifiction Letters $24/residential $100/commercial
Airport Overlay Zoning District - Land Use Checklist $45.00
Sign
if under 35 square feet $20.00
if over 35 squre feet $.60/per square foot
Site Plan Permit Fees
Accessory Structure w/ disturbed areas of 1,200 s.f. or less & principle structures of 250 s.f. or less $75.00
Parking Lot construction/reconstruction and/pr other site improvements w/out principl structure/other projects $150.00
Building/Structural additions-distubred are of 1,201 s.f or more for accessory and 251 s.f. or more for principle structure additions $250.00
New Construction (including Class 1 Telecommunication Tower Construction) $350.00
Impact Fees
Green Fee $638.47/acre
Park Fee/Unit $922.21/unit
Park Fee/Unit w/Land $448.52/unit
Topography Map $10/acre
Stormwater Permit Application Fees
Residential
<1 acre of disturbance $75.00
>1 acre of disturbance $150.00
Commercial
<1 acre of disturbance $100.00
>1 acre of disturbance $200.00
Page 7 of 13
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
Subdivision/Condo Plat
<10 acres $200.00
>10 acres $400.00
*Permit Fees will double if work is commenced before permit is issued*
Erosion Control Permit Application Fees
<1 acre of disturbance $75.00
>1 acre of disturbance $150.00
Commercial
<1 acre of disturbance $100.00
>1 acre of disturbance $200.00
Subdivision/Condo Plat
<10 acres $200.00
>10 acres $400.00
*Permit Fees will double if work is commenced before permit is issued*
Fill/Excavation Permit Application Fees
<1 acre of disturbance $75.00
>1 acre of disturbance $150.00
Commercial
<1 acre of disturbance $100.00
>1 acre of disturbance $200.00
Subdivision/Condo Plat
<10 acres $200.00
>10 acres $400.00
*Permit Fees will double if work is commenced before permit is issued*
Page 8 of 13
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
Building Inspection:
Residential Permit Fees
State Application Processing - 1 or 2 family resicence (new construction) $250.00
Building, adding, altering and
replacing accessory sturcures
(includes porches, decks
and egress windows)
$0.25/square feet of all area
($50.00 minimum fee)
Swimming Pools
(over 15 feet in diameter)
$100.00
Razing/Demolition
(over 200 square feet)
$50.00 (accessory structures) $100.00 (residences)
Residential Moving $100.00
Residential Certificate of
Completion
$25.00
Residential Zoning Permit
(Plan Review)
$50.00
Residential Roofing
(over 200 square feet)
$50.00
Reinspection Fee $50.00
*Permit Fees will double if work is commenced before permit is issued*
Commercial Permit Fees
Commercial Permission to Start (Limited to Footing, Foundation and Excavation) $100.00
Commercial (Non warehouse) and Multi Family Structures $0.40/square feet for first 15,000 square feet, add $0.20 additional square
feet ($100 minimum and $40,000 max)
Remodeling and Build-outs $0.40/square feet for first
15,000 square feet, add
$0.15 additional square feet
($100 minimum and $40,000 max)
Commercial City Construction
State Plan Review Area (Square Feet)
Building Plans HVAC Plans Fire Alarm System Fire Suppression
Less than 2,500
$250.00 $150.00 $30.00 $30.00
2,500-5,000
$300.00 $200.00 $60.00 $60.00
5,001 - 10,000 $500.00 $300.00 $100.00
$100.00
10,001 - 20,000 $700.00 $400.00 $150.00
$150.00
20,001 - 30,000 $1,100.00 $500.00 $200.00
$200.00
30,001 - 40,000 $1,400.00 $800.00 $350.00
$350.00
40,001 - 50,000 $1,900.00 $1,100.00 $500.00
$500.00
50,001 - 75,000 $2,600.00 $1,400.00 $700.00
$700.00
75,001 - 100,000 $3,300.00 $2,000.00 $1,000.00
$1,000.00
(new or addition less than 50,000 ft3
or alterations less than 100,000 ft3)
Page 9 of 13
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
Commercial Warehouse
Structure
$0.25/sq. ft. for first 15,000 sq. ft. and
$0.15 per additional sq. ft.($40,000 Max. $100 Min.)
Commercial Wrecking $100.00
Commercial Moving $100.00
Commercial Certificate of
Completion
$50.00
Multi-Family Certificate of
Completion
$50.00 + $5.00/unit
Commercial Roofing over
1,000 square feet
$100.00
Commercial Miscellaneous $100.00
(misc. interior and exterior modifications)
Class 1 Collocation $600.00
Class 2 Collocation /Radio Broadcasting $250.00
Re-Inspection Fee $50.00
Electrical/Low Voltage Permit Fees:
Commercial Permit Fees: New Construction, Remodels and Additions Fees: (minimum fee for all commercial - added to
additional permits) $50.00
Commercial (Non-warehouse) and Multi Family Structures $0.09 per square foot
Warehouse Structures $0.06 per square foot
200 AMP Meter $45.00
320 & 400 AMP Meter $60.00
600 AMP Meter $80.00
800 AMP Meter $100.00
1000 + AMP Meter $125.00
Additional Meters $4.00 per additional meter
Miscellaenous Work not addressed above (includes 1 inspection) $50.00
Residential Permit Fees: (minimum fee for all residential - added to additional permits) $50.00
Service Upgrades $55.00
Residential Construction, Remodels and Addition Fees $0.05 per square foot
Miscellaenous Work not addressed above (includes 1 inspection) $50.00
Re-Inspection or Additional Inspection Fee $50.00
*Permit Fees will double if work is commenced before permit is issued*
HVAC Permit Fees: Based on Project Value (including time and materials)
$0 -$2,000 (total cost) $45.00
$2,001 - $3,000 $50.00
$3,001 - $4,000 $60.00
$4,001 - $5,000 $70.00
$5,001 - $6,000 $80.00
$6,001 - $7,000 $90.00
$7,001- $8,000 $100.00
$8,001 - $9,000 $110.00
$9,001 - $10,000 $120.00
>$10,000 $120 add $2.50/additional $1,000 or part thereof
Re-Inspection Fee $50.00
*Permit Fees will double if work is commenced before permit is issued*
Page 10 of 13
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
Plumbing Permit Fees Based on Project Value (including time and materials):
$0 -$2,000 (total cost) $45.00
$2,001 - $3,000 $60.00
$3,001 - $4,000 $75.00
$4,001 - $5,000 $90.00
$5,001 - $6,000 $105.00
$6,001 - $7,000 $120.00
$7,001- $8,000 $135.00
$8,001 - $9,000 $150.00
$9,001 - $10,000 $165.00
$10,001 - $50,000 $175 for first $10,000 & add $4 for each additional $1,000 or part thereof
>$50,000 $350 for each $50,000 plus $3.50 for each additional $1,000 or part
thereof
Sewer Connection $30.00
Sewer Relay $30.00
Water Connection $30.00
Water Relay $30.00
New Well Permit $5,000.00
Well Permits $25.00
Lift Station/Sanitary Sewer Service Fees in Certain Areas** In addition to the foregoing there shall be a connection charge for certain areas - See Engineering
Department for Fee Information
Re-Inspection Fee $50.00
*Permit Fees will double if work is commenced before permit is issued*
ENGINEERING/PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT FEES
REFUSE/RECYCLING
Cart Size Change - Garbage $50.00
Cart Size Change - Recycling $50.00
Additional Container- Garbage $70.00
Additional Container - Recycling $30.00
Cart Replacement (lost, damaged, destroyed) $85.00
YARD WASTE
Yard Waste Sticker $20.00
Miscellaneous Permit Fees
Sidewalk $15/stretch
Street Opening $25.00 + actual fees
(with Public Works Permission
Street Opening Renewal $25.00
Driveway Approaches $20/opening
Street Privelege $25.00 + actual City costs
Dumpster $25.00
Miscellaneous Inspection Fees
Long Grass Abatement Contractor Cost + Administrative Fee
Snow Removal Greater of $75/side or Actual Cost + Administrative Fee
Page 11 of 13
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
Printing Fees
Black and White Copies/Prints
8 1/2 x 11 - Letter Size $0.25
8 1/2 x 14 - Legal Size $0.50
11 x 17 Ledger Size $0.50
17 x 22 -Arch C $3.00
22 x 34 -Arch D $5.00
34 x 44 - E size, up to Arch E $6.00
Small Street Maps $2.00
Large Street Maps $10.00
Color Copies/Prints
8 1/2 x 11 - Letter Size $1.00
8 1/2 x 14 - Legal Size $1.00
11 x 17 Ledger Size $2.00
17 x 22 -Arch C $9.00
22 x 34 -Arch D $12.00
34 x 44 - E size, up to Arch E $15.00
Aerial Photo & Full Color Maps-Copies or Prints
8 1/2 x 11 - Letter Size $1.00
8 1/2 x 14 - Legal Size $1.00
11 x 17 - Ledger Size $2.00
17 x 22 - Arch C $15.00
22 x 34 - Arch D $20.00
34 x 44 - E size, up to Arch E $30.00
Smal Zoning Maps (color only) $10.00
Large Zoning Maps (color only) $15.00
Query/Service Products
Products that require the creation of an original document by a staff person involving computer time,
calcuations and/or data retrieval
Black and White
8 1/2 x 11 - Letter Size $1.00
8 1/2 x 14 - Legal Size $1.00
11 x 17 Ledger Size $2.00
17 x 22 -Arch C $15.00
22x34-Arch D $17.00
34x44 -E size up to Arch E $19.00
Color Prints
8 1/2 x 11 - Letter Size $2.00
8 1/2 x 14 - Legal Size $2.00
11 x 17 Ledger Size $4.00
17 x 22 -Arch C $18.00
22x34-Arch D $21.00
34x44 -E size up to Arch E $24.00
Page 12 of 13
City of Onalaska Fee Schedule
Type of Fee Fee Amount
Aerial Photo & Full Color Maps-Prints
8 1/2 x 11 - Letter Size $2.00
8 1/2 x 14 - Legal Size $2.00
11 x 17 Ledger Size $4.00
17 x 22 -Arch C $24.00
22x34-Arch D $29.00
34x44 -E size up to Arch E $39.00
Misc.
Mailing Labels $1.00 per page
Faxes .25 per page
Page 13 of 13
Index
USE OF INDEX: This index is designed for user ease. To locate information found in the code, formulate a
specific question. The key words in that question then become guides for using the index. In the event you do not
locate the desired information on your first attempt, the following checklist may help.
1) Cross references (when needed) are always located at the beginning of entries. Have you overlooked any?
2) Frequently initial questions are too general. Reformulating a more specific question may help.
3) Information on officials can be found two ways. The entry for an official's title contains general duties as
well as conditions of his or her office, such as compensation and tenure. Duties assigned to the official by
ordinances on specific subjects will be found under those subjects.
A
Abandoned Refrigerators
Prohibited, 10-5-8, 11-3-4
Abandoned and Lost Property
City disposal of, 3-4-2
Abandoned and Junked Vehicles
Junked vehicles and appliances on private property,
10-5-2
Removal and disposal of abandoned vehicles, 10-5-1
Accessory Buildings
Standards for, 13-6-7
Administrative Determinations, Review Of
Administrative appeal, 4-1-9
Determinations not subject to review, 4-1-3
Determinations reviewable, 4-1-2
Final determination, 4-1-11
Hearing on administrative appeal, 4-1-10
Judicial review, 4-1-12
Legislative review, 4-1-13
Municipal authority defined, 4-1-4
Persons aggrieved, 4-1-5
Reducing determination to writing, 4-1-6
Request for review of determination, 4-1-7
Review of administrative determinations, 4-1-1
Review of determination, 4-1-8
Air Guns
Carrying or discharge in city, 11-2-1
Alarm Systems
See index at start of Title 5, Chapter 4
Alcoholic Beverages see also Operator's
Licenses
Application for license, 7-2-6
Approval of application, 7-2-9
Beer garden licenses, 7-2-17
Classes of licenses, 7-2-4
Closing hours, 7-2-15
Conditions of license, 7-2-14
Definitions, 7-2-2
Fees, 7-2-5
Granting of license, 7-2-10
Investigation, 7-2-8
License required, 7-2-3
Numbering and expiration of license, 7-2-12
Pharmacists' permits, 7-3-1
Posting of licenses, 7-2-13
Qualifications of applicant, 7-2-7
Restrictions on licenses, 7-2-14, 7-2-15
Restrictions on picnic and special event licenses,
7-2-16
Revocation and suspension of licenses, 7-2-17
State statutes adopted, 7-2-1
Transfer of license, 7-2-11
Alcoholic Beverages, Offenses Involving
Adult permitting underage violation, 11-4-8
Defense of sellers, 11-4-5
Outside consumption, 11-4-1
Persons who have altered identification cards, 11-4-6
Possession of alcoholic beverages on school grounds,
11-4-7
Sale to underage or intoxicated persons,
11-4-2, 11-4-4
Solicitation of drinks prohibited, 11-4-9
Underage persons' presence in places of sale,
11-4-3, 11-4-4
Aldermanic Districts
Established, 2-1-3
Alderpersons
See Council Members
Alleys
Paving of, 6-2-19
All-Terrain Vehicles, see also
Snowmobiles
Accidents, 10-4-9
Age restrictions, 10-4-7
Definitions, 10-4-4
Enforcement, 10-4-10
Equipment requirements, 10-4-8
Operation of dirt bikes, 10-4-11
Penalties, 10-4-2
State laws adopted, 10-4-1
Unauthorized operation on private property,
10-4-1, 10-4-3
Amusement arcades
Definitions, 7-9-1
Hours for, 7-9-3
License for, 7-9-2, 7-9-5
Requirements for, 7-9-4
Animals
Animal feces, 7-1-10
Barking dogs or crying cats, 7-1-12
Beekeeping, 7-1-22
Bites, duty in case of, 7-1
Cruelty to prohibited, 7-1-18
Dog and cat licenses required, 7-1-1
Dognapping and catnapping, 7-1-20
Dogs and cats restricted on public grounds and
cemeteries, 7-1-8
Food and drink for animals, 7-1-15
Geese feeding prohibited, 8-1-9
Injury to property by dog or cat, 7-1-11
Impoundment of dogs, 7-1-7
Issuance of dog and cat licenses, 7-1-3
Late fees, 7-1-4
Neglected or abandoned animals, 7-1-17
Number of dogs and cats limited, 7-1-23
Penalty for failure to obtain rabies vaccination, 7-1-5
Penalties, 7-1-24
Prohibited and protected animals, 7-1-13
Proper shelter for animals, 7-1-16
Rabies quarantine, 7-1-5
Rabies vaccination required, 7-1-2
Restrictions on keeping of animals, 7-1-6
Sale of rabbits, chicks or artificially colored animals,
7-1-14
Trapping on city lands, 7-1-19
Vehicle accidents involving animals, 7-1-21
Annexations
To city, Follow State Statutes
Antennas
Regulation of, 13-6-2
Archaeological Sites
Regulations 13-3-27
Arrows
Shooting restricted, 11-2-4
Assessments see special assessments
Assessor
Selection and duties, 2-3-8
Automobiles see traffic and parking
Automobiles see Traffic and Parking
B
Ball Playing
Hours for, 11-2-13
BB Guns
Carrying or discharge in city, 11-2-1
Bed and Breakfast Establishments
Regulation of, 13-5-13
Beer see Alcoholic Beverages
Bicycle Races
Regulation of, 7-12-1, 7-12-2
Bicycles, In-Line Skates and Play
Vehicles
Applicability of regulations, 10-2-10
Bicycle dealers, 10-2-9
Enforcement 10-2-13
Lighting equipment, 10-2-3
Manner of operation, 10-2-2
Parental responsibility, 10-2-11
Parking of, 10-2-4
Penalties, 10-2-12
Registration and licensing of, 10-2-7
Regulations, 10-2-6
Rules of the road, 10-2-5
Skateboards, 10-2-8
Blasting and Rock Crushing
Regulation of, 7-10-7
Block Parties
Approval procedures for, 6-2-20
Board of Appeals
Composition and duties, 2-4-4
Procedures of, 13—8-40
Board of Gas Examiners
Appointment and duties, 15-1-59
Board of Public Works
Appointment and duties, 2-4-3
Board of Review
Composition, 2-4-1(a)
Duties, 2-4-1(c)
Boards and Commissions, General
Requirements
Meeting notice requirements, 2-4-11
Residency requirement for service on, 2-4-12
Boating and Water Sports
No wake restrictions, 12-2-2
State boating laws adopted, 12-2-1
Boulevard Areas
Restrictions on, 6-2-9
Budget
Budget, 3-1-3
Changes in budget, 3-1-4
Funds to be spent in accordance with budget, 3-1-5
Building Code see also Plumbing Code;
Electrical Code; Heating, Ventilating and
Air Conditioning Code; Construction Site
Erosion Control
Basements, 15-1-11
Building permits, 15-1-1, 15-1-2, 15-1-3
Clear water discharge, 15-1-12
Construction standards, 15-1-4
Disclaimer on inspections, 15-1-8
Duplex service connections, 15-1-12
Enforcement and penalties, 15-1-90
Excavations, 15-1-10
Fees, 15-1-15
Fire limits, 15-1-6
Garages, 15-1-9
Inspections, 15-1-2
Moving buildings, 15-1-14
New methods and materials, 15-1-5
Permits conditioned upon tax payments, 15-6-1
Razing buildings, 15-1-10
Room heaters, stoves and freestanding fireplaces, 15-
1-13
Uniform dwelling code, 15-1-3
Unsafe buildings, 15-1-7
Building Inspector see Director of
Inspection
Bulkhead Lines
Established, 12-3-1
Burning
Open burning restricted, 5-2-9
C
Cable Television
See index at start of Title 9, Chapter 4
Cats see Animals
Cemeteries
Prohibited conduct in, 11-3-10
Cemetery, City
Policy Statement, 8-4-1
Platting of New Cemetery Lots, 8-4-2
Purchase of Lots, 8-4-3
Ownership Rights in Interment, 8-4-4
Care of Lots, 8-4-5
Privileges and Restrictions, 8-4-6
Rules for Visitors, 8-4-7
Interments and Disinterments, 8-4-8
Monuments and Markers, 8-4-9
Vaults and Mausoleums, 8-4-10
Trees, Shrubs and Flowers, 8-4-11
Miscellaneous, 8-4-12
Certified Surveys see Subdivision
Regulations
Checks, Worthless
Issuance of, 11-3-6
Chief of Police
Employment and general duties, 2-3-6, 5-1-4
Cigarettes
Retailer's licenses, 7-3-2
Citations
Form of, 1-2-2
Issuance of, 1-2-5
Method of enforcement, 1-2-1
Nonexclusivity, 1-2-7
Procedure, 1-2-6
Schedule of deposits, 1-2-4
City Treasurer
See Financial Services Director/Treasurer
City Attorney
Appointment and duties, 2-3-5
City Clerk
Appointment and duties, 2-3-3
City Engineer
See Director of Public Works
City Logo
Use of 1-3-2
City Planner/Zoning Administrator
See Land Use Development Director
City Staff Forester
Appointment and duties, 6-4-3
City Treasurer see Financial Services
Director/Treasurer
Code of Ordinances see Ordinances,
Code of
Coin Machines
Tampering prohibited, 11-3-8
Commission On Equal Opportunities In
Housing see also Fair Housing
Appointment and duties, 15-3-3
Committees, Common Council
Standing council committees, 2-2-5
Common Council
Committees, 2-2-5
Conduct of deliberations, 2-2-18
Cooperation with other municipalities, 2-2-7
Council Members, 2-2-2
General powers of, 2-2-6
Internal powers of, 2-2-8
Introduction of ordinances, 2-2-16
Mayor, 2-2-3
Meetings, 2-2-10
Open meetings, 2-2-12
Order of business, 2-2-15
President and vice-president of the council, 2-2-4
Presiding officers, 2-2-14
Publication and effect of ordinances, 2-2-17
Public hearing procedures, 2-2-19
Quorum, 2-2-13
Salaries, 2-2-9
Special meetings, 2-2-11
Suspension of rules, 2-2-22
Community Development Authority
Appointment and duties, 2-4-10
Concealed Weapons
Carrying of prohibited, 11-2-2
Conditional Uses
Procedures and standards for, 13-5-1
through 13-5-20
Construction Site Erosion Control
Regulations on, 15-2-1 through 15-2-15
Construction Standards
Minimum Standards 13-1-24
Controlled Substances
Regulation of, 11-2-11
Cooperative Arrangements
Authority to enter into, 2-2-7
Cross Connections
Control of, 9-1-49
Curb and Gutter
Standards and assessments for, 3-2-14, 6-2-18
Curfew
Established, 11-5-1
D
Deer
Prohibition of Feeding 11-6-8
Depositories
Designated, 3-1-7
Deputy Financial Services
Director/Deputy Treasurer
Appointment and duties, 2-3-4
Developments see Subdivisions
Direct Sellers
Agent for service of process, 7-4-4(c)(2)
Cancellation of sale, buyer's rights, 7-4-7(b)(2)
Definitions of terms, 7-4-2
Disclosure requirements, 7-4-7(b)(1)
Exemptions from provisions, 7-4-3
Orders for late delivery, information furnished buyer,
7-4-7(b)(3)
Penalties for violations, 7-4-10
Prohibited practices, 7-4-7(a)
Records of violations, 7-4-8
Registration
additional documents submitted, 7-4-4(b)
completion of, 7-4-4(c)(3)
denials
appeals, 7-4-6
grounds, 7-4-5(b)
duration, 7-4-4(c)(3)
fee, 7-4-4(c)(1)
form, contents, 7-4-4(a)
investigation of applicant, 7-4-5(a)
requirement, 7-4-1
revocation
notice, 7-4-9(b)
procedures, 7-4-9(a)
Violations records, 7-4-8
Director of Inspection; Deputies
Appointment and duties, 2-3-9
Disbursements
Procedures, 3-1-8
Disorderly conduct
Regulated, 11-2-10
Disposal of City Property
Disposal of Surplus City Property, 3-4-1
Lost and Abandoned Property, 3-4-2
Documents
Incorporation into code by reference, maintenance and
availability of copies, 1-1-8
Dogs and Cats see Animals
Door-To-Door Salesmen see Direct
Sellers
Driveways
Liability for damages, 6-3-2
Permit and specifications, 6-3-1
Drugs
Paraphernalia, 11-2-18
Regulation of, 11-2-11
E
Elections
Aldermanic districts, 2-1-3
Election officials, 2-1-4
Election times, 2-1-5
Polling place, 2-1-5
Primary elections, 2-1-6
Electric Vehicles
Regulations 10-6-1 thru 10-6-5
Electrical Code see also Building Code;
Plumbing Code; Heating, Ventilating and
Air Conditioning Code
Applicability; 15-1-70
Board of electrical examiners, 15-1-71
Electrical licenses and certifications
15-1-72
Standards for Installation of Electrical Equipment
15-1-74
Additional Installation Requirements, 15-1-75
Unsafe or Illegal Electrical Equipment, 15-1-76
Penalties, 15-1-77)
Electrical Inspector see Director of
Inspection
Emergency Management
Declaration of emergency, 5-5-4
Definitions, 5-5-1
Emergency regulations, 5-5-5
Joint action ordinance, 5-5-2
Obstruction of, 5-5-6
Utilization of facilities, 5-5-3
Ethics
Declaration of policy, 2-5-1
Definitions, 2-5-1
Specific conflicts on interest, 2-5-4
Statutory conflicts of interest, 2-5-3
Expenditures see Disbursements
F
Facsimile Signatures
Use of, 3-1-10
Fair Housing
See index at start of Title 15, Chapter 3
Fee Schedule 1-1-10
Fences and Hedges
Regulation of, 13-6-10
Finance
Accounts receivable, 3-1-13
Audits, 3-1-14
City budget
budget, 3-1-3
changes in budget, 3-1-4
funds to be spent in accordance with budget;
3-1-5
Claims against city, 3-1-8
Compensation for city employees, 3-1-15
Duplicate treasurer's bond eliminated, 3-1-2
Facsimile signatures, 3-1-10
Fiscal year, 3-1-6
Insufficient funds checks, 3-1-1
Investment of funds, 3-1-9
Public depositories, 3-1-7
Receipt for monies received, 3-1-I1
Statement of real property status, 3-1-12
Fire Chief
Selection of, 2-3-7
Fire District
Limits of, 5-2-10
Fire Limits
Building requirements in, 15-1-6
Fire Protection and Fire Department see
also Fire Chief; Fire Prevention Code
Bonfires and outdoor fires, 5-2-9
Damaging fire hose prohibited, 5-2-4
Duty of bystanders to assist, 5-2-6
Entering adjacent property, 5-2-5
Fire district limits, 5-2-10
Fire inspector, 5-3-9(b)
Impeding fire equipment prohibited, 5-2-2
Interference with use of hydrants, 5-2-8
Open burning, 5-2-9
Organization of department, 5-2-1
Police power of fire department, 5-2-3
Vehicles to yield right-of-way, 5-2-7
Fire Prevention Code see also Fire
Protection and Fire Department
Adoption of state codes, 5-3-1
Disclosure of hazardous materials, 5-3-2
Recovery of cost of hazardous material fire, 5-3-3
Firearms
Carrying or discharge in city, 11-2-1
Safe transportation of, 11-2-3
Firewood
Storage of, 13-6-8
Fireworks
Restrictions and permits for displays, 7-7-1, 11-2-6
Floodplain Zoning see also Zoning,
Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
Please refer to Chapter 2, Part, Title 13
Fortune Telling
Prohibited, 11-2-15
Franchises
Ordinances for private and special, 9-5-1
G
Garage Sales
Licensing of, 7-8-1
General Penalty
For code of ordinances, 1-1-7
Golf Carts
Regulations, 10-7-1 thru 10-7-7
Grades
Alteration of, 6-1-2
Establishment of, 6-1-1
Regulation of underground utilities, 6-1-3
Guns
Carrying or discharge in city, 11-2-1, 11-2-2
Safe transportation of, 11-2-3
H
Handicapped Access
Grievances regarding access (ADA compliance),
15-5-1
Harassment
By telephone, 11-2-5
Hazardous Materials
Disclosure of, 5-3-3
Health and Sanitation see also Board of
Health
Animals in food handling establishments, 8-1-3
Control of lawns, weeds and grasses,
8-1-5, 8-1-6, 8-1-7
Deposit of deleterious substances prohibited, 8-1-4
Health nuisances, 8-1-2
Rodent control, 8-1-8
Rules and regulations, 8-1-1
Smoking prohibited in municipal buildings, 8-1-9
Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning
Code see also Building Code; Plumbing
Code; Electrical Code
Board of gas examiners, 15-1-59, 15-1-60
Bond and insurance, 15-1-61
Minimum installation requirements, 15-1-55
Permits and inspections, 15-1-52, 15-1-53, 15-1-54,
15-1-55
Permit fees, 15-1-57
State regulations adopted, 15-1-51
Wood burning equipment, 15-1-56
Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning
Inspector see Director of Inspection
Historic Preservation
13-3-18
Historic preservation commission, 13-3-20
Home Occupations
Accessory Use, 13-6-12
Regulation of, 13-5-15(d)
Hotel-Motel Room Tax
Audits, 7-5-8
Bond, 7-5-10
Clerk to administer, 7-5-3
Definitions, 7-5-1
Failure to file return, 7-5-9
Issuance of permit, 7-5-5
Penalty, 7-5-13
Records, 7-5-11
Returns confidential, 7-5-12
Revocation of permits, 7-5-6
Tax imposed, 7-5-2
Hunting
Restrictions within city, 11-2-1
I
Ice
Sidewalks, removal from, owner's responsibility and
liability, 6-2-8
Incorporation
City, 2-1-1
Intergovernmental Cooperation
Authorized, 2-2-7
Intoxicating Liquor see Alcoholic
Beverages
Itinerant Merchants see Direct Sellers
J
Junk
Regulation of, 10-5-8, 11-3-5, 7-16
Licensing, 7-16
Juveniles
City jurisdiction over, 11-5-5
Criminal gang activity prohibited, 11-5-10
Curfew, 11-5-1
Drug paraphernalia, 11-5-6
Enforcement and penalties, 11-5-11
Petty theft by, 11-5-3
Possession of controlled substances, 11-5-2
Possession or purchase of tobacco products, 11-5-9
Receiving stolen goods, 11-5-4
Tobacco products prohibitions, 11-5-9
Truancy, 11-5-7
Unlawful sheltering of minors, 11-5-8
K, L
La Crosse Airport Zoning, 13-3-50
Law Enforcement see Police Department
Lawful Order
Failure to obey, 11-2-14
Lawns
Length of, 8-1-5, 8-1-6, 8-1-7
Leaves
Raking into street prohibited, 6-2-14
Library
Theft of material, 11-3-8
Library Commission
Organization and duties, 2-4-8
Licensing Process see also Specific Type
of License, i.e., Direct Sellers, Dogs,
Cigarettes, Street Use, Nonmetallic
Mining, Alcoholic Beverages
Appeals of license denial, 7-14-1
Payment of taxes, 7-14-1
Permits conditioned upon payment of taxes, 15-6-1
Liquor see Alcoholic Beverages
Littering
Prohibited, 11-3-2
Loading Zone
Downtown Loading Zones 10-1-38
Loitering
Prohibited, 11-2-8
Lost Property
City disposal of, 3-4-2
M
Marathons and Runs
Permit and regulation of, 7-12-1, 7-12-2
Marijuana
Possession of, 11-2-11
Mayor
Duties, 2-2-3(b)
Election, 2-2-3(a)
Medical Campus District
Regulations 13-3-62
Meetings, Open
Provisions for notice, 2-2-12, 2-4-11
Merchandise
Sale or display on streets, 6-2-12
Missiles
Throwing of, 11-2-4
Minors see Juveniles
Mobile Homes
Licensing 7-17-1 thru 17-17-5
Mobile home zoning district, 13-2-8
Recreational vehicle parking, 13-7-11
Regulations regarding parks, 13-2-8
Municipal Court Clerk
Appointment and duties, 2-3-13
Municipal Judge; Municipal Court
Election of judge and duties, 2-3-13
Municipal Harbor Commission
Creation, Composition, 2-4-13
Municipal Officers and Employees
General Provisions, 3-4-2
City Clerk, 2-3-3
Deputy Financial Services Director/Deputy Treasurer,
2,3-4
City Attorney, 2-3-5
Chief of Police, 2-3-6
Fire Chief, 2-3-7
Assessor, 2-3-8
Director of Inspection; Deputy Directors, 2-3-9
Director of Public Works, 2-3-10
Director of Parks and Recreation, 2-3-11
Weed Commissioner, 2-3-12
Municipal Judge; Municipal Court
Clerk of the Municipal Court
Eligibility for Office
Removal from Office
Custody of Official Property, 2-3-17
Oath of Office; Bonds of Officers, 2-3-18
Rule-Making Authority, 2-3-19
Land Use Development Director
Financial Services Director/Treasurer, 2-3-21
Human Resources Director, 2-3-22
N
Natural Lawns
Regulation of, 8-1-6
Neighborhood Electric Vehicles
Regulations 10-6-1 thru 10-6-5
Newspaper, Official
Designation of, 2-1-2
Noise
Loud and unnecessary prohibited, 11-2-9
Nonconforming Uses
Under zoning code, 13-1-33 through 13-1-36
Nonmetallic Mining
Regulation of, 7-10-1 through 7-10-7
Noxious Weeds
Destruction of, 8-1-6
Nuisances
Abatement of public nuisances, 11-6-6
Definitions, 11-6-2
Cost of abatement, 11-6-7
Enforcement and penalties, 11-6-8
Nuisances affecting health, 11-6-3
Nuisances affecting peace and safety, 11-6-5
Nuisances offending morale and decency, 11-6-4
Prohibited, 11-6-1
O
Oaths of Office
Required, 2-3-18
Obscene Telephone Calls
Prohibited, 11-2-5
Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks
Prohibited, 6-2-7
Off-Street Parking see Traffic and
Parking; Parking Lots
Offenses
Parties to acts, 11-1-2
State statutes adopted, 11-1-1
Official Newspaper
Designation of, 2-1-2
Officials
Eligibility for office, 2-3-15
General provisions, 2-3-1
Oath of office, 2-3-18
Property, public, standards for custody of, 2-3-17
Removal from office, 2-3-16
Onalaska Tourism Commission
Appointment and duties, 2-4-7
Open Wells and Excavations
Prohibited, 11-3-3
Operator's License see Alcoholic
Beverages
Display, 7-2-25
Duration, 7-2-22
Fee, 7-2-23
Issuance, 7-2-24
License required, 7-2-20
Procedure for license, 7-2-21
Provisional licenses, 7-2-23
Revocation, 7-2-26
Orders
Failure to obey lawful, 11-2-14
Ordinances, Code of see also Citations
Code of
citing, manner of, 1-1-1
conflicting provisions, interpretation of, 1-1-3
construction, rules of, 1-1-2
definitions of terms, 1-1-2
documents incorporated by reference,
maintenance by city clerk and availability for
inspection, 1-1-8
effective date, 1-1-5(a)
name, official, 1-1-1
penalties for violations, 1-1-7
separability of provisions, 1-1-4
Enforcement by citation, 1-2-1 through 1-2-7
Effective date, 1-1-5(b)
General penalty for municipal code, 1-1-7, 11-3-1
Introduction of new ordinances, 2-2-16
Publication and effect of ordinances, 2-2-17 Repeal of,
effect of, 1-1-2(9)
Oriental Weapons
Prohibited, 11-2-2
Outdoor Venue Licnese Class “B”
Requirements 7-2-18
P
Parades
Permits and regulations for, 7-12-1, 7-12-2
Paraphernalia, Drug
Possession, 11-5-6
Park Land Dedications see also
Subdivision Regulations
Chapter 9, Part 6, Title 13
Parks and Navigable Waters Regulations
Ball playing hours, 11-2-13
No wake boating restrictions, 12-2-2
Park hours, 12-1-4
Park regulations, 12-1-1
Radio-controlled airplanes or helicopters prohibited in
parks, 12-1-2
Reservation of park space, 12-1-6
State boating laws adopted, 12-2-1
Ultra light aircraft use in parks, 12-1-5
Use of metal detectors on public property, 12-1-2
Parks and Recreation Board
Appointment and duties, 2-4-6
Parking see Traffic and Parking
Parking Lots
Design of, 13-7-10
Pawn Brokers
Statutes adopted, 7-13-1
Peddlers see Direct Sellers
Penalties
Code violations, general, 1-1-7
Pistols
Carrying or discharge in city, 11-2-1, 11-2-2
Safe transportation of, 11-2-3
Plan Commission
Appointment and duties, 2-4-5
Planned Unit Developments
Requirements for, 13-3-4 through 13-3-7
Plumbing Code see also Building Code
Check valve installation, 15-1-36
Definitions, 15-1-32
Plumbers to be licensed, 15-1-34
Plumbing fees, 15-1-35
Plumbing permits, 15-1-33
State regulations adopted, 15-1-31
Plumbing Inspector see Director of
Inspection
Police Department
Civilians to assist, 5-1-8
General powers of officers, 5-1-3
Maintenance of personnel records, 5-1-6
Onalaska police reserve, 5-1-9
Organization of, 5-1-1
Records and reports, 5-1-2
Responsibilities of chief, 2-3-5, 5-1-4, 5-1-7
Rules and policies of, 5-1-5
Police and Fire Commission
Appointment and duties, 2-4-2
Police Reserve, Onalaska
Purpose and authority, 5-1-9
Pollution Abatement see also Safety
Code; Hazardous Materials
Clean-up of wastes, 8-2-1
Storage of polluting substances, 8-2-2
President of the Council
Election of, 2-2-4
Private Wells
Abandonment of, 9-1-50
Property
Damaging, prohibition, 11-3-1, 11-3-9, 11-3-10
Unclaimed, 3-4-1, 3-4-2, 3-4-3
Public Depositories
Designated, 3-1-7
Public Nuisances see Nuisances
Public Records see Records, Public
Public Works see Streets and Sidewalks
Q, R
Radio Towers
Regulation of, 13-6-2
Records, Public
Access procedures, 3-3-5
Definitions, 3-3-1
Destruction of records, 3-3-7
Duty to maintain records, 3-3-2
Legal custodian(s), 3-3-3
Limitations or right to access, 3-3-6
Preservation through microfilm, 3-3-8
Public access to records, 3-3-4
Recreational Vehicles see All-Terrain
Vehicles; Snowmobiles
Refuse Disposal and Collection
Approved waste containers, 8-3-6
Collection of refuse, 8-3-8
Declaration of policy, 8-3-2
Definitions, 8-3-4
Effective date, 8-3-3
Garbage accumulation as nuisance, 8-3-10
Preparing refuse, 8-3-7
Prohibited activities and non-collectible materials,
8-3-9
Refuse from outside city, 8-3-11
Refuse storage areas, 8-3-5
Restrictions on hours of collection, 8-3-12
Retail Theft
Prohibited, 11-3-4
Review Board see Board of Review
Rules
Rule making authority, 2-3-19
Runs, Walks
Purpose, 7-12-1
Permit Requirements, 7-12-1
S
Satellite Dishes (Signal Receiving
Antennas)
Regulation of, 13-6-1
School Property
Unauthorized presence prohibited, 11-2-12
Sewer Utility Regulations and Rates
See index at start of Title 9, Chapter 2
Greens Coulee service area charges, 9-2-12
Sewer connection charges in Pralle service area, 9-3-4
Sewer installation charges, in Greens Coulee service
area, 9-3-3
Sewer and water connection charges for East Avenue
service area, 9-3-1
Special assessments for sewer mains, 3-2-14
Shooting Missiles
Prohibited, 11-2-3
Shoreland-wetland Zoning see also
Zoning
See index at start of Title 13, Chapter 2, Part 2
Sidewalks see Streets and Sidewalks
Signs, Canopies and Awnings
Requirements for, 13-6-19
Smoking
Possession or purchase of tobacco by minors, 11-5-8
Prohibited in municipal buildings, 8-1-9
Smoke Free Restaurants, 11-2-17
Snow
Sidewalks, removal from, 6-2-8
Snowmobiles see also All-Terrain
Vehicles
Accidents, 10-3-8
Applicability of traffic regulations, 10-3-2
Enforcement, 10-3-11
Operation on private premises restricted, 10-3-6
Operation on sidewalks, 10-3-5
Penalty, 10-3-10
Restrictions on operators, 10-3-7
State snowmobile laws adopted, 10-3-1
Trails designated, 10-3-9
Unattended vehicles, 10-3-4
Solicitors see Direct Sellers
Special Assessment Procedures
Appealed assessments payable when due, 3-2-10
Board actions after hearing, 3-2-6
Board's power to amend special assessment, 3-2-
Combined assessments, 3-2-7
Costs that may be paid, 3-2-3
Exemptions, 3-2-4
Miscellaneous provisions, 3-2-13
Notice of project, 3-2-5
Resolution and report required, 3-2-2
Sewer and water line assessments, 3-2-15
Special assessment a lien, 3-2-11
Special assessment policies on curb/gutter, sidewalks,
sanitary sewer, and water mains, 3-2-14
Special charges permissible, 3-2-12
Storm Sewers
Special rezoning fee, Chapter 8, Part 7, Title 13
Street Commissioner, see Public Works
Director
Streets and Sidewalks
Alley paving, 6-2-19
Block parties, 6-2-20
Boulevard areas, 6-2-9
Curb and gutter, 6-2-18
Downspouts not to drain on sidewalks, 6-2-11
Grades, 6-1-1, 6-1-2
Depositing dirt on streets, 6-2-7
Ditch obstructions, 6-2-17
Depositing snow and ice on streets, 6-2-7
Dumpsters on streets, 6-2-7
Grades, 6-1-1, 6-1-2
Obstructions and encroachments, 6-2-5, 6-2-17
Raking leaves into streets, 6-2-14
Requests for improvements, 6-2-13
Regulations governing excavations and openings,
6-2-3, 6-2-4
Removal of rubbish and dirt, 6-2-1
Requests for improvements, 6-2-11
Sale or display of merchandise on, 6-2-12
Sidewalk construction and repair, 3-2-14, 6-2-2
Snow and ice removal, 6-2-8
Street construction, 6-2-2
Street numbers, 6-2-16
Street privilege permit, 6-2-6
Terrace areas, 6-2-9
Unlawful dumping on streets, 6-2-15
Vaults, 6-2-10
Street Numbers
Requirement for, 6-2-16
Subdivision Regulations
See index at start of Title 13, Chapter 9
Surplus City Property
Disposal of, 3-4-1
Swimming Pools
Requirements for, 13-6-11
T
Tax Assessor see Assessor
Taxicabs
Conditions of license, 7-6-4, 7-6-5, 7-6-8
Exemptions, 7-6-6
Inspection required, 7-6-3
Insurance required, 7-6-2
Meters and rates, 7-6-5
Operators license, 7-6-9
Refusal to pay fare, 7-6-7
Regulation of taxicabs, 7-6-1
Revocation of license, 7-6-10
Telecommunications Structures and
Towers
Regulation of, 13-6-6
Telephone Use
Harassing calls, 11-2-5
Terrace (Boulevard) Areas
Responsibilities, 6-2-9
Theft see also Retail Theft
Prohibited, 11-3-1, 11-3-11
Tobacco
Possession or purchase by minors, 11-5-9
Towers, Antenna
Radio or television, 13-6-2 and 13-6-6
Traditional Neighborhood Development
Application process, 13-3-9
Design Standards, 13-3-10
Traffic and Parking see also Abandoned
and Junked Vehicles
Accident reports, 10-1-7
Alternate parking, 10-1-29, 10-1-36
Blue warning lights on police vehicles, 10-1-6
Controlled intersections, 10-1-15
Display of power, 10-1-50
Disturbing peace with vehicle, 10-1-50
Driving over curbing, 10-1-55
Enforcement, 10-1-62
Heavy traffic routes, 10-1-13
Inoperable and wrecked vehicles, 10-1-35
Leaving keys in motor vehicles prohibited, 10-1-24
Miscellaneous lane and turn controls, 10-1-56
Motor vehicles on pedestrian ways, 10-1-53
Official traffic control devices, 10-1-3
One-way alleys, 10-1-18
Operation in parking lots, 10-1-33
Operators to obey traffic control devices, 10-1-10
Parking restricted or prohibited, 10-1-20, 10-1-22,
10-1-26, 10-1-27
Parking reserved for vehicles of disabled, 10-1-23
Parking restrictions for purposes of snow removal, 10-
1-21
Pedestrian regulations, 10-1-52
Penalties, 10-1-60
Railroad regulations, 10-1-51
Registration record of vehicle as evidence, 10-1-4
Removal of illegally parked vehicles, 10-1-34
School bus warning lights, 10-1-5
School crossing guards, 10-1-54
School district grounds traffic and parking regulations,
10-1-31
Speed limits, 10-1-11
State administrative code provisions adopted, 10-1-2
State traffic laws adopted, 10-1-1
Through streets, 10-1-12
Tow-away zones, 10-1-28
Truck parking, 10-1-3
Turn only lanes, 10-1-17
U-turns, 10-1-14
Unattended motorized machinery, 10-1-25
Unlawful removal of citations, 10-1-32
Winter alternate parking, 10-1-29
Year round alternate parking 10-1-36
Yield signs, 10-1-6
Transient Merchants see Direct Sellers
Transient and Temporary Public
Entertainments
License for, 7-11-1
Trees
Abatement of tree diseases, 6-4-5, 6-4-6
Adoption of state statutes, 6-4-14
Appeal of orders, 6-4-13
Authority of city forester, 6-4-4
Definitions, 6-4-2
Forester, 6-4-3
Interference with forester prohibited, 6-4-4
Obstructing an intersection, 6-4-10
Penalties, 6-4-12
Planting of trees, 6-4-7, 6-4-8
Policy, 6-4-1
Preservation, 13-8-62
Prohibited acts, 6-4-12
Removal of trees and stumps, 6-4-11
Trimming, 6-4-9
Truancy
Prohibited, 11-5-7
Trucks see Traffic and Parking
U
Utility Regulations and Rates
Title 9, Chapter 6
Urinating or Defecating in Public
Disorderly conduct, 11-2-11(c)
Utilities
Private and special franchise ordinances, 9-5-1
Utilities Commissioner see Director of
Public Works
Utilities, Underground
Regulation of, 6-1-3
V
Variances see also Zoning
Procedures for zoning variances, 13-8-40
W
Wards
Boundaries, 2-1-3
Water Utility Regulations and Rates
See index at start of Title 9, Chapter 1
Illicit Discharges and Connections 6-6-1 thru 6-6-5
Special assessments for watermains, 3-2-14
Storm Water Management 6-5-1 thru 6-5-16
Water services in unincorporated areas, 9-3-2
Illicit Discharges and Connections 6-5-1 thru 6-5-16
Weapons
Carrying concealed weapons prohibited, 11-2-1,
11-2-2
Transporting of, 11-2-3
Weed Commissioner
Appointment and duties, 2-3-12
Control of weeds, 8-1-6, 8-1-7
Weeds and Grasses
Regulation of length, 8-1-5, 8-1-6, 8-1-7
Weights and Measures Regulations
Licensing, 7-15
Wellhead Protection
Regulations, 13-3-3
Wells
Private well abandonment, 9-1-50
Wind Energy
Systems regulated, 13-1-132 through 13-1-134
Wine see Alcoholic Beverages
X Y Z
Zoning see also Zoning, Floodplain;
Zoning, Shoreland-Wetland,, Historic
Preservation
See index at start of Title 13, Chapter 1
Zoning Board of Appeals see also Zoning
Appeals to, 13-8-40
Composition and powers, 2-4-4
Zoning Districts
Title 13, Chapters 1 and 2
Zoning, Floodplain see also Zoning;
Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
Floodplain and shoreland-wetland zoning district,
13-2-18
Zoning, Historic Preservation
Purpose and Intent, 13-3-18
Historic Preservation Commission; Composition,
13-3-20
Historic Structure, Historic Site and Historic
Designation Criteria, 13-3-21
Powers and Duties of Historic Preservation
Commission, 13-3-22
Designation Procedures, 13-3-23
Interim Control, 13-3-24
Penalties for Violations, 13-3-25
Public Safety and Health Issues, 13-3-26
Zoning, Overlay Districts
Title 13, Chapter 3
Zoning, Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
Title 13, Chapter 12. Part 2
13-2-18