City of Port Washington Chapter 1 - Page 1 12/18/2013
Chapter 1
Mayor and Council
Table of Contents
1.01.000 TIME OF MEETING
1.02.000 PROCEDURE
1.02.010 Agenda
1.02.020 Presiding Officer
1.02.030 Quorum
1.02.040 Order of Business
1.02.050 Voting
1.03.000 ALDERMANIC DISTRICTS
1.04.000 ORDINANCES
1.05.000 MAYORAL APLPOINTMENTS TO STANDING AND
STATUTORY COMMITTEES
1.05.010 Required Appointments
1.06.000 ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL
1.07.000 COUNCIL GOVERNED
City of Port Washington Chapter 1 - Page 2 12/18/2013
CHAPTER 1
Mayor and Council
1.01.000 TIME OF MEETING. The Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and
third Tuesday of each month, at 7:30 p.m., except for the third Tuesday in July. When the day
fixed for any regular meeting falls upon a day designated as an election day or on a legal or
national holiday, such meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day not a
holiday. All regular meetings shall be held in the Council Chambers in the Municipal Building.
Following a regular city election the new Council shall meet on the third Tuesday in April. The
Mayor may call a special meeting by written notice to each member delivered to him personally
or left at his usual abode at least six hours before the meeting for good cause if 24-hour notice is
impossible or impractical.
1.02.000 PROCEDURE.
1.02.010 Agenda. All reports, communications, resolutions or other matters to be submitted to
the Council at a regular meeting shall be delivered to the City Administrator prior to 5:00 p.m.
on the Thursday preceding the meeting. The City Administrator shall arrange a list of such
matters according to the Order of Business and furnish each alderman and the Mayor with a copy
as far in advance as time for preparation will permit. If Council members, city officials or city
staff know in advance of the time the meeting agenda is established that there are specific
informational items or forthcoming events about which the public may be interested, that
particular subject matter shall be identified and described in a way that is reasonably likely to
apprise members of the public news media thereof.
1.02.020 Presiding Officer. The presiding officer shall be the Mayor. In his absence, the
president of the Council, elected annually at the first meeting of the new Council, shall preside.
The presiding officer shall take the chair at the appointed hour and shall call the meeting to order.
The City Clerk shall call the roll.
1.02.030 Quorum. Two-thirds of the members shall be a quorum. The Mayor shall not be
counted in determining whether a quorum is present.
1.02.040 Order of Business. Except where required or permitted by law to meet in closed
session, all meetings of the Council shall be open to the public. The business of the Council shall
be taken up for consideration in the following order:
1. Roll Call
2. Pledge of Allegiance
3. Consent Agenda
4. Approval of Minutes of Previous Meeting
5. Mayor’s Business
6. Officers’/Staff Reports
7. Public Comments/Appearances
8. Committees
9. Boards/Commissions
10. Unfinished Business
11. New Business
12. Forthcoming Events
13. Public Comments/Appearances
14. Adjournment
City of Port Washington Chapter 1 - Page 3 12/18/2013
1.02.050 Voting. The ayes and noes may be required by any member. On confirmation
and on the adoption of any measure assessing or levying taxes, appropriating or
disbursing money or creating any liability or charge against the City, the vote shall be by
ayes and noes. Silence on a voice vote shall be deemed an affirmative vote.
1.03.000 A. 1st Aldermanic District – Includes Ward 1 with the following boundaries:
WARD 1 – Beginning at the intersection of I-43 and N. Wisconsin Street, east along the
east side of the I-43 right-of-way to city limits, then south to C.T.H. LL, then northeast
along C.T.H. LL to city limits, then east along city limits to a point where city limits
proceed south, then south along city limits to a point where city limits proceed east, then
east along city limits to a point where city limits proceed south, then south along city
limits to a point where city limits proceed west, then west along city limits to a point
where city limits proceed south, then south along city limits to a point where city limits
proceed east, then east along city limits until Groeschel Road, then north on Groeschel
Road to a point where city limits proceed east, then east along city limits to a point where
city limits proceed south, then south along city limits to Norport Drive, then west on
Norport Drive to a point where city limits proceed south, then south along city limits to a
point where city limits proceed east, then east along city limits to Noridge Trail, then
southwest on Noridge Trail to Briarwood Lane, then west on Briarwood Lane to
Crestview Drive, then south on Crestview Drive to Sunrise Trail, then west on Sunrise
Trail to Hales Trail, then north/west on Hales Trail to the Ozaukee Interurban Trail, then
South on the Ozaukee Interurban Trail to a point extending East of Prospect Street, from
that point to Prospect Street, then West along Prospect Street to N. Wisconsin Street, then
north on N. Wisconsin Street to the point of beginning, and including that detached tract
of land lying north of I-43 and east of N. Wisconsin Street extended.
2nd Aldermanic District – Includes Ward 2 with the following boundaries:
WARD 2 – Beginning at the intersection of C.T.H. KK (Moore Road) and N. Spring
Street, then south on N. Spring Street to its intersection with W. Grand Avenue, then east
on W. Grand Avenue to Milwaukee Street, then north on Milwaukee Street to W. Dodge
Street, then east on W. Dodge Street to N. Wisconsin Street, then North on N. Wisconsin
Street to Jefferson Street, then West on Jefferson Street to Webster Street, then South on
Webster Street to W. Walters Street, then West along W. Walters Street to city limits,
then south along city limits to a point where city limits proceed west, then west along city
limits to Moore Road, then following city limits northwest to a when where they turn
southwest, then following city limits southwest to a point where they turn southeast, then
following city limits southeast to a point where they turn west, then following city limits
west to a point where they turn northwest, then following city limits northwest until its
intersection with Moore Road, following Moore Road northwest to the point of the
beginning.
3rd Aldermanic District – Includes Ward 3 with the following boundaries:
WARD 3 – Beginning at the intersection of Norport Drive and Noridge Trail, then
northeast on Norport Drive to city limits, then east along city limits to Lake Michigan,
then south along Lake Michigan shoreline following city limits past the marina to the
north side of Sauk Creek, then west along Sauk Creek to its intersection with S.
City of Port Washington Chapter 1 - Page 4 12/18/2013
Wisconsin Street, then South along S. Wisconsin Street to Chestnut Street, then west
along Chestnut Street to Division Street, then south along Division Street to Oakland
Avenue, then west following Oakland Avenue to S. Spring Street, then north on Spring
Street to Lincoln Avenue, then west on Lincoln Avenue to Tower Drive, then north on
Tower Drive to W. Grand Avenue, then east on W. Grand Avenue to Milwaukee Street,
then north on Milwaukee Street W. Dodge Street, then east on W. Dodge Street to N.
Wisconsin Street, then north on N. Wisconsin Street to Prospect Street, then east on
Prospect Street to a point extending off of Prospect Street where it meets the Ozaukee
Interurban Trail, then north on the Ozaukee Interurban Trail to its intersection with Hales
Trail, then east on Hales Trail to Sunrise Drive, then east on Sunrise Drive to Crestview
Drive, then north on Crestview Drive to Briarwood Lane, then east on Briarwood Lane to
Noridge Trail, then north on Noridge Tail to the point of beginning.
4th Aldermanic District – Includes Ward 4 with the following boundaries:
WARD 4 – Beginning at the intersection of S. Wisconsin Street and Chestnut Street, then
North on S. Wisconsin Street to its intersection with Sauk Creek, then east following the
south bank of Sauk Creek to city limits, then south following city limits to a point where
city limits proceeds northeast, then northeast along city limits to a point where city limits
proceeds southeast, then southeast along city limits until to a point where the north coal
dock ends, proceed southwest along the edge of the coal dock to a point where the edge
turns northwest, then northwest along the coal dock until the WE energies plant, from the
WE Energies plant go southeast along the perimeter to a point where it turns southwest,
then southwest along the edge of the south coal dock until you reach a point where it
turns northwest, then northwest along the edge of the coal docks/Lake Michigan until you
reach a point where it reaches south beach, then south along city limits/ Lake Michigan
shoreline to a point where city limits proceeds west, then west along city limits to CTH C
(which turns into Division Street after Sunset), then north on Division Street to a point
where city limits proceeds west, then west along city limits to a point where city limits
proceeds south, the south along city limits to Sunset Road, then west along Sunset Road
to S. Park Street, then south on Park Street along city limits to a point where city limits
proceed east, then east along city limits to C.T.H. C. , then south along C.T.H. C to a
point where city limits proceeds east, then east following along city limits to a point
where the city limits proceed north, the north along city limits to a point where city limits
proceed east, then east to a point where city limits proceed south (Lake Michigan
Shoreline), then south along city limits to a point where city limits proceed west, then
west along city limits to a point where city limits proceeds north, then north along city
limits to a point where city limits proceed west, then west along city limits to a point
where city limits proceed north, then north along city limits to a point where city limits
proceed west, then west along city limits to a point where city limits proceed south, then
south along city limits to a point where city limits proceed east, then east along city limits
to a point where city limits proceed north, then north along city limits to a point where
city limits proceed west, then west along city limits to a point where city limits proceed
south, then south along city limits to Stonecroft Drive, then east along Stonecroft Drive to
C.T.H. C, then north along C.T.H. C to a point where city limits proceed east, then east
along city limits to a point where city limits proceed north, then north along city limits to
a point where city limits proceed west, then west along city limits to C.T.H. C, then north
along C.T.H. C to a point where city limits proceed west, then west along city limits to a
point where city limits proceed south, then south along city limits to a point where city
City of Port Washington Chapter 1 - Page 5 12/18/2013
limits proceed west, then west along city limits to a point where city limits proceed south,
then south along city limits to a point where they proceed east, then east along city limits
to a point where city limits proceed south, then south along city limits to a point where
city limits proceed west, then until a point where city limits proceed south, then south
along city limits to a point where city limits proceed west, then west along city limits to a
point where city limits proceed north, then north along city limits to a point where city
limits proceed east, then east along city limits to a point where city limits proceed north,
then north along city limits to a point where city limits proceed east, then east along city
limits to a point where city limits proceed north, then north along city limits to a point
where city limits proceed west, then west along city limits to a point where city limits
proceeds southwest along State Highway 32, then southwest along city limits to a point
where city limits proceeds west, then following along city limits west to a point where
city limits proceed north, then north along city limits until a point where city limits
proceeds northeast, then northeast along city limits to a point where city limits proceed
east, then east along the city limits until a point where city limits proceeds north, then
north along city limits to a point where city limits proceed east, then east along city limits
to a point where city limits proceed north, then north along city limits to E Sauk Road,
then west along E Sauk Road to a point where city limits proceed north, then north along
city limits to a point where city limits proceed east, then east along city limits to a point
where city limits proceed southeast, then southeast to a point where city limits meets
State Highway 32, then north along the west side of State Highway 32 to Maritime
Drive, then east across the north side of Maritime Drive to the east side of State Highway
32, then southwest following State Highway 32 along city limits to a point where city
limits proceeds south, then south along city limits where city limits meets the railroad
right of way, then northeast along the east side of railroad right-of-way to a point where
the railroad right-of-way intersects with a point where city limits proceeds northwest,
then northwest along city limits to where city limits proceeds southwest along the east
side of S. Spring Street, then southwest along the east side S. Spring Street to a point
where city limits proceeds southeast, then southeast along city limits to a point where city
limits proceeds southwest along the railroad right of way, then southwest along the west
side of the railroad right of way until a point where city limits proceeds northwest, then
northwest along city limits to a point where city limits proceeds southwest along State
Highway 32, then southwest along city limits to a point where city limits proceeds west,
then west along city limits to a point where city limits proceeds north, then north along
city limits to a point where city limits proceeds southwest at the intersection of the
Ozaukee Interurban Trail and County Highway LL, then southwest following Ozaukee
Interurban Trail a point where city limits proceeds west, then following city limits west to
a point where city limits proceed north, then north following city limits until Sunset
Road, then east along Sunset Road to a point where city limits proceed north, then north
along city limits until a point where city limits proceed west, then west along city limits
to a point where city limits proceed north, then north along city limits until a point where
city limits proceed east, then east along city limits to a point where city limits proceed
north, the north along city limits to a point where city limits proceed east, then east along
city limits to a point where city limits proceed north, then north along city limits to a
point where city limits proceed east, then east along city limits to a point where city
limits proceed south, then south to Sunset Road, then east along Sunset Road to its
intersection with the Ozaukee Interurban Trail, then northeast following the Ozaukee
Interurban Trail to its intersection with S. Spring Street, then northeast on S. Spring
Street to W. 4th Avenue, then northwest on W. 4th Avenue to S. Garfield Avenue, then
City of Port Washington Chapter 1 - Page 6 12/18/2013
northeast on Garfield Avenue to 2nd Avenue, then northwest on 2nd Avenue to High
Street, then north on High Street to Lincoln Avenue, then east on Lincoln Avenue to S.
Spring Street, then south on S. Spring Street to Oakland Avenue, then east on Oakland
Avenue to Division Street, then north on Division Street to Chestnut Street, then east on
Chestnut Street to the point of beginning.
EXCLUDING: Beginning at the intersection of the west parcel line of parcel ID
#070320300500 and Sunset Road, then north along city limits to a point where city limits
proceed east, then east along city limits to a point where city limits proceed north, then
north along city limits to a point where city limits proceed east, then east along city limits
to a point where city limits proceed north, then north along city limits to a point where
proceed east, the east along city limits to where a point where city limits proceed
southwest, then southwest along city limits (following S. Park Street) to a point where
city limits proceed west, then west along city limits to a point where city limits proceed
south, then south along city limits to a point where city limits proceed west, then west
along city limits to a point where city limits proceeds south, then south along city limits
to a point where city limits proceeds west, then west along city limits to a point where
city limits proceeds south, then south along city limits to a point where city limits
proceeds west, then west along city limits to the beginning of the exclusion.
EXCLUDING: Beginning at a point at the intersection of Sunset Road and S. Park Street,
east along Sunset Road until a point where city limits proceed north, then north to where
city limits proceed east, then east until CTH C (S. Division Street), then southwest along
the east line of CTH C until a point where city limits proceed east, then east along the
city limits to the Lake Michigan shoreline, then south along the Lake Michigan shoreline
until a point where the city limits proceed west, then west along the city limits to CTH C,
then northeast along the west side CTH C to a point where the city limits proceed west,
then west along the city limits to a point where the city limits proceed northeast, then
northeast to a point where the city limits proceed west, then west along the city limits to a
point the city limits proceed north, then north along the east line of S. Park Street to the
beginning of the exclusion.
5th Aldermanic District – Includes Ward 5 with the following boundaries:
WARD 5 – Beginning at the intersection of W. Grand Avenue and Spring Street, then
west on W. Grand Avenue to its intersection with Freeman Drive, then south along
former County Highway LL off ramp/State Highway 33 onramp to its intersection with
the east side of County Highway LL, then west across County Highway LL to W. Second
Avenue, then west on W. Second Avenue extending to the west to Jackson Road, then
north along Jackson Road to State Highway 33, then east along the south right-of-way of
State Highway 33 to a point where city limits proceed north, then north along city limits
to a point where city limits proceed west, then west along city limits to a point where city
limits proceed south, then south along city limits to a point where city limits proceed
west, then west along city limits to a point where city limits proceed south, then south
along city limits to a point where city limits proceed west, then west along city limits to a
point where city limits proceed north, then north along city limits to a point where city
limits proceed west, then west along city limits to a point where city limits proceed south,
then south along city limits until State Highway 33, then west along the north right-ofway
of State Highway 33 to a point where city limits proceed north, then north along city
City of Port Washington Chapter 1 - Page 7 12/18/2013
limits to a point where city limits proceed west, then west along city limits to a point
where city limits proceed north, the north along city limits to a point where city limits
proceed east, then east along city limits to a point where city limits proceed north, then
north along city limits to Green Bay road, proceeding northeast along Green Bay Road to
a point where city limits proceed south, then south along city limits to a point where city
limits proceed east, then east along city limits to a point where city limits proceed north,
then north along city limits to a point where you meet Green Bay Road, then northwest
along Green Bay Road to a point where the city limits proceed south, then south along
city limits to a point where city limits proceed east, then east along city limits to a point
where city limits proceed north, then north along city limits to a point where city limits
proceed southeast, then southeast along city limits until you meet up with County
Highway LL, then follow County Highway LL north to a point where the city limits
proceed east, then east along city limits until a point where city limits proceed north, then
north along city limits until W Walters Street, then east on W Walters Street and
continuing east along the city limits until Moore Road, then following Moore Road
southeast until Spring Street, then south on Spring Street to the point of beginning.
6th Aldermanic District – Includes Ward 6 with the following boundaries:
WARD 6 – Beginning at the intersection of Second Avenue and County Highway LL,
then north along former County Highway LL off ramp to W. Grand Avenue, then east on
W. Grand Avenue to Tower Drive, then south on Tower Drive to Lincoln Avenue, then
east on Lincoln Avenue to High Street, then south on High Street to 2nd Avenue, then
southeast on 2nd Avenue to Garfield Avenue, then southwest on Garfield Avenue to 4th
Avenue, then southeast on 4th Avenue to S. Spring Street, then continuing northeast on S.
Spring Street to 3rd Avenue, then southeast on 3rd avenue to S. Spring Street, then
southwest on S. Spring Street to its intersection with the Ozaukee Interurban Trail, then
Southwest along the Ozaukee Interurban Trail to Sunset Road, then west on Sunset Road
to County Highway LL, then north on County Highway LL following city limits to the
point of beginning.
7th Aldermanic District – Includes Ward 7 with the following boundaries:
WARD 7 – Beginning at the intersection of N. Wisconsin Street and C.T.H. LL, then
south on N. Wisconsin Street to Jefferson Street, then west on Jefferson Street to N.
Webster Street, then south on N. Webster Street to W. Walters Street, then west on W.
Walters Street to Grant Street, then north on Grant Street to a point where city limits
proceed west, then west along city limits to a point where city limits proceeds north, then
north along city limits to a point where city limits proceeds east, then east along city
limits to Grant Street, then north along Grant Street to a point where city limits proceeds
southwest, then southwest along city limits to a point where city limits proceed
northwest, then northwest along city limits to a point where city limits parallels railroad
right-of-way, then northeast along railroad right of way to a point where city limits
proceeds east, then east along city limits to a point where city limits proceeds north, then
north along city limits to a point where city limits parallel the railroad right of way, then
northeast along the railroad right of way to a point where city limits proceeds west, then
west along city limits to a point where city limits proceeds north, then north along city
limits to County Highway LL, then east along County Highway LL to the intersection of
City of Port Washington Chapter 1 - Page 8 12/18/2013
N. Wisconsin Street and Interstate Highway 43, then south along N. Wisconsin Street to
the point of beginning.
B. Location of Polling Places. Election polling places are hereby designated at the
following locations to serve each of the aldermanic districts and wards set forth below:
1. Aldermanic Districts 1 and 7, Wards 1 and 7:
St. Matthew Lutheran Church, 1525 N. Grant Street.
2. Aldermanic Districts 2 and 3, Wards 2 and 3:
Port Washington City Hall, 100 W. Grand Avenue.
3. Aldermanic Districts 4, 5 and 6, Wards 4, 5 and 6:
Grand Avenue United Methodist Church, 505 W. Grand Avenue.
1.04.000 ORDINANCES. All proposed ordinances shall be prepared by the City
Attorney at the direction of the Common Council. Any proposed ordinance shall be first
introduced at a Council Meeting with a first reading and discussion with no action to be
taken at this meeting. A proposed ordinance shall be voted on at a meeting held at least
one week but not more than five weeks after the first reading. The Council may, in cases
of emergency, by a three-quarter vote of those members present waive this section of the
ordinance requiring a first reading before the adoption of an ordinance. All adopted
ordinances shall be incorporated into the City Code as soon as possible.
Pursuant to Section 4.002, Wis. Stats., the following conventions pertaining to the above
geographical boundary descriptions apply:
(1) Each bound continues to the intersection with the boundary next named, or to the
intersection with a straight-line extension of such bound.
(2) If the bound is a street, it follows the centerline of such street or the centerline of such
street extended.
(3) If the bound is a railroad right-of-way, it follows the centerline of such railroad rightof-
way.
(4) If the bound is Lake Michigan, it follows the highwater shoreline of such lake.
(5) If the bound follows a municipal boundary, it coincides with such boundary
1.05.000 MAYORAL APPOINTMENTS TO STANDING AND STATUTORY
COMMITTEES.
City of Port Washington Chapter 1 - Page 9 12/18/2013
1.05.010 Required Appointments. The mayor shall appoint aldermen to the following
standing statutory committees.
1. Three aldermen to the Board of Public Works.
2. Three aldermen to the Finance Committee.
3. One alderman to the Planning Commission.
4. Three aldermen to the License Committee.
5. One alderman to the Park Board.
6. One alderman to the Commission on Aging.
7. One alderman to the Library Board.
8. One alderman to the Harbor Commission.
9. Three aldermen to the Administration Committee.
10. Three aldermen to the Personnel Committee.
1.05.020 The Mayor shall not appoint an alderman to more than one of the following
committees, boards, or commissions:
1. Board of Public Works (3)
2. Finance Committee (3)
3. Plan Commission (1)
1.05.030 Commencing with the regular term of office for the City Clerk commencing the
third Tuesday of April, 1985, selection of the City Clerk shall be by appointment by the
Mayor subject to confirmation by the Council.
1.05.040 Commencing with the third Tuesday of April, 1985, said office shall be
consolidated with the City Administrator of the City of Port Washington.
1.06.000 ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL. Any person desiring to address the Council
regarding a particular subject matter shall do so during that portion of the Council
meeting reserved for comments by the public. The Council may discuss, but shall not act
on, any matter raised by the public during a comment period, provided, however, that
extensive discussion and action on such matter shall be deferred until specific notice of
the subject mater can be given as required by law.
1.07.000 COUNCIL GOVERNED. Unless otherwise provided, the Council shall be
governed by Robert’s Rules of Order.
CHAPTER 2
Officials, Boards and Commissions
Table of Contents
2.01.000 ELECTED OFFICIALS
2.01.010 Mayor
2.01.020 Common Council
2.01.030 Aldermen
2.01.040 Assessor
2.01.050 Treasurer
2.01.060 City Clerk
2.01.070 City Attorney
2.01.080 Spring Primaries
2.01.090 Salaries
2.01.100 Polling Place Hours
2.01.110 Election Officials
2.02.000 DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION
2.02.010 List of Departments
2.02.020 Administrative Policies
2.03.000 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
2.03.010 Appointment
2.03.020 Term
2.03.030 Termination
2.03.040 Conditions of Employment
2.03.050 Duties & Responsibilities
2.04.000 DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION
2.05.000 DEPARTMENTS OF POLICE, FIRE AND AMBULANCE
2.06.000 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
2.06.010 Division of Engineering
2.06.020 Division of Inspections
2.06.030 Division of Sewers
2.06.040 Division of Water
2.06.050 Division of Streets
2.07.000 DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
2.08.000 DEPARTMENT OF SENIOR CITIZENS SERVICES
2.09.000 DEPARTMENT OF LIBRARY SERVICES
2.10.000 DEPARTMENT OF MARINA/HARBOR FACILITIES
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 1 1/19/2011
2.11.000 DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING & ZONING
ADMINISTRATION
2.12.000 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
2.12.010 Police & Fire Commission
2.12.020 Board of Public Works
2.12.030 Parks and Recreation Board
2.12.040 Commission on Aging
2.12.050 Library Board
2.12.060 Board of Health
2.12.070 Board of Review
2.12.080 Economic Development Committee
2.12.090 Plan Commission
2.12.100 Finance and License Committee
2.12.110 (Repealed)
2.12.120 Personnel Committee
2.12.130 Administration Committee
2.12.140 Safety Committee
2.12.150 (Repealed)
2.12.160 Community Development Authority
2.12.170 Cooperative Development Committee
2.12.180 Citizen Membership on Multiple Boards, Commissions and
Committees Prohibited
2.12.190 Traffic Safety Committee
2.12.200 Business Improvement District Board Directors
2.13.000 CITY CLERK DUTIES
2.14.000 CODE OF ETHICS
2.15.000 RECORDS RETENTION ORDINANCE
2.15.010 Purpose
2.15.020 Definitions
2.15.030 General Provisions
2.16.000 MUNICIPAL COURT
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 2 1/19/2011
CHAPTER 2
Officials, Boards and Commissions
2.01.000 ELECTED OFFICIALS.
2.01.010 Mayor. The Mayor shall be elected at the Spring Election in 1973 and at the
Spring Election every three years thereafter for a term of three years. The term of office
shall begin on the third Tuesday in April in the year of election.
2.01.020 Common Council. The Common Council shall consist of the mayor and one
alderman from each aldermanic district in the City.
2.01.030 Alderman. The aldermen from the odd numbered districts shall be elected at
the Spring Election in odd numbered years and the aldermen from the even numbered
districts shall be elected at the Spring Election in even numbered years. The term of
office for aldermen shall be two years and begin on the third Tuesday in April in the year
of the election.
2.01.040 Assessor. The city assessor shall be certified by the Wisconsin Department of
Revenue under Section 73.03 (2) (b), Wis. Stats., and commencing at such time as the
individual serving as City Assessor as of July 19, 1988, vacates said office, is not reelected
to said office, chooses not to seek election for a succeeding term, or fails to file
nomination papers by the last date on which such nomination papers are due for a
succeeding term, whichever occurs first, selection of the City Assessor shall be by
appointment of the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Council. The term of office
shall be two years and shall begin on May 1 in odd numbered years.
2.01.050 Treasurer. Commencing at such time as the individual serving as City
Treasurer as of July 19, 1988, vacates said office, is not re-elected to said office, chooses
not to seek election for a succeeding term, or fails to file such nomination papers by the
last date on which such nomination papers are due for a succeeding term, whichever
occurs first, selection of the City Treasurer shall be by appointment of the Mayor subject
to confirmation of the Council. The compensation for the Treasurer will be determined
by the Council. The term of office of the City Treasurer shall be for an indefinite period.
2.01.070 City Attorney. Commencing with the regular term of office for the City
Attorney commencing May 1, 1989, selection of the City Attorney shall be by
appointment of the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Council. The term of office
shall be two years and shall begin on May 1 in odd numbered years.
2.01.080 Spring Primaries. Whenever three or more candidates file nominations for a
city office, a primary to nominate candidates for the office shall be held.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 3 1/19/2011
2.01.090 Salaries. The Mayor shall be paid a salary and be reimbursed for expenses and
per diem costs at amounts to be established, from time to time, by Council resolution.
Expense or per diem reimbursement, if any, will only be provided when a Mayor or
Alderman is in attendance at a government function or in furtherance of a municipal
activity requiring the Mayor or Alderman’s absence from a place of employment or under
such circumstances so as to cause financial loss, but only when previously authorized by
the Mayor or Common Council. Whenever the above salaries are to be changed or
established by resolution the Council shall fix such an amount not later than the first
regular meeting in February for those who may be elected or appointed during the
ensuing year. The salary of the Mayor and Aldermen shall not be increased or
diminished during a term. The salary of other elected officials shall be fixed by
resolution effective the first day of each year.
2.01.100 Polling Place Hours. The polls for all elections shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. all election days.
2.01.110 Election Officials. Election officials appointed pursuant to Wis. Stats. Chapter
7 may be appointed so that, if necessary, there are two (2) sets of officials to work at
different times on all election days.
2.02.000 DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION.
2.02.010 List of Departments. The City shall be divided into the following departments
and heads thereof:
Department of Administration…………………... City Administrator
Department of Police…………………………… Police Chief
Department of Fire……………………………… Fire Chief
Department of Public Works……………………. Director of Public Works
Department of Parks & Recreation………………Director of Parks & Recreation
Department of Senior Citizens Service…………. Senior Citizen Director
Department of Library Services………………….Library Director
Department of Marina/Harbor Facilities………… Harbormaster
Department of Planning & Zoning Administration..Director of Planning & Development
2.02.020 Administrative Policies.
A. The City Administrator as the Chief Administrative Officer shall be responsible under
the direction of the Mayor and Common Council to implement administrative policies
and to carry out the actions required by Statute or these Ordinances.
B. Perform Duties. Each Department Head and officer of the City shall perform all
duties required by him or her by State law, Ordinances of the City, or such other duties as
may be required of him or her by the Mayor and Common Council through the direction
of the City Administrator.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 4 1/19/2011
C. Records. Each Department shall establish and maintain records sufficient for proper
control of departmental activities and to form a basis for reports. Obsolete public records
may be destroyed after seven (7) years unless a longer and more specific time is
prescribed by Wisconsin Statutes. Prior to any such destruction at least sixty (60) days
notice in writing shall be given the Historical Society pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes.
Public records may be preserved by the use of microfilm or other reproductive devices
meeting the established standards prescribed by the Wisconsin Statutes.
D. Background Investigations. Every new employee and/or volunteer of the City may
have a routine background check made by the police department. The police department
shall conduct an investigation of the applicant including, but not limited to, requesting
information from the state, surrounding municipalities and/or any community or state
where the applicant has previously resided concerning the applicant’s arrest and
conviction record. This will be done before appointment and such report shall be filed
with the City Administrator. The personal background and criminal and/or civil action
data will be evaluated in relation to the applicant’s perceived ability to perform the duties
and responsibilities of the specific position for which he or she has applied.
2.03.000 CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator shall be the Chief
Administrative operating officer of the City.
2.03.010 Appointment. The City Administrator shall be appointed by the affirmative
vote of a majority of the members of the entire common Council.
2.03.020 Term. The term of the office of the City Administrator shall be for an
indefinite period.
2.03.030 Termination. The City Administrator’s employment may be terminated by a
majority vote of the members of the entire common council.
2.03.040 Conditions of Employment. The salary, fringe benefits and conditions of
employment shall be determined by the common council. The work performance of the
City Administrator shall be evaluated annually at a time and in accordance with
procedures determined by the mayor and the common council.
2.03.050 Duties and Responsibilities.
A. The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the City and shall
direct, coordinate and expedite activities of all City departments, divisions and offices.
B. The City Administrator shall execute and be administratively responsible for all
policies and programs established by the Mayor and Council and shall be responsible for
such other duties as may be assigned by the Mayor and the Common Council from time
to time.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 5 1/19/2011
C. The City Administrator shall be ex officio a member of all boards, commissions and
committees of the City, except of the Police and Fire Commission. The City
Administrator shall not be authorized a vote by virtue of this appointment.
D. The City Administrator shall supervise all department heads (excluding those under
the authority of the Police & Fire Commission) and all other City personnel, through
department heads. The City Administrator and department heads are responsible for
hiring, suspending, and dismissing of all employees with final approval needed from the
appropriate board or committee and the Common Council. The hiring, suspension or
dismissal of department heads will be based upon the recommendation of the City
Administrator to the Personnel Committee with final authority retained by the Common
Council.
E. The City Administrator shall be the financial advisor of the City and shall oversee all
departments as to budget performance and shall report regularly to the Mayor and
Common Council thereon; the City Administrator shall prepare the annual and capital
improvements budgets and shall review and interpret financial reports submitted to the
Common Council; the City Administrator shall review and report to the Common
Council significant variations and actual expenses compared to budgeted expenditures;
the City Administrator shall advise and recommend to the Mayor and Common Council
the adoption of various plans and programs of finance including available local, county,
state or federal revenue resources; the City Administrator shall act as a purchasing agent
for the City and develop a program for such purchases, the City Administrator shall
prepare the controller’s report, keep the official records for the City of Port Washington
and act as the Office Manager.
2.04.000 DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION. The Department of
Administration shall consist of the City Administrator’s Office, the Treasurer’s Office,
the City Clerk’s Office, the Assessor’s Office, and the Water Department Billing and
Records Office. The Department of Administration shall perform all those duties
required by the Wisconsin Statutes and the Ordinances of the City. The accounting and
financial, budgeting, payroll, licensing, and tax collection shall be performed by the
Department of Administration. The Department of Administration shall also keep a
record of all official documents of the City of Port Washington. The City Administrator,
as office manager, shall be responsible for supervision of the clerical employees in the
Department of Administration.
2.05.000 DEPARTMENTS OF POLICE, FIRE AND AMBULANCE. The
Departments of Police, Fire, and Ambulance shall be supervised by the Police & Fire
Commission in accordance with Wisconsin Statutes Section 62.13 (6). The Police & Fire
Commission shall perform all duties required by the Wisconsin Statutes and the local
ordinances of the City.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 6 1/19/2011
2.06.000 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Department of Public Works
shall be governed and supervised by the Board of Public Works. The Director of Public
Works shall be appointed, upon recommendation of the City Administrator, by the
Common Council by an affirmative vote of the majority of the members of the entire
Common Council. The term and compensation of such Director shall be determined by
the Council.
The Director of Public Works shall recommend to the Board of Public Works those for
employment for whom he shall be responsible for supervision including any assistant or
clerical personnel in his office; a Street Commissioner, and employees in the department;
a Water Department Superintendent and employees in the department; a Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent and employees in that department; a Building Inspector and
employees in that department. All full time employees to be employed, their term and
compensation shall be subject to council determination and approval, except that
employment of seasonal employees shall not be subject to council determination and
approval. The Department of Public Works shall be divided into five divisions.
2.06.010 Division of Engineering. This division shall perform all engineering services
for the Department of Public Works and for such other departments of the City as may
from time to time require such services, and shall be responsible for the inspection of
street, sidewalk, sewer and water, and other construction projects. This division shall be
supervised by the City Engineer under the direction of the Director of Public Works.
2.06.020 Division of Permits and Inspections. This division shall issue all permits for
and inspect all work required, under the provisions of the electrical, plumbing and
building codes of the City. This division shall be supervised by the Director of
Inspection and Zoning Code Enforcement Officer who shall supervise the electrical,
plumbing and building inspectors, under the direction of the City Administrator.
2.06.030 Division of Wastewater Treatment. The Division of Wastewater Treatment
shall be responsible for the conversion of raw sewage from the inception at the disposal
plant to its disposal. This division shall be supervised by the Wastewater Superintendent
under the direction of the Director of Public Works.
2.06.040 Division of Water Filtration. The Division of Water Filtration shall operate
and maintain the City water distribution system and shall pump, purify and filter supplied
to such distribution system. The Division of Water Filtration shall be supervised by the
Water Superintendent under the direction of the Director of Public Works.
2.06.050 Division of Streets. This division shall direct the repair and maintenance of
streets, sidewalks, sanitary and storm sewers, and public places, collect garbage and
rubbish, be responsible for the clearing of snow as may be directed by the Director of
Public Works and be responsible for the City owned street light system and traffic
signals. This division shall be supervised by the Street Commissioner, who shall be the
City Weed Commissioner, under the director of Public Works.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 7 1/19/2011
2.07.000 Department of Parks and Recreation. The Department of Parks and
Recreation shall be governed and supervised by the Parks and Recreation Board. The
Director of Parks and Recreation shall be appointed, under recommendation of the City
Administrator, by the Common Council by an affirmative vote by the majority of the
members of the entire Common Council. The term and compensation of such Director
shall be determined by the Council. The Director shall recommend to the Board for
employment those employees to be employed, their term and compensation subject to
council determination and approval, except that employment of seasonal employees shall
not be subject to council determination and approval.
2.08.000 Department of Senior Citizen Services. The Department of Senior Citizens
Services shall be governed and supervised by the Commission on Aging. The Senior
Citizen Director shall be appointed, upon recommendation of the City Administrator, by
the Common Council by an affirmative vote by the majority of the members of the entire
Common Council. The term and compensation of such Director shall be determined by
the Council. The Director shall recommend to the Commission for employment those
employees for whom it shall be responsible. The full time employees to be employed,
their term and compensation shall be subject to Council determination and approval.
2.09.000 Department of Library Services. The Department of Library Services shall be
governed and supervised by the Library Board.
2.10.000 Department of Marina/Harbor Facilities. The Department of Marina/Harbor
Facilities shall be governed and supervised by the Harbor Commission. The
Harbormaster shall be appointed, upon recommendation of the City Administrator, by the
Common Council by an affirmative vote by the majority of the members of the entire
Common Council. The term and compensation of such Harbormaster shall be
determined by the Council. The Harbormaster shall recommend to the Harbor
Commission for employment those employees for whom the Harbormaster shall be
responsible. The employees to be employed, their term and compensation shall be
subject to council determination and approval, except that employment of seasonal
employees shall not be subject to council determination and approval.
2.11.000 Department of Planning and Zoning Administration.
The Department of Planning and Zoning Administration shall be supervised by the City
Administrator. The Director of Planning and Development shall be appointed, upon
recommendation of the City Administrator, by the Common Council by an affirmative
vote of the majority of the members of the entire Common Council. The term and
compensation of such Director shall be determined by the Council. The Director of
Planning and Development shall serve as City Zoning Administrator, direct the City’s
economic development activities and programs, and be responsible for preparation and
implementation of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 8 1/19/2011
2.12.000 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS. The policies of the City shall be developed
and proposed by the Boards, Committees and Commissions listed in this article for
approval by the Common Council.
2.12.010 Police and Fire Commission.
A. How Constituted. This commission shall consist of five members appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the Council. The term of office of each member shall be five
years commencing May of each year.
B. Organization. The commission shall choose a chairman and secretary from its
members at its first organizational meeting in May of each year.
C. Responsibilities. This commission shall be responsible for all matters authorized by
Wis. Stat. Section 62.13 (6) and these ordinances.
2.12.020 Board of Public Works.
A. How Constituted. This board shall consist of three aldermen and three citizen
members. For elected officials appointed to the board. The term of office shall be one
year commencing at the regular meeting on the third Tuesday in April. For non-elected
officials, the term of office shall be three years commencing at the regular meeting on the
third Tuesday in April. Commencing the third Tuesday in April, 1978, one member shall
be appointed for one year; one member for two years, and one member for three years.
Thereafter, all appointments of non-elected officials shall be for three years. All
appointments to the board shall be made by the Mayor; citizen member appointments
shall be subject to confirmation by the Council.
B. Organization. The board shall choose a chairman from its members on the fourth
Tuesday in April.
C. Responsibilities. The Board of Public Works shall be responsible for all duties
required by Wis. Stats. In these local ordinances. The board shall also be responsible for
the development and approval of policies and rules and regulations for the operation of
the Department of Public Works and for the recommendation of major City policies
affecting public works matters for approval by the Common Council.
2.12.030 Parks and Recreation Board.
A. How Constituted. This board shall consist of nine residents of the City, one of whom
shall be an alderman and one of whom shall be a student enrolled in the tenth or eleventh
grade at Port Washington High School at the beginning of the term. The term of office of
the aldermanic and student member shall be for one year. The term of office for other
members shall be for three years. All terms will commence the third Tuesday in April.
All appointments to the Board shall be made by the Mayor and approved by the Council.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 9 1/19/2011
B. Organization. The members of the board shall select a chairman and secretary from
its members at its first organizational meeting of the year.
C. Responsibilities. The board shall be responsible for the planning and development of
parks, green areas and recreational programming. It shall adopt rules and regulations
and policies for the operation of the Parks and Recreation Department.
2.12.040 Commission on Aging.
A. How Constituted. This commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the
Mayor, one of whom shall be an alderman. The term of office of the aldermanic member
shall be one year commencing the third Tuesday in April. The term of office of other
members shall be three years commencing the third Tuesday in April. All appointments
to the commission shall be made by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. All
members shall serve without compensation.
B. Organization. The members of the commission shall select a chairman and secretary
from its members at its first organizational meeting of the year.
C. Responsibilities. This commission shall investigate the needs of all programs for
senior citizens, coordinate programs of special concern to them and prepare an annual
report relating thereto for the Council prior to October 1 of each year with
recommendation for action to improve the quality of life for senior citizens.
2.12.050 Library Board.
A. How Constituted. This board shall consist of seven members who shall be residents
of the City of Port Washington.
Council shall at one time be a member of the Library Board. One member shall be a
school district administrator of his representative to represent the school district. The
term of office of any aldermanic representative shall be for one year and commence the
third Tuesday of April. Other members shall serve for three years commencing July 1.
Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the Common Council. No
compensation shall be paid any member except reimbursement for actual and necessary
expenses incurred in performing duties outside the city when authorized by the board and
per diem, mileage and other necessary expenses when authorized by the board and the
Common Council. Members of the board at the effective date of this ordinance shall
complete their original terms.
B. Organization. A majority of the membership constitutes a quorum but the board may,
by regulation, provide that three or more members shall constitute a quorum. Within 30
days after the beginning of the term for regular members, the board shall organize by the
election from their number, a president and such other officers as they deem necessary.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 10 1/19/2011
C. Powers and Duties.
1. The Library Board shall have exclusive control of the expenditure of all monies
collected, donated or appropriated for the library fund, and of the purchase of a
site and the erection of the library building whenever authorized. The Library
Board also shall have exclusive charge, control and custody of all lands,
buildings, money or other property devised, bequeathed, given or granted to, or
otherwise acquired or leased by the city for library purposes.
2. The Library Board shall audit and approve all vouchers for the expenditures of the
public library and forward the vouchers or schedules covering the same, setting
forth the names of claimants, the amounts of each claim and the purpose for
which expended, to the City Administrator with a statement thereon, signed by the
Library Board secretary or other designee of the Library Board, that the
expenditure has been incurred and that the Library Board has audited and
approved the bill. The city shall then pay the bill as others are paid.
3. Any person having a claim or demand against the city growing out of any act of
omission of the Library Board shall file with the Library Board a written
statement thereof. If the claim or demand or any part thereof is disallowed, the
claimant may bring an action against the city.
4. Notwithstanding ss. 59.031 (2) (b) and 59.033 (2) (b), Wis. Stats., the Library
Board shall supervise the administration of the public library and shall appoint a
librarian who shall appoint such other assistants and employees as the Library
Board deems necessary, and prescribe their duties and compensation.
5. The Library Board may employ competent persons to deliver lectures upon
scientific, literary, historical or educational subjects; and may cooperate with the
university of Wisconsin system, vocational, technical and adult education district
boards, the historical society, the department, cooperative educational service
agencies, school boards and other educational institutions to secure such lectures
or to foster and encourage by other means the wider use of books and other
resource, reference and educational materials upon specific, historical, economic,
educational and other useful subjects.
6. Within 60 days after the conclusion of the fiscal year of the city in which the
public library is located, the Library Board shall make a report to the city. The
report shall state the condition of the Library Board’s trust and the various sums
of money received for the use of the public library during the year, specifying
separately the amounts received from appropriations, from the income of trust
funds, from rentals and other revenues of the public library and from other
sources. The report shall state separately the condition of the permanent trust
funds in the Library Board's control , shall state in detail the disbursements on
account of the public library during that fiscal year and shall contain an estimate
of the needs of the public library for the next succeeding fiscal year.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 11 1/19/2011
7. The Library Board may receive, manage and dispose of gifts and donations as
follows:
(a) All persons wishing to make donations of property for the benefit of
the public library may vest the title thereto in the Library Board, to be
held and controlled by the board, when accepted, according to the
terms of the deed of gift, devise or bequest. As to such property the
board shall be deemed special trustees.
(b) If a gift, bequest, devise or endowment is made to the library, the
Library Board thereof may pay or transfer the gift, bequest, devise or
endowment, or the proceeds thereof, to the treasurer of the city, may
entrust any funds therefrom to a public depository under ch. 34 or may
pay or transfer such gift, bequest, devise or endowment to any member
of the Library Board to be selected by the Library Board and thereafter
to be known as financial secretary. The financial secretary shall hold
office only during membership on the Library Board and shall be
elected annually at the same time and in the same manner as the other
officers of the Library Board.
(c) If any such treasurer or financial secretary holds any property
belonging to the public library, the Library Board shall require a bond
from the treasurer or financial secretary to the Library Board in such
sum, not less than the amount of such property so held by him or her,
and with such sureties as the Library Board requires. The bond shall
be conditioned in substantially the same form as the ordinary bond
required from the treasurer of the city with the necessary changes.
(d) The treasurer or financial secretary shall make an annual report to the
Library Board showing in detail the amount, investment, income and
disbursements from the trust funds in his charge. Such report shall
also be appended to the annual report of the Library Board under s.
43.58 (6). The treasurer or financial secretary shall also send a copy of
such annual report to the commissioner of banking.
(e) In the case of a gift for a library building, the Library Board of the city
shall have the exclusive right to select and contract for the purchase of
a site.
2.12.060 Board of Health.
A. How Constituted. This board shall consist of the Common Council, the Health
Officer, and the Director of Inspections and Zoning Administration. The term of office
shall be one year and shall commence the third Tuesday in April. The Mayor shall
appoint the Health Officer, subject to confirmation by the Common Council.
B. Organization. The board shall select a chairman from its members at its regular
meeting on the third Tuesday in April.
C. Responsibilities. The board shall perform such duties required by the ordinances and
statutes of the State of Wisconsin.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 12 1/19/2011
2.12.070 Board of Review.
A. How Constituted. This board shall consist of five residents of the City, none of whom
shall occupy any public office or be publicly employed. In addition to five regular
members, there shall be two residents of the city, none of whom shall occupy any public
office or be publicly employed, who will serve as alternates to the board. The term of
office for all regular and alternate members of the board shall be for five years
commencing the third Tuesday in April. All appointments to the board shall be made by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council.
B. Organization. The members of the board shall select a chairman from its members at
its first organizational meeting of the year. The City Administrator shall designate a
clerk for the board. Compensation for non-elected members shall be fixed annually by
the Common Council. The assessor shall attend all meetings.
C. Responsibilities. The board shall perform such duties as required by the statutes or
ordinances.
2.12.080 Economic Development Committee.
A. How Constituted. This committee shall consist of the Mayor, an Alderman, and five
citizen members, appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common
Council. Not more than two of the citizen members may be non-residents of the City
who are affiliated with businesses located within the City. For the alderman member of
the committee, the term of office shall be one year commencing on the third Tuesday in
April. For the citizen members of the committee, the term of office shall be three years
commencing on the third Tuesday in April; provided, however, that commencing on the
third Tuesday in April, 2000, one member shall be appointed for one year, two members
shall be appointed for two years, and two members shall be appointed for three years.
Thereafter, all appointments of citizen members shall be for three years.
B. Organization. The Mayor shall be the chairperson and presiding officer. The
members shall select a secretary from its members at its first organizational meeting of
the year.
C. Responsibilities. This committee shall be responsible for overseeing the economic
health of the City, particularly the job-producing sector. This committee shall be the
liaison between employers and city government. This committee shall advise the city and
assist, where appropriate, in taking the surveys, and selecting and marketing tracts of
lands or buildings for employment activity. In carrying out this general charge, the
committee is charged with the following specific responsibilities.
1. Interface with local civic groups to include liaison with related development
groups to enhance city economic activities.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 13 1/19/2011
2. Provide for industry retention activities with an emphasis on regular periodic
communication.
3. Develop marketing plans and prospect response plans to meet economic
development goals.
4. Develop an inventory of new sites and existing facilities available to
appropriate prospects.
5. Consult with City Council on long-range economic development goals.
6. Compile community information to enhance marketing and response activities
such as demographics, labor, transportation, leasing and financing programs
available.
7. Assist, when needed, in commercial marketing and business recruitment
activities.
8. Develop and submit economic development coordinator and committee
budgets to City Council on an annual basis.
2.12.090 Plan Commission.
A. How Constituted. Commencing on the third Tuesday in April, 2000, this
Commission shall consist of the Mayor, an Alderman, the City Engineer, a member
of the Parks and Recreation Board selected by said Board, and three citizens of the
City. The term of office for each citizen member shall be three years, commencing
the third Tuesday in April. Commencing on the third Tuesday in April, 1998, and
annually thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint one citizen member to a three year
term.
B. Organization. The Mayor shall be the chairman and presiding officer. The
members of the commission shall select a secretary from its members at its regular
meeting in April, which shall not be held prior to the third Tuesday in April.
C. Responsibilities. The commission shall perform such duties as may be authorized
or required by State Statutes or these ordinances or as may be requested by the
Mayor or Council.
2.12.100 Finance and License Committee.
A. How Constituted. This committee shall consist of three aldermen appointed by the
Mayor. The term of office of each member shall be one year commencing the third
Tuesday in April.
B. Organization. The board shall choose a chairman from its members at its first
organizational meeting.
C. Responsibilities. This committee shall exercise policy guidance over the financial
interests of the City including the preparation of annual budgets, the receipt and
disbursement of funds and the audit of books of account of the City and its
departments. In addition, this committee shall review and recommend for approval to
the Council all those applications as required by statute or ordinance.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 14 1/19/2011
2.12.120 Personnel Committee.
A. How Constituted. This committee shall consist of three aldermen. The term of office
shall be for one year and commencing on the third Tuesday in April of each year.
B. Responsibilities.
1. Shall act as a review committee for personnel decisions in the grievance
procedure.
2. Shall review interdepartmental relationship of salaried, supervisory and other
personnel not members of a recognized bargaining unit.
3. Shall recommend to the Common Council conditions of employment, fringe
benefits and grievances of salaried, supervisory and other personnel not members
of a bargaining unit.
4. Shall recommend to the Common Council work standards and compliance
therewith for salaried, supervisory and other personnel not members of a
bargaining unit.
5. Shall recommend to the Common Council based upon recommendations from
the City Administrator and department heads increases or decreases in the
number of salaried, supervisory and other personnel not members of a bargaining
unit.
6. Shall develop policies and guidelines for negotiation strategies that can be used
by the City’s negotiation teams.
2.12.130 Administration Committee.
A. How Constituted. This committee shall consist of three aldermen and one citizen
member. The terms of office shall be for one year and commencing on the third
Tuesday in April of each year.
B. Responsibilities.
1. Shall be responsible for periodically reviewing and recommending changes to the
City’s Code of Ordinances as applicable.
2. Shall review and make recommendations to the Common Council on proposed
ordinances when referred to the Committee and as applicable.
3. Shall periodically review the City Administrator’s procedures for implementing
the policies of the Department of Administration.
2.12.140 Safety Committee.
A. How Constituted. The committee shall consist of one alderman, the City
Administrator, four City Department Heads, and one union representative. The
terms of office for the alderman and the union representative shall be for one year
and commence on the third Tuesday in April of each year. The term of office for
each Department Head shall be two years, commencing as follows: one on the third
Tuesday in April of even numbered years; one on the third Tuesday of October in
even numbered years; one on the third Tuesday in April of odd numbered years;
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 15 1/19/2011
B. Organization. The City Administrator shall serve as chairman of the committee.
C. Responsibilities.
1. Review safety surveys to detect hazardous conditions and unsafe work practices
and recommend corrective actions.
2. Study accident investigations of all types of accidents to determine cause and
preventive recurrence.
3. Review loss control reports for each City department and develop loss control
standards and rules.
4. Plan employee safety seminars that would promote safety in the workplace.
5. Keep accurate records of committee meetings so that recommendations can be
followed up and Department Heads kept informed of progress.
6. Recommend to the Personnel Committee disciplinary action when necessary.
2.12.160 Community Development Authority.
2.12.160 A. The Common Council having determined that a need for blight elimination,
slum clearance, urban renewal and community development programs and projects and
housing projects exists in the City of Port Washington, there is hereby created a
community development authority to be known as “The Community Development
Authority of the City of Port Washington, Wisconsin”, hereinafter known as The
Community Development Authority.
B. The Community Development Authority shall be constituted, organized, and
operated in strict accordance with all provisions of Section 66.4325, Wisconsin
Statutes.
2.12.170 Cooperative Development Committee.
A. How Constituted. The Committee shall consist of the Mayor, the council
representative to the Plan Commission, and one additional plan commission
member. The Mayor and the council representative to the Plan Commission shall
be permanent members of the committee, and the term of office for the additional
plan commission member shall be one year. All terms shall commence the third
Tuesday in April. The Mayor shall appoint a plan commission member as the third
member of the committee subject to confirmation by the Council. The initial
committee appointment for the third plan commissioner shall expire in April, 1998.
B. Organization. The Mayor, or his appointee, shall be the chairman of the committee.
If not the Mayor, the Mayor shall appoint a chairman at the first meeting after the
third Tuesday in April of each year.
C. Responsibilities. The committee is an advisory committee and shall be responsible
for recommending to the Plan Commission and Council plans and strategies
relating to increased communication and cooperation in the area of development
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 16 1/19/2011
2.12.180 Citizen Membership on Multiple Boards, Commissions and Committees
Prohibited.
A. Commencing on the third Tuesday in April, 1998, no person who is not a member of
the Common Council shall serve simultaneously on m ore than one of the Boards,
Commissions, or Committees described in this Chapter, excepting the Parks and
Recreation Board representative on the Plan Commission.
2.12.190 Traffic Safety Committee. A. Creation. The Traffic Safety Committee shall
consist of three aldermen, the City Engineer, and the Police Chief or his or her designee
and are appointed annually.
B. Duties and Powers. The Traffic Safety Committee shall meet as needed to review all
proposed ordinances relating to parking, speed limits, and traffic controls, and shall
provide a recommendation regarding all such ordinances to the Common Council. No
such ordinance shall be considered for adoption by the Common Council unless it has
been first reviewed by the Traffic Safety Committee. No ordinance related to speed
limits or traffic controls shall be recommended for adoption by the Common Council
except upon the basis of an engineering report. The Traffic Safety Committee shall have
no duties or powers not specifically enumerated in this Section.
2.12.200 Business Improvement District Board of Directors.
A. How Constituted. The Board of Directors shall consist of eleven (11) members, a
majority of whom shall own or occupy real property in the Business Improvement
District established by the City Council pursuant to §66.608, Wis. Stats. The Mayor
shall appoint members to the Business Improvement District Board in a manner
prescribed in §66.608 (3) (a), Wis. Stats. The term for each member shall be three
(3) years. The Board of Directors shall include an Alderman and a representative of
the City’s Chamber of Commerce. In addition to the current nine (9) members of the
Board of Directors, there shall be an additional two (2) members appointed on the
first Tuesday of May, 1999, with a term of office for one (1) of the members being
for one (1) year and the term of office for the additional new member being two (2)
years.
B. Organization. Organization of the Board of Directors shall be as set forth in the
Business Improvement District Operating Plan as submitted and approved by the
City Council and as set forth in §66.608, Wis. Stats.
C. Responsibilities. The Board of Directors shall exercise those responsibilities and
powers as set forth in the Business Improvement District Operating Plan and as set
forth in §66.608, Wis. Stats.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 17 1/19/2011
2.13.000 CITY CLERK DUTIES. The City Clerk shall perform those duties specified
by Section 62.90 (10) and (11), Wis. Stats., and those other duties specifically required
by Wisconsin Statutes to be performed by the City Clerk.
2.14.000 CODE OF ETHICS
2.14.010 Declaration of Policy. The proper operation of democratic government
requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial, and responsible to
the people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the
government structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public
have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is
hereby established a Code of Ethics for all City of Port Washington officials and
employees whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of boards,
committees and commissions of the City. The purpose of the Code is to establish
guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting
forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the City of Port
Washington and by directing disclosures by such officials and employees of private
financial or other interests in matters affecting the City. The Common Council
recognizes that the representatives of the City are drawn from society and therefore
cannot and should not be without all personal and economic interest in the decisions and
policies of government, that citizens who serve as city officials and employees retain
their rights as citizens to interest of a personal and economic nature.
That the standards of ethical conduct for city officials and employees need to distinguish
between those minor and inconsequential conflicts that are unavoidable in a free society
and those conflicts which are substantial in material and that city officials and employees
may need to engage in employment, professional or business activities other than official
duties in order to support themselves or their families and to maintain a continuity of
professional or business activity or may need to maintain investments which activities or
investments do not conflict with the specific provisions of this Code. The provisions and
purpose of this Code and such rules and regulations as may be established are hereby
declared to be in the best public interest. It is the intent of the Common Council that in
its operations the Board of Ethics shall protect to the fullest extent the right of individuals
affected.
2.14.020 Standards of Conduct. There are certain provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes
which should, while not set forth herein, be considered an integral part of any Code of
Ethics.
Accordingly, the provisions of the following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are made
a part of this Code of Ethics and shall apply to public officers and public employees
whenever applicable, to-wit:
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 18 1/19/2011
Section 946.10 – Bribery of Public Officers and Employees
Section 946.11 – Special Privileges from Public Utilities
Section 946.12 – Misconduct in Public Office
Section 946.13 – Private Interest in Public Contract Prohibited
2.14.030 Responsibility of Public Office. Public officials and employees are agents of
public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of this State and to carry out
impartially the laws of the nation, state and municipality and thus to foster respect of all
government. They are bound to observe in their official acts the highest standards or
morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal
considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their primary concern.
2.14.040 Definitions.
A. Financial Interest. Any interest which shall yield directly or indirectly a monetary or
other material benefit to the official or employee or to any person employing or
retaining services of the official or employee.
B. Anything of Value. Anything of value means any money or property, favor, service,
payment, advance forbearance, loan or promise of future employment but does not
include compensation and expenses paid by the state, fees, honorariums and expenses
which are permitted and reported under Section 19.56 Wis. Stats., and political
contributions which are reported under Chapter 11 Wis. Stats.
C. Persons. Any person, corporation, partnership or joint venture.
2.14.050 Conflict of Interest.
A. No official or employee shall accept from any person anything of value, as defined in
Section 2.13.040 B., which may tend to impair the official’s or employee’s
independence of judgement or action in the performance of his or her official duties.
1. It is not a conflict of interest for any public employee or public official to receive
a gift or gratuity that is an unsolicited item of nominal intrinsic value.
B. No public official or employee shall engage in any business or transaction or shall act
in regard to any financial interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the
proper discharge of his or her official duties for the benefit of the public, contrary to
the provisions of this code or which would tend to impair his or her independence of
judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties.
C. No public official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment or
render service for private interest when such employment or service is incompatible
with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair his or
her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official
duties unless otherwise permitted by law unless disclosure is made as hereinafter
provided.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 19 1/19/2011
D. No public official or employee and no business in which a City official or public
employee holds a ten percent (10%) or greater interest may enter into a contract with
the City of Port Washington involving a payment or payments of more than Three
Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) within a twelve (12) month period unless said official
or employee has first made a written disclosure of the nature and extent of such
relationship or interest to the Board and to the Department acting for the City in
regard to such contracts. This subsection does not affect the application of Section
946.13, Wis. Stats.
E. No official or employee shall disclose confidential information concerning the
property, government or affairs of this City nor shall he or she use such information
to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or any other
person.
F. Disclosure of Interest in Legislation. Any member of the Common Council who has a
financial interest in any proposed legislation before the Common Council shall disclose
on the records of the Common Council the nature and extent of such interest, prior to or
during the initial discussion on said legislation. Any other official or employee who has a
financial interest in any proposed legislative action of the Common Council and who
participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion or recommendation to the
Common Council, shall disclose on the records of the Common Council the nature and
extent of such interest.
2.14.060 Ethics Board. There is hereby created an Ethics Board consisting of three (3)
members and one alternate who shall serve without compensation unless the Common
Council otherwise provides. The members of the Board of Ethics shall be residents of the
City and shall not be elected officials, full-time appointed officials, City employees, nor
shall they be currently serving on any other city board or commission. Each member
shall be appointed by the Mayor and subject to the confirmation by the Common Council.
The City Attorney shall furnish the Board whatever legal assistance necessary in carrying
out its functions. Terms of office shall be three (3) years, except that when the initial
appointments are made one (1) member shall be appointed for one (1) year, one (1) for
two (2) years and one (1) for three (3) years. The alternate shall serve on the Board when
one of the members of the Board is unavailable. The term of the alternate shall be for
three (3) years. The Ethics Board shall elect its own chairman and vice-chairman.
2.14.070 Duties of Ethics Board.
A. The Ethics Board may adopt and develop written rules which shall be submitted to
the Common Council for approval. A copy of such rules shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
B. Any person to whom this ordinance applies, may apply to the Ethics Board for an
advisory opinion and shall be guided by the opinion rendered. Such person shall
have the opportunity to present his interpretation of the facts at issue and of the
applicability of provisions of the Code before the advisory decision is rendered. The
Board’s deliberations and action upon such applications shall be in meetings not open
to the public. Records of the Board’s opinions, opinion requests and investigations of
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 20 1/19/2011
C. The Board shall investigate any complaint properly filed with it.
D. The Board shall accept from any person, or make upon its own motion, a verified
complaint in writing which shall state the name of the official or employee alleged to
have committed a violation of this chapter and which shall set forth the particulars
thereof. The Board shall forward within ten (10) days a copy of the complaint to the
official or employee who is accused. If no action on the verified complaint is taken
by the Board within sixty (60) days, the complaint shall be void.
E. Following the receipt or motion of a verified complaint, the Board may make
preliminary investigations with respect to alleged violation of this chapter. No
preliminary investigation of the activities of any official or employee may be initiated
unless such official or employee is notified in writing. The notice shall state the
exact nature and purpose of the investigation, the individual’s specific actions or
activities to be investigated and a statement of such person’s due process rights.
F. If, after such investigation, the Board finds that probable cause exists for believing
the allegations of the complaint, it shall conduct a hearing on the matter which shall
be held not more than thirty (30) days after such finding. The Board shall give the
accused at least twenty (20) days’ notice of the hearing date. Such hearings shall be
at open session unless the accused petitions for a hearing are closed to the public. The
rules of criminal evidence shall apply to such hearings. All evidence, including
certified copies of records and documents which the Board considers, shall be fully
offered and made part of the record in the case. Every party shall be afforded
adequate opportunity to rebut or offer countervailing evidence.
G. During all stages of any investigation or proceeding conducted under this section, the
accused or any persons whose activities are under investigation shall be entitled to be
represented by counsel of his own choosing.
H. The accused or his representative shall have an adequate opportunity to examine all
documents and records to be used at the hearing under sub. D. at a reasonable time
before the date of the hearing as well as during the hearing, to bring witnesses, to
establish all pertinent facts and circumstances, and to question or refute any
testimony or evidence, including opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse
witnesses.
I. The Board shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and to issue
subpoenas granted other boards and commissioners under Section 885.01 (3) of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
J. Determination. Upon conclusion of the hearing the Board shall file its decision
within five (5) days in writing signed by all participating Board members with
findings of fact, conclusions of law concerning the propriety of the conduct of the
official or employee and if appropriate, refer the matter to the City Council or other
proper authority with a recommendation for suspension, removal from office or
employment or other disciplinary action.
K. The affirmative vote of the Board shall be required for any action taken by the Board,
with the exception that action taken by the Board pursuant to a hearing conducted
under Sub. F. shall require a unanimous vote.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 21 1/19/2011
2.14.080 Applicability of Code. This code shall be operative in all instances covered by
its provisions except when superceded by an applicable statutory provision and statutory
action is mandatory or when the application of a statutory provision is discretionary but
determined by the Ethics Board to be more appropriate or desirable.
2.14.090 Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is invalid or unconstitutional,
or if the application of this ordinance to any person or circumstances is invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other
provisions or application of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid
or unconstitutional provision or application.
2.15.000 RECORDS RETENTION ORDINANCE.
2.15.010 Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to establish a city records retention
schedule and authorize destruction of city records pursuant to the schedule on an annual
basis. Records custodians may destroy a record prior to the time set forth in the schedule
only if such a record has been reproduced as an original record pursuant to section 16.61
(7), Wisconsin Stats.
Any record not covered by this ordinance or any other regulation or law shall be retained
7 years unless the record is added by amendment into this ordinance and the shorter time
period approved by the state Public Records and Forms Board.
2.15.020 Definitions.
A. “Legal Custodian” means the individual responsible for maintaining records pursuant
to Section 19.33, Wis. Stats.
B. “Record” has the meaning defined in Section 19.32 (2), Wis. Stats.
2.15.030 General Provisions.
A. Historical Records. Under s. 19.21 (4) (a), municipalities must notify the State
Historical Society of Wisconsin (SHSW) prior to destroying records. However, the
SHSW has waived the required 60-day notice:
? For any record marked “W” (waived notice).
? SHSW must be notified prior to destruction of a record marked “N” (non-waived).
? Notice is also required for any record not listed in this ordinance.
? “N/A” indicates not applicable and applies to any record designated for permanent
retention.
B. Micro-filing of Records. Local units of government may keep and preserve public
records through the use of microfilm providing the microfilm meets the applicable
standards in Wis. Stats. 16.61 (7). Retention periods and estimated costs and benefits
of converting records between different media should be considered in deciding which
records to microfilm. After verification paper records converted to microfilm should
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 22 1/19/2011
be destroyed. The retention periods identified in his ordinance apply to records in any
media.
C. Destruction After Request for Inspection. No requested records may be destroyed
until after the request is denied. If an action is commenced under Section 19.37 Wis.
Stats., the requested record may not be destroyed until after a court order is issued
and all appeals have been completed. See 19.35 (5), Wis. Stats.
D. Destruction Pending Litigation. No record subject to pending litigation shall be
destroyed until the litigation is resolved.
E. Review and Approval By Public Records and Forms Board. This ordinance and the
retention periods of less than 7 years have been reviewed and approved by the Public
Records and Forms Board.
2.15.040 Records Retention Schedules. The following records are maintained by the
various departments in the city and are subject to uniform regulation unless otherwise
specified. The retention period and authority are listed with each record.
A. General Records Common throughout the Local Unit of Government:
Record Retention SHSW
ID# Brief Description Period Authority Notify
001 Contracts, leases,
agreements, notices
of taking bids EVT+7 59.715(10) W
002 Master insurance
contract P N/A
003 Cancelled FIS+7 59.715(18) W
B. Police Department
001 Traffic Accident
Reports (MV4000 forms) EVT+4 W
002 Telephone line and Radio
Frequency Tape Recordings
(other than dispatch tapes) CR+120 days W
003 Radar Laser Reports CR+4 W
004 Ride along Reports CR+1 W
005 False Alarm Reports EVT+1 W
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 23 1/19/2011
006 Daily Roster/Schedule CR+2 W
007 Daily Alert Bulletin CR+2 W
008 Cash Register Balance Sheets CR+2 W
009 TIME System Criminal
History Log CR+2 W
010 Overnight Parking
Register CR+1 W
011 Police Dispatch Tapes CR+120 days W
LEGEND:
Record ID#: is a unique control number for each type of record.
Brief Description: provides a brief description of the records. Group specific items
such as forms into logical groups that have the same function or purpose.
Retention period: refers to the time that the identified records must be kept until
destruction.
? CR stands for creation which usually refers to receipt or creation of the record.
? FIS stands for current fiscal year and the additional amount of time as indicated.
? EVT stands for event and refers to an occurrence that starts the retention “clock
ticking”. Close of contract, termination of employee, and disposition of a case are
common events.
? P stands for permanent retention.
Period of time: is expressed in years unless specifically identified as month or day.
Authority: refers to any specific statutory, administrative rule, or specific regulation that
determines retention of the record. In most cases this will be blank because units of
government have discretion to establish a time period.
SHSW Notify: refers to whether or not the State Historical Society of Wisconsin has
waived the required statutory notification prior to destruction of records.
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 24 1/19/2011
City of Port Washington Chapter 2 - Page 25 1/19/2011
? “W” means records are not historical and the required notification is waived.
? “N” means the records may have secondary historical value and therefore SHSW
notification is required on a case-by-case basis prior to destruction.
? “N/A” means not applicable and refers to those circumstances where a local unit of
government is retaining a record permanently.
2.16.000 MUNICIPAL COURT. A. Created. There is created and established a
Municipal Court, to be designated as the “Mid-Moraine Municipal Court”, under the
provisions of Ch. 755, Wis. Stats., and pursuant to the Agreement for the Operation of the
Municipal Court for Washington as amended (“Agreement”), a copy of which is on file
with the City Clerk.
B. Municipal Court Judge. The Municipal Court shall be under the jurisdiction of and
presided over by a Municipal Judge, who shall be an attorney licensed to practice law
in Wisconsin and who resides in any of the Member Municipalities as defined in the
Agreement. The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large in the Spring election for a
term of two (2) years commencing on May 1 of the year of his or her election. The
governing bodies of the Member Municipalities shall provide for a primary election
in the event that more than two (2) candidates file nomination papers for the position
of Municipal Judge for the existing Municipal Court for Washington County shall
serve as Judge of the Mid-Moraine Municipal Court until the end of his term.
C. Bond. The amount of the bond required by sec. 755.03 (1), Wis. Stats., shall be Two
Thousand Five Hundred ($2,500.00) Dollars.
D. Hours. The Municipal Court shall be open at such times as the Municipal Judge
determines, subject to the Agreement.
E. Contempt. The Municipal Judge may impose a forfeiture for contempt of court and a
jail sentence for nonpayment of the forfeiture and any applicable assessments, under
sec. 800.12 (2), Wis. Stats.
F. Jurisdiction. This section shall be construed to limit neither the jurisdiction of the
Municipal Court nor the authority of the Municipal Court to impose penalties under
the Wisconsin Statutes.
City of Port Washington Chapter 3 – Page 1 11/16/2011
CHAPTER 3
Finance
Table of Contents
3.01.000 DUPLICATE TREASURER’S BOND ELIMINATED
3.01.010 Bond Eliminated
3.01.020 City Liable for Default of Treasurer
3.02.000 BUDGET SYSTEM
3.02.010 Annual Budget Preparation
3.02.020 Executive Budget
3.02.030 Appropriation Resolution
3.02.040 Transfers of Balances
3.02.050 Money Drawn From Treasury
3.02.060 Financial Claims Against City
3.03.000 WISCONSIN RETIREMENT FUND
3.04.000 NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT INCREASES REQUIRED
3.05.000 PENALTY ON WATER UTILITY CHARGES
3.06.000 STATEMENT OF REAL PROPERTY STATUS; FEES
3.07.000 SPECIAL CHARGES FOR CURRENT SERVICES
City of Port Washington Chapter 3 – Page 2 11/16/2011
CHAPTER 3
Finance
3.01.000 DUPLICATE TREASURER’S BOND ELIMINATED.
3.01.010 Bond Eliminated. The City of Port Washington elects not to give the bond on
the municipal treasurer provided for by Section 70.67 (1) Wisconsin Statutes.
3.01.020 City Liable for Default of Treasurer. Pursuant to Section 70.67 (2),
Wisconsin Statutes, the City of Port Washington shall be obligated to pay, in case the
Treasurer thereof shall fail to do so, all state and county taxes required by law to be paid
by such Treasurer to the County Treasury.
3.02.000 BUDGET SYSTEM.
3.02.010 Annual Budget Preparation. The City Administrator shall be responsible for
preparing an annual budget for presentation to the Finance Committee and Common
Council.
3.02.020 Executive Budget. On or before October 31 each year, the City Administrator
shall submit to the Finance Committee a proposed Executive Budget representing a
financial plan for conducting the affairs of the City for the ensuing year. The budget
shall include the following information:
1. Detailed estimates of the expense of conducting each department and office of
the City for the ensuing fiscal year.
2. Expenditures for corresponding items for the current year and at least 2
preceding fiscal years with reasons for increases and decreases recommended
as compared with appropriation for the current year.
3. An itemization of all anticipated income of the City from sources other than
general property taxes and bond issues with a comparative statement of the
amounts received by the City from each of the same or similar sources for the
last 2 preceding fiscal years.
4. An estimate of the amount to be raised from general property taxes which,
with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed
expenditures.
5. Such other information as may be required by the Council.
City of Port Washington Chapter 3 – Page 3 11/16/2011
3.02.030 Appropriation Resolution. The Finance Committee shall submit to the
Council, at the time the annual budget is submitted, the draft of an appropriation
resolution providing for the expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. Upon the
submission of the proposed appropriation resolution to the Common Council, it shall be
deemed to have been regularly introduced therein. The Council shall provide for public
hearings on the budget and the proposed appropriation resolution either before a
committee of the Council or before the Council sitting as a committee of the whole.
Following the public hearing the proposed appropriation resolution may be changed or
amended and shall take the same course in the Council as other resolutions, but shall not
be passed before the first meeting of the Council in November. Upon final passage the
appropriation resolution shall be published in the manner provided for the publication of
other resolutions.
3.02.040 Transfers of Balances. Any transfer of a portion of an unencumbered balance
of an appropriation to any other purpose or object shall be reviewed by the Finance
Committee and a recommendation made by the Finance Committee to the Council for
final action. The City Administrator may approve requests of a department head for
transfers within a project account. All other requested transfers shall be submitted to the
Finance Committee for final Council action.
3.02.050 Money Drawn From Treasury. No money shall be drawn from the treasury of
the City, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in
pursuance of the annual appropriation resolution or of such resolution when changed as
authorized by Section 3.02.040. At the close of each fiscal year any unencumbered
balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation;
but appropriations may be made by the Council, to be paid out of the
income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works
which will not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue
in such force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished or
abandoned.
3.02.060 Financial Claims Against City. Payments may be made from the Treasury
after the City Administrator/Comptroller audits and approves each claim of payment as a
proper charge against the treasury, and endorses his or her approval on the claim after
having determined that funds are available in the approved budget, that the item or
service has been authorized by the appropriate Department Head, that the item or service
has been actually supplied or performed, and that the claim is just and valid pursuant to
law.
1. The City Administrator/Comptroller shall file with the Common Council a list
of claims approved not less than monthly showing the date paid, name of
claimant, purpose and amount.
City of Port Washington Chapter 3 – Page 4 11/16/2011
2. An annual detailed audit of the City’s financial transactions and accounts shall
be conducted pursuant to Wis. Stats. 73.10 or by a public accountant licensed
under Chapter 442.
3. All claims that are not a part of the approved budget shall be submitted
through the City Administrator/Comptroller to the Finance Committee for
review and then to the Common Council for approval.
3.03.000 WISCONSIN RETIREMENT FUND. Pursuant to Section 66.90, Wisconsin
Statutes, the City has elected to include eligible City personnel under the provisions of
the Wisconsin Retirement Fund in accordance with the terms thereof. Notice of such
election has been given to the Wisconsin Retirement Fund Board.
3.04.000 NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT INCREASES REQUIRED. The Assessor
shall, on or before the third Monday of June, cause written notice to be given by mail to
all taxpayers whose aggregate real estate assessment he has increased over the previous
year. Such notice shall be mailed to the last known address of such taxpayer and if such
address be unknown, such notice shall be addressed to the place where such property, or
any part thereof, was viewed or examined at the time the assessment was made.
Such notice shall state the aggregate real estate assessment for the previous year and the
corresponding assessment for the current year, together with a statement of the time and
place of the meeting of the Board of Review.
When the Assessor shall lay his assessment roll before the Board of Review he shall file
with the Board of Review a certified list of the taxpayers to whom he has given the notice
herein provided and that all of such notices were mailed in accordance with this section.
The failure of the Assessor to give the notice herein provided shall not invalidate or in
any way affect the validity of the assessment made.
3.05.000 PENALTY ON WATER UTILITY CHARGES. The City Administrator is
authorized to send a notice by October 15th to those arrears on water charges for services
prior to October 1st and there shall be assessed a penalty of 10% of such arrears if such
amount is not paid by November 1; that if such arrears with any such added penalty is not
paid by November 15th, the same shall be levied as a tax against the lot or parcel to which
the water was furnished.
3.06.000 STATEMENT OF REAL PROPERTY STATUS; FEES. The City
Treasurer and his or her designees are authorized to prepare a Statement of Real Property
Status form to be used to provide information often requested for transfers of real
property. Said form may include, but is not limited to, the amount of outstanding special
assessments; deferred assessments; contemplated or pending assessments; changes in
assessments; amount of taxes paid or outstanding; outstanding sewer, water and/or
electric bills; current sewer, water and/or electric bills; contemplated or pending
improvements; shoreland, wetland and/or floodplain status; violations of building, health
and/or zoning codes, and similar information. Any such information sought shall be
City of Port Washington Chapter 3 – Page 5 11/16/2011
provided to the person requesting it on said form, or on a similar form provided by the
requester and acceptable to the City Treasurer, in his or her sole discretion. Said report
shall be issued subject to errors and omissions and shall not be binding upon the City
since, in accordance with sec. 19.31, et seq. Stats., a requester may inspect and make or
receive copies of public records to verify the information contained therein to his or her
satisfaction. A fee of Thirty-Five Dollars ($35.00) shall be charged for locating,
researching and/or compiling such information and for completing such form, and such
fee shall be prepaid by the requester. The fee prescribed in this section may be modified
from time to time by resolution of the Common Council.
3.07.000 SPECIAL CHARGES FOR CURRENT SERVICES.
A. Findings and Determination; Authorization to Impose Special Charges. The
provision by the City of current services to real property within the city affects the
health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens. The cost of those services
should, to the extent practicable, be allocated directly to and im-posed against the
property receiving the services. The special charges established pursuant to this
section bear a reasonable relationship to the services provided by the City. Therefore,
the Common Council, pursuant to §66.0627, Stats., authorizes the establishment,
imposition, and collection of special charges against real property within the City for
current services, as provided herein.
B. Current Services. In addition to all other methods provided by law, special charges
for current services may be imposed by the Common Council by allocating all or part
of the cost to the real property served. Such services may include, but are not limited
to, snow and ice removal, weed elimination, street sprinkling, oiling and tarring,
repair of sidewalks or curb and gutter, garbage and refuse disposal, recycling,
stormwater management, including construction of stormwater manage-ment
facilities, tree care, soil conservation work under §92.115, Stats., water service
activation and meter reinstallation, services specifically authorized by the Municipal
Code, and such other services and charges as may be established or revised from time
to time by Common Council resolution.
C. Notices; In General; Service Charges; Lien; Collection. 1. Except as provided in
subsecs. 2 and 3, before a special charge for current services may be imposed, notice
thereof shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the affected property. The
mailing of a bill for such charge to the owner shall serve as notice that failure to pay
the charge within 30 days will result in the charge being delinquent, and in the
delinquent charge becoming a lien on the property and being included in the current
or next tax roll for collection. In addition, the City may provide notice to a property
owner by October 15 each year of any unpaid special charges owed to the city, which
charges, if not paid by November 15, may be placed on the tax roll under §66.0627,
Stats. Interest charges calculated at the rate of 12% per year shall be added to any
delinquent special charge. A special charge is not payable in installments.
City of Port Washington Chapter 3 – Page 6 11/16/2011
2. Street Tarring; Repair of Sidewalks, Curbs or Gutters. Before a special charge for
street tarring or the repair of sidewalks, curbs or gutters may be imposed, notice and a
public hearing shall be pro-vided as set forth in §66.0627 (3)(b), Stats.
3. Garbage and Refuse Disposal or Recycling. Before a special charge for garbage
and refuse disposal or recycling may be imposed, notice shall be given by Class 1
notice under ch. 985, Stats., published by November 10 each year in the City’s
official newspaper. The notice shall state the full amount of the garbage and refuse
disposal or recycling charge for the next year, and that such amount will be included
in the current property tax bill.
CHAPTER 4
Police Department
Table of Contents
4.01.000 POLICE DEPARTMENT
4.02.000 CHIEF OF POLICE
4.03.000 OTHER APPOINTMENTS
4.04.000 OTHER EMPLOYMENT
4.05.000 DUTIES OF CHIEF
4.05.010 Supervision
4.05.020 Arrest
4.06.000 POWERS OF POLICEMEN
4.07.000 WHO MAY ARREST
4.08.000 FIRES AND RIOTS
4.09.000 OFFICER PROVIDING BAIL
4.10.000 LIABILITY OF POLICE OFFICERS
4.11.000 AUXILIARY POLICE CORPS
4.12.000 COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER
4.13.000 SERVICE FEES
City of Port Washington Chapter 4 – Page 1 1/19/11
CHAPTER 4
Police Department
4.01.000 POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department shall consist of one Chief
of Police and such other officers and personnel as determined necessary from time to
time for the good order of the City and for the safety and welfare of the public, subject to
final financial approval of the Common Council.
4.02.000 CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Police and
Fire Commission and shall hold office during good behavior, subject to suspension or
removal by the Board for cause.
4.03.000 OTHER APPOINTMENTS. The Chief of Police shall appoint subordinates
subject to approval by the Board of Police and Fire Commission. Such appointments
shall be made by promotion when this can be done with advantage, otherwise from an
eligible list provided by examination and approval by the Board and kept on file with the
Board Secretary. The Chief of Police may appoint such persons for temporary
emergency duty as he shall deem advisable and necessary.
4.04.000 OTHER EMPLOYMENT. No regular member of the Police Department shall
engage in any other business or accept any other part-time employment except with
written permission of the Police and Fire Commission.
4.05.000 DUTIES OF CHIEF.
4.05.010 Supervision. The Chief of Police shall, under the supervision of the Mayor,
have general supervision of the Police Department. He shall obey all lawful orders of the
Common Council. He shall cause the public peace to be preserved by enforcement of
ordinances and resolutions of the Common Council and by the suppression of all riots
and disturbances that may occur.
4.05.020 Arrest. The Chief of Police shall cause to be arrested and prosecuted all
persons who shall be found violating any provisions of the Municipal Code or regulations
of the City of Port Washington. He shall likewise arrest all persons chargeable with
offenses punishable by the laws of the state or county and bring such persons before the
proper tribunal for punishment.
City of Port Washington Chapter 4 – Page 2 1/19/11
4.06.000 POWERS OF POLICEMEN. The Chief of Police and each policeman shall
possess the powers, enjoy the privileges and be subject to the liabilities conferred and
imposed by law upon constables and be taken as included in all writs and papers
addressed to constables; shall arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, and
with reasonable diligence take before the proper court, every person found in the City
violating any law of the state or ordinance of the City or county, and may command all
persons present in such cases to assist therein, and if any person, being so commanded,
shall refuse or neglect to render such assistance, he shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in section 25.04 of this code. Such persons shall collect the same fees allowed
to constables for similar service.
4.07.000 WHO MAY ARREST. The Mayor, Aldermen, Chief of Police, and members
of the Police Department, may, with or without process or complaint, arrest, retain and
confine in such place as may be provided by the Common Council of this City, until a
trial can be had in a proper court, any and all persons violating any provision of the
Municipal Code, any ordinance or regulation of this City, and any person who shall be
detected by said Mayor, Aldermen, Chief of Police or members of the Police Department
in the act of offending against any of the provisions of the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
4.08.000 FIRES AND RIOTS. The Chief of Police or any other officer directed by him
shall proceed to the scene of fires, riots, and tumultuous assemblages to direct traffic, to
save and protect property and to disperse mobs and arrest such persons as may be found
disturbing the peace of aiding or abetting others in so doing.
4.09.000 OFFICER PROVIDING BAIL. The Chief of Police or other officers shall not
provide bail for any persons arrested and shall in no case provide bail for any person
under arrest.
4.10.000 LIABILITY OF POLICE OFFICERS. Any police officer who shall willfully
neglect or refuse to perform any duty required of him by any provision of the Municipal
Code of the City shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 25.04 of this Code.
4.11.000 AUXILIARY POLICE CORPS. The Members of the Auxiliary Police Corps
shall be appointed by the Chief of Police, subject to approval by the Police and Fire
Commission. The Auxiliary Police shall be responsible to the Chief of Police who shall
prescribe rules and regulations for its control and management, subject to the approval of
the Police and Fire Commission.
City of Port Washington Chapter 4 – Page 3 1/19/11
City of Port Washington Chapter 4 – Page 4 1/19/11
4.12.000 COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER. Community service officer or officers
may be appointed by the Chief of Police, subject to approval by the Police & Fire
Commission. Said Community Service Officer shall be empowered to, among other
things, enforce all city ordinances and amendments thereto related to public health and
safety. This delegation of authority herein shall in no way limit the continuing authority
of police officers to enforce the city ordinances under similar circumstances.
4.13.000 SERVICE FEES.
A. Service Fees. Pursuant to secs. 814.70, 814.705 and 814.71, Wis. Stats., the City
of Port Washington Police Department shall charge a service fee of $35 when the
city police serve a warrant or commitment order upon a person. The person
served with the warrant or commitment order shall be responsible for payment of
the service fee. The service fee may be collected at the time of service or as a
court cost through the court.
B. Multiple Warrants or Commitment Orders. The Police Department shall charge a
separate fee for each warrant or commitment order served on a person.
C. Disposition of Fees. If warrant or commitment order service fees have been
collected by the court, those fees shall be forwarded by the court to the City
Treasurer.
CHAPTER 5
Fire Department
Table of Contents
5.01.000 COMPOSITION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT
5.02.000 CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT
5.03.000 OTHER OFFICERS
5.04.000 ANNUAL MEETING
5.05.000 DUTIES OF THE OFFICERS OF THE DEPARTMENT
5.05.010 Chief
5.05.020 Other Officers
5.05.030 Secretary-Treasurer
5.05.040 Engineers
5.05.050 Temporary Deputy Chief
5.06.000 CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS
5.07.000 BYSTANDERS MAY BE CALLED TO ASSIST AT FIRES
5.08.000 RESISTANCE TO FIREMAN
5.09.000 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
5.10.000 FALSE ALARMS
5.11.000 FIRE INSPECTION
5.11.010 Entering Buildings
5.11.020 What Inspection to Cover
5.11.030 Inflammable Material
5.11.040 Doors and Openings
5.11.050 Storage of Inflammables
5.11.060 Business Buildings Defined
5.11.070 Notice of Violations
5.11.080 Notice of Hazardous Conditions
5.12.000 RETIREMENT AND DEATH BENEFITS
5.13.000 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION CODE
5.13.010 Intent of Code
5.13.020 Application to New and Existing Conditions
5.13.030 Exceptions
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 1 6/7/06
5.13.040 Adoption of Codes
5.13.050 Definitions
5.13.060 Authority to Enter Premises
5.13.070 Inspection of Building and Premises
5.13.080 Investigation of Fires
5.13.090 Fire Records
5.13.100 Annual Report
5.13.110 Modifications
5.13.120 Appeals
5.13.130 New Materials, Processes or Occupancies Which May Require
Permits
5.13.140 Fire Hydrant Requirements on Private Property
5.13.150 Permits
5.13.160 Trash Burning
5.13.170 Open Flame
5.13.180 Apparatus Capable of Igniting Flammable Material Prohibited
5.13.190 Chimneys and Heating Appliances
5.13.200 Use of Torches or Flame Producing Devices
5.13.210 Combustible Materials
5.13.220 Storage of Petroleum Products With Flash Points of Less Than
100º F
5.13.230 Smoking Prohibited Conditions
5.13.240 Fire Hazards
5.13.250 Sprinkler Systems Required
5.13.260 Fire Warning Systems Required: Multi-Family Dwellings
5.13.270 Fire Warning Systems Required: One or Two Family Dwellings
5.13.280 Fire Extinguishing Equipment
5.13.290 Fire Lanes Required
5.13.300 Enforcement
5.13.310 Police Powers of Fire Department
5.13.320 Penalty
5.13.330 Penalty Provisions
5.13.340 Hazardous Spills
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 2 6/7/06
CHAPTER 5
Fire Department
5.01.000 COMPOSITION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Fire Department of the
City of Port Washington shall consist of one company of not more than 50 members.
5.02.000 CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Chief of the Fire Department shall
be appointed by the Police and fire Commission and shall hold office during good
behavior subject to suspension or removal by the Commission for cause.
5.03.000 OTHER OFFICERS. There shall be a 1st Assistant Chief, Deputy Chiefs,
Captains, Lieutenants, Engineers, Assistant Engineers, and a Secretary-Treasurer. The 1st
Assistant Chief, Deputy Chiefs, Captains, Lieutenants, Engineers, and Assistant
Engineers shall be appointed by the Chief, subject to approval by the Police and Fire
Commission. The Secretary-Treasurer shall be elected by the members at the annual
meeting and their term of offices shall be for one year and shall begin on January 1
succeeding the annual meeting.
5.04.000 ANNUAL MEETING. The annual meeting of the Fire Department shall be
held on the first Monday of December in each year.
5.05.000 DUTIES OF THE OFFICERS OF THE DEPARTMENT.
5.05.010 Chief.
1. The Chief shall preside over all meetings of the Department and shall have
command of the department at all fires and fire drills.
2. The Chief shall examine the apparatus and buildings of the Department as
often as necessary to convince himself that they are having the proper care
and are in serviceable condition, and report the same to the Common Council.
It shall also be his duty to submit to the Common Council in January of each
year a report showing the statistical and financial condition of the Fire
Department.
5.05.020 Other Officers. The other officers shall assist the Chief in the discharge of his
duties, and in case of the event of absence or disability to act, shall have all the powers of
the Chief, in the order rank.
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 3 6/7/06
5.05.030 Secretary-Treasurer.
1. The Secretary-Treasurer shall keep a record of the proceedings of the
Department, and record the same in a book for such purposes.
2. The Secretary-Treasurer shall keep a list of all the members of the
Department. He shall also keep a record of all fires and fire alarms and make
an estimate of the fire losses as near as can be ascertained annually.
3. The Secretary-Treasurer shall receive and have custody of all monies of the
Department and disburse the same only upon an order or check signed by the
Chief and Secretary-Treasurer of the Department and render an itemized
account of the same at the annual meeting of the Department, and to give a
bond in such sum as may be stipulated at the annual meeting.
5.05.040 Engineers. The Engineers shall keep all of the equipment and apparatus in said
Department in good repair. They shall be paid salaries which shall be fixed by the
Common Council.
5.05.050 Temporary Deputy Chief. The primary duty of the Temporary Deputy Chief
shall be to assist a new Chief during a transitional period following the appointment of
the new Chief, and to perform such other duties as may be assigned from time-to-time by
the new Chief. The Temporary Deputy Chief shall hold office for a term not to exceed
sixty (60) days immediately following the appointment of a new Chief, as determined by
the Police and Fire Commission, and shall be paid compensation in such amount or at
such rate as shall be fixed by the Common Council.
5.06.000 CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS. The Department may adopt a
constitution and by-laws as may be necessary for the orderly conduct of its meetings and
providing for the conduct of said Department in general.
5.07.000 BYSTANDERS MAY BE CALLED TO ASSIST AT FIRES. The Mayor, or
the Chief of the Fire Department, may require any bystander at any fire to render such
reasonable aid as shall be necessary.
5.08.000 RESISTANCE TO FIREMAN. No person shall willfully offer any hindrance
or resistance to a fireman in the discharge of his duty, nor shall any person willfully
injure in any manner, any hose, fire engine, or other fire apparatus belonging to the City.
5.09.000 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY. During the progress of any fire, the Chief
of the Fire Department, or in case of his absence or disability, the subordinate officer in
charge shall have the power to order the removal or destruction of any property necessary
to prevent the further spread of fire.
5.10.000 FALSE ALARMS. No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any
false alarm of fire. No person excepting the Chief of the Fire Department and those
acting under his express authority in writing, or by express authority of the Common
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 4 6/7/06
Council, shall make or cause to be made any key or keys of any fire alarm telegraph box,
or use or attempt to use, or cause to be used, any such key or keys.
5.11.000 FIRE INSPECTION.
5.11.010 Entering Buildings. The Chief of the Fire Department and his duly authorized
assistants may enter and inspect any building in the City of Port Washington, Wisconsin
except the interior of private dwellings, at any reasonable hour, in the performance of
their duties under this section.
5.11.020 What Inspection To Cover. The Fire Chief, or his duly authorized assistants,
shall inspect all buildings, except the interior of private dwellings, in the City to
determine the general character of the premises with respect to the disposition of debris,
rubbish, waste paper, rags, oils, waste, explosives, and all kinds of inflammable material,
and the means of access from one part of the building to another, and they may inspect
any building in said City for the purpose of ascertaining if any danger from fire exists by
reason of defective chimneys, flues, stoves, ovens, furnaces, boilers, electric wiring, ash
houses, and receptacles, or by reason of any other cause.
5.11.030 Inflammable Material. All parts of business buildings shall be cleaned daily
and kept free from all inflammable material, except that combustible material not in
actual use may be neatly arranged in a manner to provide passageways and aisleways for
the convenient movement of the members of the Fire Department.
5.11.040 Doors And Openings. All doors and openings, external and internal in all
business buildings, shall be kept, free from goods of any kind and means of access and
free movement shall be provided for the convenient work of the members of the Fire
Department.
5.11.050 Storage of Inflammables. There shall be no rubbish, excelsior, shavings,
waste paper or other like inflammable materials left in any part of business buildings over
one day, except that such materials may be stored within a fire proof room, provided with
standard fire doors, and all material of such character shall be destroyed, removed, or
placed within such fire proof room at the close of each day.
5.11.060 Business Buildings Defined. The term “business building” as mentioned
herein, shall be taken to include hotels, lodging houses, stores, office buildings,
warehouses, mills, factories and public buildings.
5.11.070 Notice of Violations. Should the Fire Chief, or his authorized assistants on
such inspections discover that any provisions of this section are being violated, said Fire
Chief shall give notice thereof in writing to the owner or occupant of such building,
requiring him to comply with the provisions of this section within 48 hours.
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 5 6/7/06
5.11.080 Notice of Hazardous Conditions. Should the Fire Chief, or his authorized
assistants on such inspection, discover any danger from fire by reason of any defective
condition set forth in subsection (2) hereof, or from any other cause, said Fire Chief or his
authorized assistants shall give notice in writing to the owner or occupants of any such
building of such defects, requiring them to make reasonable changes and repairs within a
specified time, to render the premises or buildings safe as possible from fire.
5.12.000 RETIREMENT AND DEATH BENEFITS. A member who has served 20
years with the Fire Department and has reached the age of 60 years, may retire as an
active member from such Fire Department or may be retired on motion of the Board of
Police and Fire Commissioners, after such member has become disabled, or after a
medical examination is found physically unable to carry out duties required. Upon such
retirement or upon retirement by action of the Board, the retiring member shall exercise
by his option to accept one of the following retirement plans:
1. Active members. Any active member of the Fire Department or any active
member of the Ambulance Service may elect to be covered under the group
life insurance plan maintained by the City of Port Washington. Each member
exercising that option shall advise the City Administrator in writing of such
election. Such member shall be covered under such policy so long as the
policy is in effect and so long as the member maintains those payments
required to keep that coverage in effect. Upon the member ceasing to be
active, such coverage shall terminate unless maintained under Section
5.12.000 (2).
2. Retirement Benefits. Any member of the Fire Department who has served 20
years and any member of the Ambulance Service who has served 20 years
who retires or is retired by action of the Police and Fire Commission may
elect to accept one of the following retirement plans:
(a) A cash payment of $750.00 plus $25.00 for each year of service over 20,
but not to exceed a total of $1,000.00.
(b) Continue to be maintained under the group life insurance police upon
payment of the premium required to keep that coverage in effect.
5.13.000 THE FOLLOWING FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION CODE IS
ADOPTED:
5.13.010 Intent of Code. It is the intent of this code to prescribe regulations consistent
with recognized standard practice for the safeguarding to a responsible degree of life and
property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use
of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life and
property in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises within the city limits of Port
Washington.
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 6 6/7/06
5.13.020 Application to New and Existing Conditions. The provisions of this code
shall apply equally to new and existing conditions except that existing conditions not in
strict compliance with the terms of this code shall be permitted to continue where the
exceptions do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or adjoining property.
5.13.030 Exceptions. Nothing contained in this code shall be construed as applying to
the transportation of any article of thing shipped in conformity with the regulation
prescribed by the Interstate Commerce Commission, nor as applying to the military
forces of the United States.
5.13.040 ADOPTION OF CODES.
A. The current issues of the following orders and codes of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, Rules of the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations (ILHR), and the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) are hereby adopted and by reference are
made a part of this ordinance as is fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed
or prohibited by any said code incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited
by this ordinance. Sections of the following codes adopted by reference, or as may be
altered, amended or recreated in any manner whatsoever, shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
1. Chapter ILHR 7 Explosive Materials
2. Chapter ILHR 10 Flammable and Combustible
3. Chapter ILHR 11 Liquefied Petroleum Gases
4. Chapter ILHR 14 General Hazard-Fire Prevention
5. Chapter ILHR 15 Cleaning and Dyeing
6. Chapter ILHR 28 Smoke Detectors
7. Chapter ILHR 30 Fire Department Health and Safety
8. Chapter ILHR 32 Safety and Health Standards for Public Employees
9. Chapter ILHR 50-64 Building Code (including Heating,
Ventilation and Air Conditioning
10. Volumes I through XVI inclusive, National Fire Protection Association Codes
B. Whenever the provisions of the aforementioned codes conflict, the stricter
interpretations shall apply.
C. Copies of each of said codes are on file in the office of the Chief of the Fire
Department of the City of Port Washington, and shall remain so filed, and be, at all
reasonable times, open to inspection by any interested persons.
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 7 6/7/06
5.13.050 Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for
the purpose of this code, have the meanings indicated in this chapter.
1. Approved. “Approved” means listed or approved by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., Factory Mutual Research Corp., the National Bureau of
Standards, the American Gas Association Laboratories, or other nationally
recognized testing authorities, and accepted by the Chief of the Fire
Department as a result of this investigation and experience.
2. Automatic Fire Warning System. “Automatic fire warning system” means
a supervised system which automatically detects a fire location, actuates a
fire alarm signal device and indicates the location from which the signal
originates.
3. Dwelling. “Dwelling” means a building occupied exclusively for residence
purposes and having not more than two apartments, or as a boarding or
rooming house serving not more than five persons with meals or sleeping
accommodations or both.
4. ICC Container. “ICC Container” means any container approved by the
Interstate Commerce Commission for shipping any liquid, gaseous or solid
material of a flammable, toxic, or other hazardous nature.
5. Institutional Building. “Institutional Building” means a building in which
persons are harbored to receive medical, charitable or other care or
treatment, or in which persons are held or detained by reason of public or
civic duty, or for correctional purposes.
6. Multifamily Dwelling. “Multifamily dwelling” means a building or portion
thereof, containing three or more dwelling units, occupied as the home or
residence of individuals, families or households living independently of each
other, including tenement house, apartment house, flat, town house, row
house, condominium, dormitory, boarding, or rooming house serving more
than five persons with meals or sleeping accommodations or both.
7. Persons. “Persons” means and includes person, persons, firm, corporation
or co-partnership.
8. Public Building. “Public Building” means a building in which persons
congregate for civic, political, educational, religious, social or recreational
purposes.
9. Residence Building. “Residence Building” except when classed as an
institutional building means a building in which sleeping accommodations
are provided.
5.13.060 Authority To Enter Premises. The Chief of the Fire Department or any of his
subordinates designated by him may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or
premises within his jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection, or
investigation which under the provisions of this code, he or they may deem necessary to
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 8 6/7/06
be made. Private dwellings shall not be entered without the consent or permission of an
adult occupant.
5.13.070 Inspection of Building and Premises. A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of
the Fire Department to inspect, or cause to be inspected by the fire department officers or
members, all buildings and premises, except the interiors of private dwellings, as often as
may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any
conditions liable to cause fire or any violations of the provisions of intent of this code and
of any other ordinance affecting the fire hazard, and to insure compliance in all places of
assembly with all laws, regulation and order dealing with overcrowding, use of
decorative materials, maintenance of exit ways, and maintenance of fire alarm and fire
detecting systems, and fire extinguishing systems, and appliances.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department or an inspector thereof, upon the complaint of any
person, or whenever he or they shall deem it necessary shall inspect any buildings and
premises within their jurisdiction.
5.13.080 Investigation of Fires. A. The Chief or acting chief of the fire department
shall investigate the source, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city
by which property has been destroyed or substantially damaged. Such investigations
shall be begun immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire by the fire chief of the fire
department and if it appears that such fire is of suspicious origin, the chief shall notify the
proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall
further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution
of the case.
B. The city attorney and the police department, upon the request of the chief of the fire
department shall assist in the investigation of any fire which, in the opinion of the chief
of the fire department is of suspicious origin.
5.13.090 Fire Records. The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep a record of all fires
and of all the facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires
and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance, and
if so, in what amount. Such record shall be made daily from the reports made by the fire
department officers and inspectors. All such records shall be public.
5.13.100 Annual Report. A report of the fire department activities shall be made
annually and transmitted in writing to the Police and Fire Commission. It shall contain
all proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department
may wish to include therein. The chief of the fire department shall also recommend any
amendments to the code which, in his judgement, shall be desirable.
5.13.110 Modifications. The chief of the fire department shall have the power to modify
any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner
of the lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 9 6/7/06
modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department
thereon shall be furnished the applicant.
5.13.120 Appeals. Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of
the chief of the fire department to the Police and Fire Commission within thirty days
from the date of the decision of the chief. In the event of such appeal, the commission
shall set a time and place for hearing thereof and give to the appellant at least ten days
notice thereof by mail or personally. Decision must be made within twenty days of
receipt of appeals.
5.13.130 New Materials, Processes or Occupancies Which May Require Permits.
The mayor, chairman of the Police and Fire Commission, the chief of the fire department
and the city engineer shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies,
which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in this code. The chief
of the fire department shall post such a list in a conspicuous place in his office and in the
office of the clerk, and may distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
5.13.140 Fire Hydrant Requirements on Private Property. A. Intent: The intent of
this section is to insure adequate water supply for fire fighting purposes to existing or
new structures, buildings, tank farms, lumberyards, commercial or industrial complexes
located at extended distances from city water hydrants on private property.
A. Where required. At any tank farm, lumber yard, commercial or industrial complex,
any structure or building now existing or hereafter erected, or structurally altered to
increase the floor area by fifty (50) percent or more, shall provide at the owners
expense an approved water hydrant when such building is set back 250 feet or more
from any street or highway or is located more than 300 feet from a city water hydrant.
Required hydrants shall be free standing and shall be located not more than 50 feet or
less than 25 feet from the building. One hydrant shall be located not more than 50
feet or less than 25 feet from the main entrance to such building. Additional hydrants
shall be provided around the perimeter of the building so that no water hydrant is
more than 300 feet from any other approved hydrant by normal access routes. All
water hydrants shall be located within 10 feet of an all weather road and shall be
accessible at all times to the fire department. The water pipe serving the hydrant shall
be ductile iron and shall not be less than 8 inches in diameter.
B. Fire Equipment on Private Property. The fire department, through its authorized
representative, must approve all fire hydrants, stand-pipes and sprinkler systems for
commercial, industrial or institutional buildings or properties. A permit must be
issued before such equipment may be installed. Hydrants to be used on such
properties shall be on the type approved by the Port Washington Board of Public
Works and shall be consistent with the type universally used in the City of Port
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 10 6/7/06
Washington. The hydrant must open to the right with a Port Washington, standard
operating nut. Hydrants are to be placed with six feet of earth cover and sufficient
drainage bedding to allow the hydrant to drain dry. Hose connection for Class 1
stand-pipes and fire department connection for the sprinkler and standpipe connection
shall be two and one-half inch diameter and shall have national standard couplings.
Connection points shall be between three feet and four feet above the finished
property grade. All sprinkler and stand-pipe connections shall be painted red.
5.13.150 Permits.
A. Permission granted-limitations. A permit shall constitute permission to maintain,
store or handle materials, or to conduct processes which produce conditions
hazardous to life or property, or to install equipment used in connection with such
activities. Such permit does not take the place of any license required by law. It
shall be for an indefinite period, not transferable and any change in use or occupancy
of premises shall require a new permit.
B. Approval before issuance. Before a permit may be issued, the chief of the fire
department or his assistants shall inspect and approve the receptacles, vehicles,
building or storage places to be used. In case where laws or regulations enforceable
by departments other than the fire department are applicable, joint approval shall be
obtained from all departments concerned.
C. Application. All applications for a permit required by this code shall be made to the
chief of the fire department in such form and detail as he shall prescribe.
D. To be kept on premises. Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises designated
therein and shall at all times be subject to inspection by any officer of the fire
department.
5.13.160 Trash Burning.
A. All trash burning prohibited. No person shall kindle or cause to be kindled any trash
fire in or upon any street, alley, public way or private ground within the City of Port
Washington.
B. Trash defined. Trash is defined as rubbish, grass, leaves, branches, construction
waste, paper products, industrial waste or any other type of debris.
5.13.170 Open Flame.
A. Lights and devices. No person shall take an open flame or light into any building,
barn, vessel, boat or any other place where highly flammable, combustible or
explosive material is kept, unless such light or flame shall be well secured in a glass
globe, wire mesh cage or similar approved device.
B. Place of assembly. No open flame, candles or other open flame fixture, whether
equipped with a guard or not shall be used in any place of assembly, except within
duly constituted church or lodge buildings. Such open flame candles or other flame
fixtures whether equipped with a guard or not, shall not be used in auditoriums of
Church or Lodge buildings except when such candles or fixtures are actually held by
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 11 6/7/06
persons seated, standing, or in procession in such auditorium. Such candles or
fixtures need not be held by persons if they are securely supported on
noncombustible bases, the flame is at least seven (7) feet above the floor, are so
located as to avoid danger of ignition of combustible material, are under constant
observation and supervision by a responsible person designated for each aisle, are
kept lighted only when necessary during the ceremony or ritual, and are extinguished
before occupants leave the auditorium.
C. Stages. Open flame devices may be used on stages or church altars where a
necessary part of the theatrical or religious performance requires it, provided
adequate precautions, satisfactory to the chief of the fire department are taken to
prevent ignition of any combustible materials.
D. Restaurants. Open flame devices used for the warming of food may be used in
restaurants and dining areas, provided such devices and their location are approved
by the chief of the fire department.
E. Exceptions. The use of other open flame light and devices not herein regulated may
be permitted by the fire department under such restrictions as, in his judgement, are
necessary to avoid danger of ignition of combustible material or injury to persons.
5.13.180 Apparatus Capable of Igniting Flammable Material Prohibited. No heating
or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of igniting flammable materials of the type
stored or handled shall be used in the storage area of any warehouse storing rags,
excelsior, hair, or other highly flammable or combustible material; nor in the work area
of any shop or factory used for the manufacture, repair, or renovating of mattresses or
bedding, nor in the work areas of any establishment used for the upholstering of furniture.
5.13.190 Chimneys and Heating Appliances. All chimneys, smokestacks or, similar
devices for conveying smoke or hot gases to the outer air and stoves, furnaces, fire boxes,
or boilers to which they are connected shall be constructed and maintained in such a
manner as not to create a fire hazard.
5.13.200 Use of Torches or Flame Producing Devices. Any person using a torch or
other flame producing device for removing paint from any building or structure shall
provide one approved fire extinguished or water hose connected to the water supply on
the premises where such burning is done. In all cases, the person doing the burning shall
remain in the premises one hour after the torch of flame producing device has been used.
5.13.210 Combustible Materials.
A. Hot ashes and other dangerous materials. No person shall deposit hot ashes or
cinders, or smoldering coals, or greasy or oily substances liable to spontaneous
ignition into any wooden receptacle or place the same within ten feet of any
combustible materials, except in metal or other noncombustible receptacles. Such
receptacles, unless resting on a noncombustible floor or on the ground outside the
building shall be placed on noncombustible stands, and in every case must be kept at
least two feet away from any combustible wall or partition.
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 12 6/7/06
B. Accumulations of waste materials. Accumulations of waste paper, hay, grass, straw,
weeds, litter, or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind shall not be
permitted to remain upon any roof or in any courtyard, vacant lot or open space. All
weeds, grass, vines, or other growth, when same endangers property, or is liable to
be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the property it
is on.
C. Handling Readily Combustible Materials. No person making, using, storing, or
having in charge, or under his control any shavings, excelsior, rubbish sacks, bags,
litter, hay, straw, or combustible waste materials shall fail or neglect at the close of
each day to cause all such materials which are not compactly baled and stacked in an
orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable vaults or in
metal or metal lined, covered receptacles or bins.
D. Storage of Readily Combustible Materials. Storage in buildings shall be orderly,
shall not be within two feet of the ceiling, and not so located as to endanger exit
from the building. Storage in the open shall not be more than twenty feet in height,
shall be so located, with respect to adjacent buildings, as not to constitute a hazard,
and shall be compact and orderly.
E. Flammable Decorative Materials in Stores. Cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves,
trees, or other highly flammable materials shall not be used for decorative purposes
in show windows or other parts of stores unless flame proofed; provided, however,
that nothing in this section shall be held to prohibit the display of saleable goods
permitted and offered for sale. Electric bulbs in stores shall not be decorated with
paper or other combustible materials unless such materials shall first have been
rendered flame proof.
5.13.220 Storage of Petroleum Products With Flash Points Less Than 100ºF.
A. Delivery, etc., Restrictions. No person, firm or corporation shall deliver, place,
receive, store on or underground in excess of 10 gallons, any gasoline (or like
product of petroleum which has a flash point of less than 100º F when tested in the
Tagliabue closed cup tester) upon any premises located in any district of the City of
Port Washington zoned as a single Family Residence District, Two Family
Residence District, or Multiple Family Residence District.
B. Device for Drawing, Restrictions. No person, firm, or corporation shall maintain,
use, or place any device for drawing, from an underground storage container any
gasoline (or like product or petroleum which has a flash point of less than 100º F
when tested in the Tagliabue closed cup tester) upon any premises in the City of Port
Washington zoned as a Single Family Residence District, Two Family Residence
District, or Multiple Family Residence District.
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 13 6/7/06
5.13.230 Smoking Prohibited Conditions.
A. Smoking Defined. “Smoking” means and includes the carrying of lighted pipe, cigar,
cigarette or tobacco in any form.
B. Chief to Designate Areas Where Smoking Shall be Prohibited. Where conditions are
such as to make smoking a hazard in any areas of warehouses, stores, industrial
plants, institutions, places of assembly, and in open spaces where combustible
materials are stored or handled, the chief of the fire department is empowered and
authorized to order the owner or occupant in writing to post “No Smoking” signs in
each building, structure, room or place in which smoking shall be prohibited. The
chief of the fire department shall designate specific safe locations, if necessary in any
building, structure or place in which smoking may be permitted.
C. “No Smoking Signs”. “No Smoking” signs required in accordance with Section 5.23
(2) shall read “by order of the Chief of Port Washington Fire Department”.
D. Smoking and Removal of “No Smoking” Signs Prohibited. No person shall remove
any legally required “No Smoking” sign or smoke in any place where such signs are
posted.
5.13.240 Fire Hazards.
A. Orders to Eliminate. Whenever any of the officers, members, or inspectors of the fire
department as mentioned in section 5.07 shall find in any building or upon any
premises dangerous or hazardous conditions as follows, he or they shall order such
dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or remedied in such manner as may
be specified in the order: (a) dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or
explosive matter. (b) hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly
installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive matter, (c)
dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings or other highly
flammable materials, (d) accumulations of dust or waste materials in air conditioning
systems or of grease in kitchen exhaust ducts, (e) obstructions to or on fire escapes,
stairs, passageways, door or window, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire
department or egress of occupants in case of fire and (f) any building or other
structure which, for want of automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire
extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any
other cause, creates a fire hazard or a threat to life and safety.
B. Service of Orders. (a) the service of such orders as mentioned in Section 5.24 (1) may
be made upon the owner, occupant, or other person responsible for the conditions,
either by delivering a copy of same personally or by delivering the same to and
leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is
found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the
door to the entrance of the said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve
such an order upon the owner of premises such order may be served either by
delivering to and leaving with the person a copy of the order, or, if such owner is
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 14 6/7/06
absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order by mailing such copy to
the owner’s last known post office address, and (b) if buildings or other premises are
owned by one person and occupied by another under lease or otherwise, the orders
issued in connection with the enforcing of this code shall apply to the occupant
thereof, except where the rules or orders require the making of additions to or
changes in the premises themselves, such as would immediately become real estate
and be the property of the owner of the premises; in such cases the rules or orders
shall affect the owner and not the occupant unless it is otherwise agreed between the
owner and the occupant.
5.13.250 Sprinkler Systems Required.
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to provide a means for the automatic extinguishing
of fires in buildings or parts of buildings which because of their size, construction or
occupancy or lack of suitable protective equipment constitute a special fire hazard to
life or property and an excessive burden upon the fire extinguishing facilities of the
Fire Department.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall be
applicable.
1. Approved. The material, workmanship and installation of the sprinkler system
complies with the regulations as set down in Standard 13 of the National Fire
Protection Association in effect on the date of installation, and approved by the
Fire Department of the City of Port Washington and the Insurance Services of
Wisconsin or Factory Mutual System.
2. Area. Area means the sum total of the original building and any additions,
except, that the basement and attic, if there is one, shall not be included.
3. Automatic Sprinkler Equipment. A system of water supply pipes and orifice to
apply water to a fire when activated by an automatic, manual or remote control
device.
4. Institutional Building. Institutional buildings shall include convents, monasteries,
children’s homes for the aged and infirm, nursing homes, convalescent homes,
asylums, hospitals and jails.
5. Other Terms. Used in this section shall be as defined in Section 51 of Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
C. Where Required. Every building hereinafter constructed or structurally altered shall
have an approved automatic sprinkler system installed and maintained when occupied
in whole or in part for the following purposes:
1. Factories, Office and Mercantile Buildings. Throughout every building.
Fire Resistive Building if:
Over 10,000 square feet in area
Over one story in height and exceeding 6,000 square feet in area
Over three stories in height regardless of the area
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 15 6/7/06
Where the floor area is not divided by firewalls and exceeds 6,000 square feet
regardless of stories
Non-Fire Resistive Buildings if:
Over 8,000 square feet in area
Over one story in height and exceeding 5,000 square feet in area
Over three stories in height regardless of area
Where the floor area is not divided by firewalls and exceeds 5,000 square feet
regardless of stories
2. Garages and Service Stations. Fire resistive over 10,000 square feet. Non-fire
resistive buildings over 6,000 square feet.
3. Basements. Throughout all basements and cellars of buildings having an area
over 10,000 square feet or more used for the manufacture, storage, or sale of
combustible material or merchandise, or for the housing of automobiles.
4. Hotels and Motels. Throughout every building if over 5,000 square feet in
area.
5. Multi-family Dwellings. In the basements, cellars, storerooms, work rooms,
boiler rooms, furnace rooms, hallways, and stairways
6. Theaters and Assembly halls
7. Hospitals and Other Institutional Buildings. Throughout every building.
8. Schools. Throughout every building.
9. Public Buildings. Throughout buildings if over two stories in height or if
over 10,000 square feet regardless of height.
D. Application to Existing Buildings. Where the Fire Department finds that by reason of
construction or highly combustible occupancy, existing buildings constitute a severe
fire hazard to its occupants or to adjoining property, the provisions of this section will
apply.
E. Type of System and Approval of Plans. Approved automatic sprinkler equipment
shall be installed and connected to an adequate water supply with sprinkler heads,
valves and auxiliary equipment of standard types suitable for the individual buildings
to be protected as determined by Standard 13 of the National Fire Protection
Association in effect on the date of installation. No automatic sprinkler equipment
shall be installed or altered in a building until plans have been submitted and
approved by the fire department and the Insurance Services Office of Wisconsin or
Factory Mutual System. Two copies of the plans and specifications shall be
submitted for review. Approved plans must be stamped “Approved by the Fire
Department of the City of Port Washington” and the date of such approval. One copy
shall be returned to the owner and the other kept on file by the Fire Department.
F. Building Permit. No building permit for any building covered by this section shall be
issued unless the Building Inspector’s copy of the plans for the proposed building has
been stamped “Approved by the Fire Department of the City of Port Washington.”
G. Construction Inspection. While a covered building is under construction, the
Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector and Fire Department
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 16 6/7/06
Inspector will share jointly in the responsibility of conducting inspections to see that
all provisions of this code have been carried out.
H. Occupancy Permit. A final inspection of the building will be made by the Fire
Department Inspector after notification by the Building Inspector. The Occupancy
Permit required under Section 15.03 of the City Code must be stamped “Approved by
the Fire Department” before issuance.
I. Exemption and Substitution of Other Fire Protection Equipment. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed as to require the installation of sprinklers in safe deposit or
other vaults or in rooms or buildings devoted to the manufacture or storage of
aluminum powder, calcium carbide phosphide, metallic and potassium, quick lime,
magnesium powder, sodium peroxide or like materials where the application of water
may cause or increase combustion, nor in any other location where the installation of
sprinklers may increase the hazard nor shall it be construed in any way to prohibit the
substitution of other automatic protective equipment when approved by the Fire
Department of the City of Port Washington.
J. Maintenance. The owner or occupant of a building containing the required automatic
sprinkler system shall maintain the system in an operative condition at all times. The
occupant of the building shall properly notify the Chief of the Fire Department in case
such sprinkler protection is withdrawn, interrupted, curtailed or altered.
5.13.260 Fire Warning Systems Required: Multi-Family Dwellings.
A. General Provisions. In addition to the requirement for automatic sprinkler systems, as
specified in Section 5.25 above heat and smoke detectors shall be installed in each
room throughout the remaining area of the building, including attic areas.
B. Approval. All fire detection devices shall be approved for the purpose for which they
are intended, and shall be installed in conformity with N.F.P.A. Standard No. 72E.
Three complete sets of information regarding the fire detectors, including
specifications and floor plans showing the location of the detectors, shall be
submitted for approval of the Dire Department prior to installation of the detectors.
Before requesting final approval of the installation, the installing contractor shall
furnish a written statement to the chief of the Fire Department to the effect that the
detectors have been installed in accordance with approved plans and tested in
accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications. Upon completion of the
installation, a satisfactory test of the fire detectors shall be made in the presence of a
representative of the fire department.
C. Installation. All equipment shall be installed in a workmanlike manner and in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Detectors shall be supported, in all
cases, independently of their attachment to the circuit conductors. Detectors shall not
be recessed in any way into the mounting surface unless they have been tested and
listed for such recessed mounting. In the case of solid joist construction detectors
shall be mounted at the bottom of the joists.
D. Power Supply. An AC primary source of electric power shall be utilized. A separate
circuit shall be provided for the system and the circuit breaker shall be colored red.
The requirements for power limited fire protective signaling circuits as defined in
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 17 6/7/06
Article 760 of the National Electrical Code, N.F.P.A. Standard No. 760 shall be met,
except where they conflict with the Electrical Code of the City of Port Washington.
In those cases, the City Electrical Code shall be followed. Wire used shall be
electrically supervised against both short and open wiring and trouble relay coils. A
short or open wiring fault occurring in these circuits shall cause an audible and visual
trouble indication at the control panel.
E. Functioning. The system shall function as follows when any detector operates:
The main and remote alarm devices, including the public alarm system, will sound.
The proper zone and fire indication will appear on the annunciator panel.
F. Heat Detectors. The location and spacing of heat detectors shall be in accordance
with the recommendations contained in N.F.P.A. Standard No. 72E. Detectors of the
fixed-temperature or rate-compensated spot-pattern type shall be classified as to the
temperature of operation and marked with the appropriate color code. Detectors
having fixed temperature or rate compensated elements shall be selected in
accordance with paragraph 3-3.1 of Standard No. 72E for the maximum ceiling
temperature that can be expected.
G. Smoke Detectors. Smoke detectors shall be located on the ceiling not less than 6
inches from a sidewall. Spacing of detectors shall result from an evaluation based
upon engineering judgement, supplemented, if feasible, by field tests. Ceiling shape
and surfaces, ceiling height, configuration of contents, burning characteristics of
stored combustibles, and ventilation are some of the parameters that shall be
considered. Spacing shall also be in accordance with paragraph 4-4 of Standard No.
72E. The selection and installation of detectors shall take into consideration both the
design characteristics of the detector and the areas into which the detectors will be
installed so as to prevent false operation or non-operation after installation. Detectors
shall be capable of detecting gray smoke having a minimum smoke obscuration of 4
percent per foot (optical density of 0.0177 per foot).
H. Alarm Sounding Devices. Each detection device shall cause the operation of an
alarm which shall be clearly audible over background noise levels. The tests of
audibility level shall be conducted with all household equipment, which may be in
operation at night. In full operation. Examples of such equipment are window air
conditioners and room humidifiers. All alarm sounding devices shall have a minimum
rating of 85 at 10 feet.
I. Maintenance and Testing. Each automatic detector shall be continuously maintained
in reliable operating condition at all times, and such periodic inspections and tests
shall be made as are necessary to assure proper maintenance as specified in Chapter 7
of Standard No. 72E. Detectors shall be under the supervision of a responsible person
who shall cause proper tests to be made at specified intervals and have general charge
of all alterations and additions. After installation, a visual inspection of all detectors
shall be made to be sure that they are properly located and each detector shall be
checked to insure that it is connected and powered in accordance with the
manufacturer’s commendations. Specifics for initial installation tests, periodic tests,
cleaning and maintenance, and tests following an alarm, as contained in Chapter 7 of
Standard No. 72E, shall be followed.
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 18 6/7/06
5.13.270 Fire Warning Systems Required: One or Two Family Dwelling.
A. General Provisions. Every one or two family dwelling unit erected, constructed or
reconstructed after December 31, 1978 shall have smoke detectors as hereinafter
provided.
B. Equipment Performance. Each smoke detector shall be capable of detecting
abnormal quantities of smoke that may occur in a dwelling and shall properly operate
in the normal environmental conditions of a household. Smoke detectors shall be
capable of detecting gray smoke having a minimum smoke obscuration of 4 percent
per floor (optical density of 0.0177 per foot). The failure of any non-reliable or
short-life component which renders the detector inoperative shall be readily apparent
to the occupant of the dwelling without the need for testing..
C. Alarm Sounding Devices. Each detection device shall cause the operation of an
alarm which shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels
with all intervening doors closed. The tests of audibility level shall be conducted
with all household equipment, which may be in operation at night, in full operation.
Examples of such equipment are window air conditioners and room humidifiers. All
alarm sounding devices shall have a minimum rating of 85 DBA at 10 feet.
D. Level of Protection. A basic smoke detector shall be installed to protect each
separate sleeping area and at the head of each stairway leading to an occupied area.
E. Detector Locations. Smoke detectors in rooms with ceiling slopes greater than onefoot
per 8-feet horizontally shall be located at the high side of the room. A smoke
detector installed at the head of stairs shall be so located as to assure that smoke
rising in the stairwell cannot be prevented from reaching the detector by an
intervening door or obstruction. A smoke detector installed to protect a sleeping area
shall be located outside of the bedrooms, but in the immediate vicinity of the sleeping
area. Detectors shall be located on the ceiling.
F. Power Supply. An AC primary source of electrical power shall be utilized. The
requirements of Article 760 of the National Electrical Code, N.F.P.A. Standard No.
70 shall be met, except where they conflict with the Electrical Code of the City of
Port Washington. In those cases, the City Electrical Code shall be followed. A
separate circuit shall be utilized and the circuit breaker shall be colored red. Wire
used shall be of the solid conductor, non-stranded type. Neither loss nor restoration
of primary power shall cause an alarm signal. A visible “power on” indicator shall
be provided.
G. Installation. All equipment shall be installed in a workmanlike manner and in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. All devices shall be so located and
mounted that accidental operation will not be caused by jarring or vibration.
Installed equipment shall be mounted so as to be supported independently of its
attachment to wires. Upon completion of the system, the installer, in the presence of
the householder, shall test each device for proper operation. He shall then instruct
the owner of the operation and maintenance of the system. The supplier or installing
contractor shall provide the owner with instruction charts describing the operation,
testing, and proper maintenance of the smoke detectors and also printed information
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 19 6/7/06
for establishing a household emergency evacuation plan. In addition, printed
information shall be provided to inform the owner where he may obtain repair or
replacement service and where and how parts requiring regular replacement may be
obtained within two weeks.
5.13.280 Fire Extinguishing Equipment.
A. The chief of the Fire Department is hereby empowered to designate the number, type
and location of fire extinguishers as may be deemed necessary in addition to those
now required by law in all existing buildings and structures and in all buildings and
structures hereafter erected.
B. In buildings where first aid standpipes are not required, standard fire extinguishers
shall be provided on each floor including the basement; type, size, location, and
number of which shall be approved by the Fire Department.
C. Fire extinguishers shall be conspicuously located where they will always be readily
accessible and so distributed as to be immediately available in the event of fire. They
shall be hung on hangers or set in brackets so that the top of the extinguisher is no
more than five feet above the floor.
D. Fire extinguishers must be recharged and maintained according to instructions of the
manufacturer.
E. Fire extinguishers shall require a hydrostatic test as follows: (a) Foam type-every five
years; (b) Soda and acid type-every five years; (c) Carbon dioxide type-every twelve
years; (d) Dry chemical type-every ten years.
5.13.290 Fire Lanes Required. When required by the fire department, hard surfaced
driving lanes shall be provided around facilities which, by their size, location, design or
contents warrant access which exceeds that normally provided by the proximity of city
streets.
A. General Provisions. Lanes shall provide a minimum, unobstructed continuous width
and height of 12 feet. Lanes shall be identified by a 4-inch wide line and block letters
2 feet high, painted in the lane, at 50-foot intervals stating “FIRE LANE-NO
PARKING”, color to bright yellow, or by the posting of signs stating “FIRE LANENO
PARKING”. Signs shall be posted on or immediately next to the curb line, or on
the buildings. Signs shall be 12” x 18” and shall have letters and background of
contrasting colors, readily readable from at least a 50-foot distance. Signs shall be
spaced not further than 50 feet apart. Signs shall be mounted a minimum of 4 feet
and a maximum of 6 ½ feet from the pavement to the bottom edge of the sign. Fire
lanes shall be either asphalt or reinforced concrete, 4 inches thick minimum, or when
specifically authorized by the fire chief it may be compacted crushed rock. When fire
lanes connect to city streets or parking lots, adequate clearances and turning radii
shall be provided. All proposed plans for such lanes must have fire department
approval.
B. Fire Lanes as Park of Driveways and/or Parking Areas. The fire department may
require that areas specified for use as driveways or private thoroughfares shall not be
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 20 6/7/06
used for parking. These areas when specified, shall be marked or identified by one of
the two means in (1) above.
C. Existing Buildings. When, by his judgement, the chief of the Fire Department
determines that a hazard due to inaccessibility of fire apparatus exists around existing
buildings, he may require fire lanes to be constructed and maintained as detailed in
(1) and (2) above.
D. Prohibitions. Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be
prohibited at all times.
5.13.300 Enforcement.
A. The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the chief of the Fire Department of the
City of Port Washington and such subordinates in said department as the chief shall
designate or by the Chief of Police of the City of Port Washington or any police
officer of said department. The City Building, Plumbing, and Electrical Inspectors
and Health Officer shall cooperate with the Fire Department in enforcing this code
and may be delegated such duties as the Fire Chief or the duly designated
subordinates that the fire department may assign.
B. This code shall not be construed to affect the responsibility of any person owning,
operating or installing any equipment for damage to persons or property caused by
any defect therein, nor shall the municipality be held as assuming any such liability
by reason of the inspection or re-inspection authorized herein or the permit issued as
herein provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment
authorized herein.
5.13.310 Police Powers of Fire Department.
A. The Chief and his assistants or officer in charge at any fire are hereby vested with full
and complete authority at such fires. Any officer of the department may cause the
arrest of any person failing to give the right-of-way to the fire department in
responding to a fire call.
B. The Fire Chief or officer in charge may prescribe certain limits in the vicinity of any
fire within which no persons, excepting firemen and policemen and those admitted by
order of any officers of the department, shall be permitted to come. The Chief or
officer in charge shall have the power to cause the removal of any person from any
building or area when in his opinion their continued presence shall become necessary
for the preservation of such property from fire, or to prevent the spreading of fire, or
to protect the adjoining property. During the progress of any fire, he shall have the
power to order the removal or destruction of any property necessary to prevent the
further spread of fire. He shall also have the power to cause the removal of all wires
or other facilities and the turning off of all electricity or other utility services where
the same impedes the work of the department during the progress of the fire.
C. It shall be lawful for any fireman, while acting under the direction of the Fire Chief or
other officer in charge, to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any
building or other property then on fire, for the purpose of extinguishing such fire. In
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 21 6/7/06
the event any person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any firemen in the discharge of his
duty as herein before provided, the person so offending shall be deemed guilty of
resisting firemen in the discharge of their duty.
D. Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the Fire
Chief or other officer in charge and such person may be required to render assistance
in fighting the fire or removing or guarding property. Such officer shall have the
power to cause the arrest of any person or persons refusing to obey said orders.
5.13.320 Penalty.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply
therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order may thereunder, or
who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, or
who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Chief of
the Fire Department or the City Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction within
the time fixed herein, shall be subject to penalty provided in Section 5.32 of this
Code.
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions.
5.13.330 Penalty Provisions.
A. General Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code
shall upon conviction of such violation be subject to a penalty which shall be as
follows:
1. First Offense-Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code
subject to a penalty shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $1.00 or
more than $200.00 together with the cost of prosecution and in default of
payment of such forfeiture and cost of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the
county jail until said forfeitures and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
2. Second Offense-Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance or
part of an ordinance of this Code who shall previously have been convicted of a
violation of the same ordinance within one year shall upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00 for each such offense, together
with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and
costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said forfeiture and costs of
prosecution are paid, but not to exceed 6 months.
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 22 6/7/06
B. Continued Violations. Each violation and each day a violation continued or occurs
shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the City from
maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision
of this Code.
C. Execution Against Defendant’s Property. Whenever a person fails to pay any
forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the Court for violation of any
ordinance of the City, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the
defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution
against the property of the defendant for said forfeiture and costs.
5.13.340 Hazardous Spills. Any person, firm or corporation will be charged for the
labor and replacement or cost of any extinguishing agent, chemical, neutralizer, or
material used in the extinguishment, confinement, neutralizing, or cleanup of any
flammable or combustible liquid, gas, solid, or any hazardous material or chemical
involved in any fire or accidental spill.
City of Port Washington Chapter 5 – Page 23 6/7/06
CHAPTER 6
Civil Defense
Table of Contents
6.01.000 POLICY AND PURPOSE
6.01.010 In General
6.01.020 Coordination of Services and Facilities
6.02.000 CIVIL DEFENSE DEFINED
6.03.000 CIVIL DEFENSE DIRECTOR
6.03.010 Appointment
6.03.020 Duties and Authority
6.04.000 UTILIZATION OF EXISTING SERVICES AND FACILITIES
6.05.000 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
6.06.000 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS
6.07.000 DECLARATIONS
6.08.000 PENALTY
6.01.000 POLICY AND PURPOSE
6.01.010 In General. By reason of the increasing possibility of disasters of
unprecedented size and destructiveness, and to insure that preparation will be adequate to
cope with such disasters, and to provide for the common defense, to protect the public
peace, health, safety and general welfare, and to preserve the lives and property of the
people, it is hereby declared necessary:
a. To establish a local civil defense organization.
b. To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during civil defense
emergencies.
c. To provide for the rendering of cooperation and mutual aid between this City
and other political subdivisions.
6.01.020 Coordination of Services and Facilities. It is further declared to be the
purpose of this chapter and the policy of this City that all civil defense functions of this
City be coordinated to the maximum extent possible with existing services and facilities
of this City and with comparable functions of the federal, state and county government
and other political subdivisions, and of various private agencies to the end that the most
effective preparations and use may be made of manpower, resources, and facilities for
dealing with any disaster that may occur.
6.02.000 CIVIL DEFENSE DEFINED. “Civil Defense” shall mean the preparation for
and carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military
forces are primarily responsible, to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from
disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage and other hostile action, or by fire, flood or
other natural causes.
6.03.000 CIVIL DEFENSE DIRECTOR.
6.03.010 Appointment. The office of Director of Civil Defense is hereby created. The
Director shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Common
Council and shall receive such compensation as may be authorized by the Common
Council. He shall take and file an official oath.
6.03.020 Duties and Authority.
A. The Director shall be the executive head of the civil defense organization and shall
have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the civil
defense organization subject to the direction and control of the Mayor and Common
Council. He shall coordinate all activities of civil defense within the City and shall
maintain liaison and cooperate with civil defense agencies and organizations of other
political subdivisions and of the state and federal government, and shall participate in
county and state civil defense activities upon request, and shall have such additional
authority, duties and responsibilities as are authorized by this chapter and as may from
time to time be required by the Common Council.
B. The Director shall prepare a comprehensive general plan for the civil defense of the
City and shall present such plan to the Common Council for its approval. When the
Common Council has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty of all
municipal agencies and all civil defense forces of the City to perform the duties and
functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like
manner.
6.04.000 UTILIZATION OF EXISTING SERVICES AND FACILITIES. In
preparing and executing the civil defense plan, the Director shall utilize the services,
equipment, supplies and facilities of the existing departments and agencies of the City to
the maximum extent practicable; and the officers and personnel of all such departments
and agencies are directed to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the
director.
6.05.000 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS. Whenever necessary to meet a civil
defense emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the
Common Council, the Mayor, and in his absence, the Director of Civil Defense, may by
proclamation promulgate and enforce such orders, rules and regulations relating to the
conduct of persons and use of property as shall be necessary to protect the public peace,
health, and safety, and preserve lives and property and to insure the cooperation
necessary in civil defense activities. Such proclamations shall be posted in 3 public
places and may be rescinded by the Common Council by resolution at any time.
6.06.000 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS. The Director of Civil Defense may, subject
to the approval of the Common Council, enter into mutual aid agreements with other
political subdivisions. Copies of such agreements shall be filed with the State Director of
Civil Defense.
6.07.000 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCIES. Upon the declaration by the
Governor, by the Mayor or the Civil Defense Director in the absence of the Mayor, or by
the Common Council, of a state of emergency, the Director of Civil Defense shall issue
all necessary proclamations as to the existence of such state of emergency and shall issue
such disaster warnings or alerts as shall be required in the civil defense plan.
The civil defense organization shall take action in accordance with the civil defense plan
only after the declaration of an emergency and the issuance of the official disaster
warnings. Such state of emergency shall continue until terminated by the issuing
authority, provided that any such declaration not issued by the Governor may be
terminated at the discretion of the Common Council.
6.08.000 PENALTY. Any person who shall willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any
member of the civil defense organization in the enforcement of any order, rule, regulation
or plan issued pursuant to this chapter, or do any act forbidden by any order, rule,
regulation or plan issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in section 25.04 of this code.

CHAPTER 7
Streets and Sidewalks
Table of Contents
7.01.000 OFFICIAL MAP
7.01.010 Establishment
7.01.020 Plat Approval
7.01.030 Permits
7.01.040 Changes and Amendments
7.01.050 Registration
7.02.000 ESTABLISHING WIDTH AND GRADE OF ROADWAYS
AND SIDEWALKS
7.03.000 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS
7.04.000 CURB AND GUTTER
7.04.010 Determination of Council
7.04.020 Cost Assessed to Abutting Property
7.04.030 Permit Required
7.04.040 Specifications
7.05.000 STREET INTERSECTIONS
7.06.000 CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS
7.06.010 Construction
7.06.020 Plans and Specifications
7.06.030 Permit Required
7.07.000 CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS
7.07.010 Order
7.07.020 Notice
7.07.030 Default of Owner
7.07.040 Minor Repairs
7.07.050 Expense
7.07.060 Installment Payment
7.08.000 DEFECTS IN STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
7.09.000 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
7.09.010 Snow and Ice to be Removed
7.09.020 Depositing of Snow and Ice Restricted
7.09.030 Violations; Liability Therefore
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 1 7/15/08
7.10.000 EXCAVATIONS OR OBSTRUCTIONS
7.10.010 Permit Required
7.10.020 Permit, How Secured, Bond
7.10.030 Issuance of Permit
7.10.040 Warning Signs Required
7.10.050 Bridges and Platforms Over Gutters
7.11.010 ENCROACHMENTS
7.11.010 Right-of-Way Use License
7.12.000 AWNINGS
7.13.000 SIGNS
7.14.000 PROJECTIONS OVER SIDEWALK
7.15.000 SIDEWALK TO BE KEPT SAFE
7.16.000 PUBLIC TO BE PROTECTED
7.17.000 USE OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC
GROUNDS
7.17.010 In General
7.17.020 Block Parties in Residential Areas
7.18.000 CROSSINGS: OBSTRUCTION BY TRAINS
7.19.000 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
7.20.000 STREET TREES
7.20.010 Permit Required for Planting, Etc.
7.20.020 Trees Furnished by City
7.20.030 Trees That May Be Planted and Maintained Between Trees
7.20.040 Trimming Trees
7.20.050 Destruction of Flowers, Flower Beds, Etc.
7.20.060 Hazardous and Infected Trees
7.20.070 Interference with City Engineer’s Orders
7.21.000 DUTCH ELM DISEASE CONTROL
7.21.010 Purpose
7.21.020 Entry of Premises
7.21.030 Destroying Diseased Tree
7.21.040 Elm Wood-Treating or Destroying
7.21.050 Destroying Diseased Wood
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 2 7/15/08
7.21.060 Spraying Trees
7.21.070 Removing Dead Wood From Trees
7.22.000 PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION
7.30.000 PENALTY
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 3 7/15/08
CHAPTER 7
Streets and Sidewalks
7.01.000 OFFICIAL MAP.
7.01.010 Establishment. There is hereby established an Official Map of the City of Port
Washington, showing the location and width of streets, highways and parkways as laid
out, adopted and established. Such Official Map consists of two sheets: Sheet 1 (Street
Development Plan), showing the location and width of streets within the City limits and
adjacent thereto; and Sheet 2 of 2 (Street Extension Plan), showing the location and width
of the extension of the major street system of the City into the adjacent unincorporated
area over which the city can exercise extraterritorial jurisdiction in accordance with
section 62.23 (6), Wisconsin Statutes.
7.01.020 Plat Approval. No land subdivision plat shall be approved unless such plat
conforms to the Official Map.
7.01.030 Permits. For the purpose of conserving the integrity of the Official Map, no
building shall be erected or located within the bed of any street, highway or parkway
shown on the Official Map unless a permit therefor shall first have been applied for and
issued in accordance with section 62.23 (6) (d), (e), (f) and (g), Wisconsin Statutes. The
applicant for such permit shall submit to the Building Inspector, with his application, an
accurate plot plan, certified by a qualified surveyor, showing the location of the proposed
building with reference to any street, highway or parkway shown on the Official Map.
7.01.040 Changes and Amendments. The Common Council may, whenever and as
often as it may deem it for the public interest, and after a public hearing as provided in
section 62.23 (6) (b), Wisconsin Statutes, a change or add to the Official Map of the City
so as to establish the exterior lines of planned new streets, highways and parkways or to
widen, extend or close existing streets, highways or parkways.
7.01.050 Registration. The City Clerk shall file with the Register of Deeds of Ozaukee
County, a certificate showing that the City of Port Washington has established an Official
Map and shall do likewise as to any changes or additions.
7.02.000 ESTABLISHING WIDTH AND GRADE OF ROADWAYS AND
SIDEWALKS. The Common Council may change the width of the sidewalk along any
street or portion of any street, and may also change the grade of any sidewalk by raising
the same above or lowering the same below the established grade of the respective streets
along which they may be located, and the Common Council may establish the width of
roadways along any street or portion of any street.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 4 7/15/08
7.03.000 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS. Whenever any
street or sidewalk, or any portion thereof, shall have been ordered paved, constructed or
improved, the Board of Public Works shall prepare plans and specifications, profiles and
cross-sections of the roadway and sidewalk in said streets or portions of said streets,
together with the diagram or diagrams of the same, and submit those plans, specifications
and diagrams, to the Common Council for approval or correction, and when such plans,
specifications and diagrams shall have been so approved or corrected, they shall be filed
with the City Clerk and when so filed, all such improvements aforesaid shall conform
with such plans and specifications.
7.04.000 CURB AND GUTTER.
7.04.010 Determination of Council. Where the Subdivision Control Code does not
apply, the Common Council may determine that curb and gutter be laid, rebuilt, repaired,
or constructed along or upon any public street or highway within the City.
7.04.020 Cost Assessed to Abutting Property. The cost of any such curb and gutter
improvement shall be borne in full by the abutting property owner and shall be assessed
under section 66.60, Wisconsin Statutes. Notice of such charge shall be given as required
in section 66.60 (16) Wisconsin Statutes.
7.04.030 Permit Required. No person shall lay, remove, replace or repair any curb and
gutter within the City unless he is under contract with the City to do such work, or has
obtained a permit therefor from the City Engineer at least 10 days before work is
proposed to be undertaken.
7.04.040 Specifications. All curb and gutter within the City shall be repaired, rebuilt and
constructed in accordance with the specifications on file with the City Engineer.
7.05.000 STREET INTERSECTIONS. The improvement of all street intersections
shall be paid by the City.
7.06.000 CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS.
7.06.010 Construction. The grade and materials of all sidewalks hereafter constructed
or re-laid shall, at the curb thereof, be at the established grade at the center of the street,
unless otherwise specifically provided, and the grade thereof shall rise to the property line
½ inch in each foot.
7.06.020 Plans and Specifications. All sidewalks constructed or re-laid shall be done
according to plans and specifications of the City Engineer on file with the Board of
Public Works.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 5 7/15/08
7.06.030 Permit Required. Any person installing new sidewalks or replacing or
repairing old sidewalks shall first make application to the City Engineer for a permit.
The application shall contain such information as the Engineer may require. The City
Engineer shall grant a permit when the applicant complies with all ordinances and rules
relating to sidewalk location and construction. Before such permit may be issued, the
applicant shall pay the permit fee prescribed in sec. 15.12.000 of this Municipal code, as
amended from time to time. However, no permit fee shall be required of any property
owner who installs, replaces or repairs sidewalks using the property owner’s own labor
and equipment, or by means of a contractor engaged by the property owner to install or
repair such sidewalks.
7.07.000 CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS.
7.07.010 Order. Pursuant to section 66.615, Wisconsin Statutes, the Board of Public
Works may order any sidewalk which is unsafe, defective or insufficient to be repaired or
removed and replaced with a sidewalk in accordance with the standard fixed by the
Council.
7.07.020 Notice. A copy of such order directing such laying, removal, replacement or
repair shall be served upon the owner of the lot in front of which such work shall have
been ordered by personal service, or if such owner or his agent cannot be found, by
publication in the official newspaper.
7.07.030 Default of Owner. Whenever the owner of property affected shall neglect for a
period of twenty (20) days after notice of such order to lay, remove, replace or repair any
such sidewalk, the City may cause such work to be done at the expense of the property
owner, except that the City shall be responsible for its share of the expenses, if any, as set
out in Section 7.07.050.
7.07.040 Minor Repairs. When the cost of repairs of any sidewalk in front of any lot or
parcel of land shall not exceed $50.00, the Board of Public Works may order the Street
Commissioner to make immediate repairs to such sidewalk, without notice, and charge
the cost thereof to the owner of such lot or parcel of land; except that if the sidewalk to be
repaired would be at the expense of the City under Section 7.07.050, the City shall pay
said repairs and not charge the same thereof to the owner.
7.07.050 Expense. The Board of Public shall keep an accurate account of the expense of
laying, removing and repairing sidewalks as to each lot or parcel of land and report the
same to the City Clerk. In the case of a lot or parcel of land which is used solely for
residential purposes and which has sidewalk on more than one side of the lot, the owner
of the lot or parcel of land shall be responsible for the expense of the sidewalk on the side
having the most length of sidewalk, and for one-half the expense of the balance of the
sidewalk; and the City shall be responsible for the remaining expense of the sidewalk.
The City Clerk shall enter the amount of the owner’s expense in the tax roll as a special
tax against that lot or parcel of land, and the same shall be collected in all respects as are
other taxes upon real estate.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 6 7/15/08
7.07.060 Installment Payment. If the amount of the owner’s expense exceeds $200.00,
at the option of the owner of the lot or parcel of land, upon written notice to the City
Clerk, such charges may be paid over a five (5) year period, with interest on the unpaid
principal to be calculated at the lesser of the following: 6% per annum; or an annual
percentage rate equal to the interest rate charged to the City on the City’s most recent
borrowing for general obligation purposes as of the date of the adoption of the special
assessment resolution.
7.08.000 DEFECTS IN STREETS AND SIDEWALKS. The Street Commissioner
shall cause frequent inspections to be made of all the streets, sidewalks, curb and gutter,
pavements, bridges and other public ways in all parts of the City, and whenever he shall
find any defect or want of repairs therein, he shall report the same to the Board of Public
Works at its next regular or special meeting, provided, however, that when in his opinion
the street, sidewalk, curb and gutter, pavement, bridge or public way is dangerous to
public travel, he shall make the repair immediately without reporting to the Board of
Public Works. The cost of repairs made hereunder shall be paid out of the general fund
except that the cost of repair of curb and gutter shall be assessed under Section 7.04 and
the cost of repair of sidewalks shall be assessed under Section 7.07.
7.09.000 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
7.09.010 Snow and Ice to be Removed. A. Every person in charge or control of any
building or lot of land fronting or abutting City right-of-way in which a paved sidewalk
has been constructed, whether as owner, tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall remove and
clear away, or caused to be removed and cleared away, snow and ice from such sidewalk
as is in front of or abuts said building or lot or land within 24 hours of the cessation of
any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
B. In the event snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it cannot be removed
without likelihood of damage to sidewalk, the person or entity charged with its
removal shall, within the time mentioned in subsection (1) hereof, cause enough sand
or other abrasive to be put on the sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe;
and shall then, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause said sidewalk to be
thoroughly cleaned.
7.09.020 Depositing of Snow and Ice Restricted. No person shall deposit or cause to be
deposited any snow and ice on or against a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway, or
loading and unloading areas except that snow and ice may be windrowed on public
roadways incident to the cleaning of sidewalks in business districts.
7.09.030 Violations; Liability Therefor. A. In the event of the failure of any person to
clear away or treat with abrasives and subsequently clear away any snow and ice from
any sidewalk as hereinbefore provided, or cause this to be done, the Director of Public
Works shall, as soon as practicable after such failure, cause such work to be done.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 7 7/15/08
B. The Director of Public Works shall ascertain and keep a record of the exact cost of all
work he causes to be done in accordance with this section on account of each act or
omission of each person; and he shall identify these persons or entities with
particularity.
C. The Director of Public Works shall cause the cost of work done in accordance with
this section to be charged against the land abutting the sidewalk where such work was
done as a special assessment and collected in the same manner.
7.10.000 EXCAVATING OR OBSTRUCTIONS.
7.10.010 Permit Required. No person shall without a permit:
1. Excavation Under Streets and Sidewalks. Excavate for and build, or cause to
be excavated for and built, a cellar, vault, coal bin or other room under a
sidewalk or street.
2. Excavations Near Street Line. Excavate or cause to be excavated a cellar,
cistern, well, hole or other depression, on or so near the line of a street,
sidewalk, alley or other public ground, within the City as to endanger the
public use thereof, or of life or limb of persons passing thereover.
3. Passageways, etc. Excavate for or build, or cause to be excavated for or built,
a passageway, trench, drain or sewer within, along or near such street,
sidewalk, alley, par, or other public ground.
4. Poles, Signs, etc. Erect, construct, place or maintain, or cause to be erected,
constructed, placed or maintained, any telephone, telegraph or electric light
pole or poles or any scaffold, platform, bay window, awning or other
extension of a building, or any billboard, sign illuminated, signboard or other
advertising device, any rope, wire or chain within or over any street, alley,
sidewalk, park or other public ground within the City.
5. Stairways. Build any stairway or entrance from a sidewalk or street into a
basement or cellar adjoining or within any street, park or other public ground
within the City.
6. Openings in Sidewalks. Build or cause to be built or suffer to exist, any area,
hole or opening within any sidewalk space.
7. Moving Buildings. Remove or cause to be removed any building upon,
within, along, over or across any street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public
ground within the City.
8. Building and Repairing Buildings. Build or repair any building next to and
adjoining any street or sidewalk whereby material may be placed or work
performed within such street or sidewalk.
9. Building Material. Use any street, sidewalk, park, or other public ground for
the deposit of building material, or the doing of any work or labor within the
same, in the moving, taking down, raising, erection and construction of any
building.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 8 7/15/08
10. Removing Payment, Gravel, etc. Break, dig up, remove, or in any way
displace or cause to be broken, dug up, removed or in any way displaced, any
permanent macadam, gravel or earth within any street, sidewalk, alley, park or
other public grounds, which might otherwise be lawfully done.
11. Removing Trees. Remove any trees along any street or sidewalk.
7.10.020 Permit; Now Secured; Bond.
7.10.020 At the time the application for a Street Opening Permit is filed the applicant
shall pay the following fees:
$20.00 permit fee with a Performance Bond of $2,000 minimum or 100% of the
restoration costs whichever is greater.
7.10.030 Issuance of Permit. When granted by the Board of Public Works upon the
terms and conditions it requires, a permit shall be issued by the City Engineer in duplicate
over his signature, stating the date of issue, the name and address of the person to whom
issued and the work or purpose for which issued, the time within which the work is to be
completed and the date on which the permit will expire, and such terms and conditions as
the Board of Council may have fixed. All permits issued shall be subject to review by the
Common Council.
7.10.040 Warning Signs Required. Every person to whom a permit shall be granted to
build, repair, or remove any building, or to use any street or sidewalk for the deposit of
building material, shall enclose or cause to be enclosed on all sides, within or exposed to
a public street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place, any obstruction or excavation,
by guards, fences, or barriers, at least 3 feet high and at night a red light or lights shall be
placed and kept, so as to cast a light on such obstruction, and in case of any excavation,
trench, drain sewer, cellar, vault, cistern, well, open area or other opening, a red light
shall be placed and kept at each end and as often as every 50 feet along the entire side or
length thereof. Any such person shall replace, rebuild, relay or make, or cause to be
replaced, rebuilt, relay or made, in all respects as good and safe, substantial and
permanent as the same was before, any street, sidewalk, crosswalk, alley, park or other
public ground which may have been disturbed or displaced by such excavation, trench or
obstruction.
7.10.050 Bridges and Platforms, Gutters. A. No bridge or platform over any gutter in
any street or alley within the City shall be more than 12 feet in width, nor if plant, less
than 2 inches thick resting on and securely nailed to 4 stringers at least 4 inches square
and such bridge or platform shall not extend into any street more than 18 inches beyond
the sidewalk space of said street, nor obstruct the flow of water in gutters and any such
bridge or platform, or any culvert or box, or any obstruction to the flow of water in the
gutter may be removed summarily by any authorized person.
B. No bridge, platform or gutter shall be placed on any street or alley, which is improved
by pavement, macadam, or gravel or with stone or concrete curbing, without a permit
of the Council.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 9 7/15/08
7.11.000 ENCROACHMENTS. Except as set forth herein, no person shall encroach
upon a street, alley, parkway or sidewalk in the City by placing thereon any boxes,
barrels, merchandise, other furniture or fixtures, provided that, any merchant, may
occupy that portion in front of his or her place of business within four feet of the curb for
such time as may be necessary for receiving and delivering goods, and as otherwise set
forth herein.
7.11.010 Right of Way Use License. An owner or operator of a business may use the
public street right of way only by license issued under the conditions established by the
City of Port Washington Plan Commission and with approval of said license by the
Common Council. At the time an application for a right of way use license is filed, the
applicant shall pay a fee of $20.00 for said license.
7.12.000 AWNINGS. All awnings shall be at least 7 feet at the lowest part thereof above
the top of the sidewalk and shall be supported without posts, but by iron brackets or by an
iron framework attached firmly to the building so as to leave the sidewalk wholly
unobstructed and all awnings obstructing travel on the sidewalks shall be removed within
10 days after notice in writing given by the Building Inspector and personally served on
the owner or occupant of the building to which such awning is attached.
7.13.000 SIGNS. No person shall place or hang any sign or cause the same to be hung
over any sidewalk, without the written permit of the Building Inspector.
7.14.000 PROJECTIONS OVER SIDEWALK. No porch, gallery, store, platform,
entrance to basement, fire escape, downspout, railing or grating shall be allowed to
extend into, upon or over any sidewalk without the written permit of the Council.
7.15.000 SIDEWALK TO BE KEPT SAFE. Every person owning any building in the
City having any area between the building and sidewalk or extending into the sidewalk
shall keep the same covered by a closed iron, or a closed iron and glass cover, laid
perfectly even with the surface of the sidewalk, or shall keep the same surrounded on all
sides by a sufficient railing or barrier at least 3 feet high, except in cases of stairways
leading from the sidewalks to basements which shall have a sufficient railing or barrier at
least 3 feet high on 3 sides thereof.
7.16.000 PUBLIC TO BE PROTECTED. Every person who shall take up or remove
any portion of any sidewalk, or any portion of any street or alley within the City shall
take all necessary precautions to guard the public against all accidents therefrom and
shall be subject to such rules and regulations for the protection of travel as the Council
shall adopt.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 10 7/15/08
7.17.000 USE OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC GROUNDS.
7.17.010 In General. No person shall within any street, alley, sidewalk, park or public
grounds:
1. ALTER GRADES. Alter any grade thereof.
2. UNATTENDED ANIMALS. Leave any animal unattended or unhitched.
3. DAMAGE STRUCTURES. Damage or destroy any structure.
4. BARRIERS OR BARRICADES. Move, remove, damage or destroy any
guard railing, barrier or barricade.
5. VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS. Push or pull any vehicle, except a vehicle for
small children, handicapped persons and wheelchairs.
6. RUBBISH AND GARBAGE. Deposit any ashes, dirt, garbage rubbish or
refuse.
7. OPENINGS AND EXCAVATIONS. Leave open any cellar door or grating,
or any excavation adjacent thereto.
8. BICYCLES. Ride a bicycle or similar vehicle on a sidewalk.
9. GAMES. Play ball or other games on any street.
10. OBSTRUCTING WATER. Place, or cause to be placed, anything in or over a
gutter which obstructs the flow of water therein.
11. MATERIAL INJURIOUS TO VEHICLES. Deposit any broken glass, nails,
wire, tacks, or other thing which may be injurious to vehicles.
7.17.20 Block Parties in Residential Areas.
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Block party: a gathering of abutting neighbors and their relatives and friends
held within a city street right-of-way or public thoroughfare located within a
primarily residential neighborhood, a portion of which street or thoroughfare has
been temporarily closed for the occasion.
B. Closing of Streets and Public Thoroughfares; Application; Permit; Hours;
Appeal. Upon written application by a person whose residence abuts the affected
portion of a city street right-of-way or public thoroughfare, the Chief of Police or
his designee may grant a permit to close a definite and limited portion of such
street or thoroughfare for a block party in a primarily residential neighborhood.
An application for such permit shall be filed at least one (1) week before the date
of the block party for which a permit is sought, and shall be made on the forms
and shall include the information as prescribed by the Chief of Police or his
designee. Block parties shall start no earlier than 10:00 a.m. and shall end no
later than 10:00 p.m. No such permit shall be granted when:
1. The street, or portion thereof, sought to be closed is part of a federal, state
or county trunk highway system or is a major through street, as
determined by the Chief of Police or his designee.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 11 7/15/08
2. Such closure will, will be likely or will tend to, cause unreasonable traffic
congestion; result in a disturbance of the peace; or endanger the public
health, safety or welfare.
Upon denial of an application for a block party permit, an applicant may
appeal to the Common Council by the filing of a written notice of appeal with
the City Administrator.
C. Responsibilities and Restrictions.
1. Acceptance of a permit required by this section shall make the applicant
primarily liable for damages to persons or property because of the closing.
The City shall not be liable for any damage caused by the closing
2. It shall be unlawful to hold a block party under circumstances where
barricades do not completely block off vehicular traffic from the portion
of the street or thoroughfare being closed by authority of the permit.
3. If the street or thoroughfare is barricaded during hours which require
vehicles to use headlights, lights and reflectors must be clearly and visibly
placed and maintained on the barricades by the permittee, and it shall be
unlawful to fail to have such lights or reflectors on the barricades.
Barricades, lights and reflectors may be obtained for the permittee’s
temporary use from the Department of Public Works provided that the
permittee shall request the same at least 48 hours in advance of the start of
the block party.
4. Music or noise must be kept at a reasonable level so as not to disturb
others.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 12 7/15/08
7.18.000 CROSSINGS; OBSTRUCTIONS BY TRAINS. No person shall permit or
allow any railway train, engine or car to stand or be upon any street, alley or railway
crossing to the obstruction of public travel thereon for a greater length of time than 5
minutes without opening said street, alley or crossing for at least 10 minutes.
7.19.000 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS. No gasoline, oil, water or air pump or
line shall hereafter be placed, erected, or constructed on any sidewalk, curb or between
any sidewalk and curb in the City.
7.20.000 STREET TREES.
7.20.010 Permit Required For Planting, Etc. No person shall plant, cut, prune,
remove, disturb or interfere with any living tree or shrub in any public street, alley or
public place in the City, without the written permission of the City Engineer.
7.20.020 Trees Furnished By City. All trees planted between the lot line and the curb
line of any street shall be furnished and planted by the City, under the rules and
regulations of the Board of Public Works, except that a property owner may, upon
obtaining special permission from said Board, plant at his own expense, trees of larger
size than the size furnished by the City. The property owner shall replace, at his own
expense under the rules and regulations of the Board of Public Works, any tree that dies
within a period of 2 years from the date of planting. The property owner shall be
responsible for maintenance during this period.
7.20.030 Trees That May Be Planted And Distance Maintained. No trees shall be
planted in the streets of the City unless the type of the trees and the distances between the
trees planted in the streets of the City are of the type and are planted with distances
approved by the Board of Public Works and City Engineer.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 13 7/15/08
7.20.040 Trimming Trees. The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of real estate in
this City shall upon written notice from the City Engineer forthwith trim and remove so
much of the branches of trees thereon, as will give a clear space of 8 feet between the
sidewalk and the lowest branch of such trees above such sidewalk and 12 feet above such
street a distance of 4 feet from the curb. If such owner or occupant shall fail to cut away
and remove the offending branches within 3 days after such notice, the City Engineer
shall cause said branches to be cut away and removed and he shall report the cost of
doing such work to the City Clerk and such costs shall be a legal charge and lien against
such lot or parcel of real estate whereon such trees are standing and shall be entered in
the tax roll as a special charge against such real estate and shall be collected in the
manner in which taxes against real estate are collected.
7.20.050 Destruction Of Flowers, Flower Beds, Etc. No person shall cut, break, tear,
deface, or otherwise injure or destroy any grass-plots, flower bed, ornamental or shade
tree, shrub or lamp post other than his own upon any sidewalk or in any street, alley or
other public place within the City.
7.20.060 Hazardous And Infected Trees. A. Any tree or part thereof, whether alive or
dead, which the City Engineer shall find to be infected, hazardous, or a nuisance, so as to
endanger the public, or other trees, plants or shrubs growing within the City, or to be
injurious to sewers, sidewalks, or other public improvements, whether growing upon
public or private property, shall be removed, trimmed or treated by the owner of the
property upon or adjacent to which such tree or part thereof is located.
B. The City Engineer shall give written notice to said owner to remedy the situation
which shall be served personally, in the manner of service of circuit court summons,
or posted upon the affected tree. Such notice shall specifically state the period of
time within which the action must be taken, which shall be within not less than 24
hours, nor more than 14 days from the giving of such notice, as determined by the
City Engineer, on the basis of the seriousness of the condition of the tree or danger to
the public.
C. If the owner shall fail to remove, treat or trim said tree within the time limited, the
City Engineer shall cause the tree to be removed, treated, or trimmed, and shall report
the full cost thereof to the City Clerk, who shall thereupon enter such cost as a
special charge against the property.
7.20.070 Interference With City Engineer’s Orders. No person shall delay or interfere
with the City Engineer or City employees in the planting, pruning, spraying or removing
of trees or shrubs, living or dead, in that part of any street lying between the lot line and
the curb line or in the center of side plots of boulevards in the City, or from removing
stone, cement, lumber, or other substance placed against a tree or shrub in any public
place in said City.
7.21.000 DUTCH ELM DISEASE CONTROL.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 14 7/15/08
7.21.010 Purpose. Many elm trees are growing on private as well as public property in
the City, which trees are threatened with Dutch Elm disease, and the loss of the trees
would substantially depreciate the market value of property in the City, and the City is
engaged in a program to protect elm trees on public property, and in order to be effective
it is necessary that a similar program be carried out on private property; therefore this
section is adopted for the purpose of preventing the spread of Dutch Elm disease and the
resulting loss of elm trees in order to protect and preserve the market value of property in
the City.
7.21.020 Entry Of Premises. Every owner and person in possession of any real estate in
the City shall permit authorized City employees to enter upon his real estate for the
purpose of examining elm trees. If it shall appear to any such employee that an elm tree
may be diseased, such employee shall be permitted to take the necessary sample of wood
from the tree to have an examination made.
7.21.030 Destroying Diseased Tree. If an examination made, as above provided, or
made at the instance of the owner of the real estate, discloses that the tree has Dutch Elm
disease, the City Council shall give notice to the owner of the real estate, at his last
known address, and to the person in possession of the real estate to have such diseased
tree cut down and the wood destroyed by burning within 10 days of giving such notice.
If the owner or person in possession of such real estate does not cut down the diseased
tree and destroy the wood by burning within 10 days after such notice is given, then such
tree shall be cut down and the wood destroyed by burning by the City employees on order
of the City Council. Accurate record of the expense of such cutting and burning shall be
made and a report thereof given to the City Clerk, who shall enter the amount against the
respective real estate in the next and subsequent tax roll as a special tax against such real
estate, and the same shall be collected in all respects as are other City taxes upon real
estate.
7.21.040 Elm Wood – Treating Or Destroying. No person shall keep, store, sell, offer
for sale, give away or transport any elm tree, elm firewood or elm branch, stump or log
into or within the City which is infested with the Dutch Elm disease, or a disease-carrying
medium except for the purpose of immediately destroying the same by burning, or if not
so infested, without debarking the same and treating it with an approved elm bark beetle
destroying concentrate. Every owner and person in possession of real estate in the City
shall permit authorized City employees to enter upon his real estate and every residence,
garage, woodshed or other structure thereon for the purpose of determining whether or
not any elm material, of the type above described, is located on the real estate of any
structure thereon. If such employee ascertains that there is any elm material located on
such real estate or structure which has not been debarked and applied with an elm bark
beetle destroying concentrate, as herein required, the City Council shall notify the owner
at his last known address, and the person in possession, to so debark and apply an elm
bark beetle destroying concentrate within 10 days from the date of the notice, or in lieu
thereof to destroy the elm material by burning.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 15 7/15/08
7.21.050 Destroying Diseased Wood. A. Each owner and person in possession of real
estate in the City shall permit such employee of the City to take a sample of any such elm
material for the purpose of determining whether or not it is infested with Dutch Elm
disease, or disease-carrying medium, and if such examination discloses that any such elm
material is so infested, the City Council shall give notice to the owner at this last known
address, and to the person in possession, to destroy by burning all of such elm material
located on such real estate or any structure thereon.
B. If the owner or person in possession does not comply with any notice given, as
provided in this section, within 10 days after the same is given, then on order of the City
Council, the City employees shall remove all such elm material and burn the same.
Accurate account of the expense of removal and burning shall be kept and report made to
the City Clerk who shall enter the amount thereof in the next and subsequent tax roll as
special tax against such real estate and the same shall be collected in all respects as are
other City taxes upon real estate.
7.21.060 Spraying Trees. When it has been determined that any elm tree or elm material
is infested with Dutch Elm disease, in addition to the removal and burning of the same, as
above provided, all elm trees within a radius of 1,000 feet from the source of such disease
shall be sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle destroying concentrate. Trees on
public property shall be sprayed at the expense of the City. Notice of the necessity of
spraying elm trees on private property shall be given by the City Council to the owner of
such private real estate at his last known address and to persons in possession, and unless
such owner or person in possession has such elm trees sprayed within 10 days of the time
of giving such notice, City employees shall spray such trees. Accurate records shall be
kept of the cost thereof entered in the next and subsequent tax roll as a special tax against
such real estate, and the same shall be collected in all respects as are other City taxes
upon real estate.
7.21.070 Removing Dead Wood From Trees. Each owner and person in possession of
real estate in the City shall cause all dead wood to be removed from every elm tree on his
real estate and to be burned. In the event that it appears to any authorized City employee
that there is dead wood in any elm tree on private property in the City, the City Council
shall cause notice to be given to the owner at his last known address, and the person in
possession of such real estate, to remove and burn such dead wood. If such dead wood
has not been removed and burned within 10 days after such notice is given, then the City
employees shall remove the same and burn it. Accurate records of the cost of removing
and burning such dead wood shall be entered in the next and subsequent tax roll as a
special tax against such real estate and the same shall be collected in all respects as are
other City taxes on real estate.
7.22.000 PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION. Any class of public construction or any part
thereof may be done directly by the City without submitting the same for bids.
7.23.000 HOUSE AND BUILDING NUMBERS.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 16 7/15/08
7.23.010 Official House And Building Numbering Map. There is hereby established
an official House and Building Numbering Map of the City of Port Washington,
providing for numbering of all buildings and houses fronting on all streets, avenues and
public ways in the City of Port Washington, and all houses and buildings shall be
numbered in accordance with said map.
7.23.020 Numbers Required. The owners and occupants of all houses and buildings
within the City shall cause to be placed upon said building or house its respective
numbers, such numbers assigned as provided herein. The numbers shall be conspicuously
placed immediately above, on, or at the side of the proper door of each building so that
the number can be seen plainly from the street.
7.23.030 Enforcement.
1. If the owner or occupant of any building required to be numbered by this
ordinance shall neglect to duly attach or maintain the proper number on such
building, the City Police Department shall serve upon the owner or occupant a
notice requiring the owner or occupant to properly number the same. If the
owner or occupant neglects to do so within fifteen days after service of the
notice, he or she shall be deemed to have violated this ordinance.
2. Whenever any house, building or structure shall be constructed in the City it
shall be the duty of the owner to procure the correct number or numbers, as
designated, from the Building Inspection Department. Proper display of said
numbers shall be required before the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
7.30.000 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter rule,
regulation or order adopted hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section
25.04 of this Code.
City of Port Washington Chapter 7 – Page 17 7/15/08
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 1 9/29/14
CHAPTER 8
Traffic Code
Table of Contents
8.01.000 PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
8.01.010 State Traffic Forfeiture Laws Adopted
8.01.020 Other Laws Adopted
8.01.030 Operating After Revocation or Suspension
8.02.000 SPEED LIMITS
8.02.010 Speed Limits Increased
8.02.020 Speed Limits Decreased
8.03.000 THROUGH HIGHWAYS DESIGNATED
8.04.000 ONE-WAY STREETS
8.05.000 PARKING. STOPPING AND STANDING REGULATED
8.05.010 Parking Limits
8.05.020 Parking Meters
8.05.030 All-Night Parking Regulated
8.05.040 Angle Parking Permitted
8.05.050 Miscellaneous Parking Provisions
8.05.060 Yield Right-of-Way Intersections
8.05.070 Stop Signs
8.05.080 Nonmoving Traffic Violations, Enforcement
8.06.000 WEIGHT LIMITS AND HEAVY TRAFFIC ROUTES
8.06.010 Class “B” Highways Designated
8.06.020 Special and Season Weight Limitations
8.06.030 Heavy Traffic Routes; Restrictions on Use of Other Streets By
Heavy Traffic
8.06.040 Parking
8.07.000 ACCIDENT REPORTS
8.08.000 ABANDONED VEHICLES
8.08.010 Abandonment of Vehicles
8.08.020 Leaving of Wrecked, Non-Operating Vehicle on Street
8.08.030 Disposition of Wrecked or Discarded Vehicles
8.08.040 Impounding
8.09.000 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS
8.09.010 Board of Public Works to Procure and Erect Signs and Signals
8.09.020 Removal of Unofficial Signs and Signals
8.11.000 TURNING REGULATED
8.11.010 U-Turns Prohibited
8.11.020 Disorderly Conduct With a Motor Vehicle
8.12.000 BICYCLE AND PROTECTIVE HELMETS
8.13.000 PENALTY
8.13.010 Uniform Offenses
8.13.020 Special Local Regulations
8.13.030 Miscellaneous
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 2 9/29/14
8.13.040 Parking
8.14.000 ENFORCEMENT
8.14.010 Uniform Citation
8.14.020 Parking Citation
8.14.030 Notice of Demerit Points and Receipts
8.14.040 Forfeitures in Treasury Officer to Post Bond, Qualify
8.15.000 REFERENCE TO STATUTES
8.16.000 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
8.17.000 SEVERABILITY
8.18.000 EFFECTIVE DATE
8.19.000 SNOWMOBILES
8.19.010 State Snowmobile Laws Adopted
8.19.020 Snowmobile Routes Designated
8.19.030 Additional Regulations
8.19.040 Accidents and Accident Reports
8.19.050 Snowmobile Renters Licensed
8.19.060 Penalty
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 3 9/29/14
CHAPTER 8
Traffic Code
8.01.000 PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
8.01.010 State Traffic Forfeiture Laws and Rules Adopted. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this ordinance, all provisions of the general body of law in
Chapters 340 to 348 of Wisconsin Statutes and Rules of the Department of
Transportation in TRANS 305, describing and defining regulations with respect to
vehicle and traffic and equipment for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, including
penalties to be imposed and procedures for prosecution, are hereby adopted and by
reference made a part of this ordinance as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be
performed or prohibited by any statute or rule incorporated herein by reference is
required or prohibited by this ordinance. Sections of Chapters 340 to 348 and TRANS
305 adopted by reference or as may be altered, amended or recreated in any manner
whatsoever shall include but not be limited to the following:
340.01 (Words and phrases defined)
341.11 (4) (Display of registration plates)
341.15 (Display of registration plates)
341.16 (4) (Issuance of duplicate plates)
341.42 (4) (Reciprocity permits)
341.55 (Penalty for misuse of plates)
341.57 (3) (Registration of finance companies and banks)
341.63 (When registration is to be suspended)
342.05 (4) (Certificate of title required)
342.15 (5), (6) and (7) (Transfer of interest in vehicle)
342.23 (secured party’s and owner’s duties)
342.30, 342.31, 342.34 (Anti-theft and Anti-fraud Provision)
343.01 (Words and Phrases defined)
343.305 (Implied consent)
343.35 (Surrender of licenses upon cancellation, revocation or suspension)
343.44 (Driving after license revoked or suspended) (First offense)
343.45 to 343.46 (Unlawful practices relative to licenses)
343.60 to 343.72 (Licensing of driver schools and instructors)
343.73 (Penalty)
344.01 (Words and phrases defined)
344.45 to 344.47 (Penalties for violation of chapter)
344.51 (Financial responsibility for domestic rented vehicles)
345.01 (Words and phrases defined)
345.20 to 345.53 (General provisions in traffic forfeiture actions)
345.55 (Traffic officers not to profit from arrests)
346.01 (Words and phrases defined)
346.02 (Applicability of chapter)
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 4 9/29/14
346.17 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.04 to 346.16)
346.18 to 346.21 (Right of way)
346.22 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.18 to 346.21)
346.23 to 346.29 (Drivers and pedestrians)
346.30 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.23 to 346.29)
346.31 to 346.35 (Turning and stopping, required signals)
346.36 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.31 to 346.35)
346.37 to 346.42 (Traffic signs, signals and markings)
346.43 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.37 to 346.42)
346.44 to 346.48 (Required stops)
346.49 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.44 to 346.68)
346.50 to 346.55 (Restrictions on stopping and parking)
346.57 (2), (3) and (4) (a) to (c) (Speed restrictions)-first offense in a year
346.57 (4) (d), (5) and (6) to 346.595 (Speed restrictions)
346.58 (2), Wisconsin Statutes
346.60 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.57 to 346.595)
346.61 (Applicability of sections relating to reckless and drunken driving)
346.62 (1) and (3) (Reckless driving) – first offense in a year
346.63 (1) (3) and (4) (Operating under “influence” of intoxicant) – first offense
in 5 years)
346.64 (Employment of drunk operators) – first offense in a year
346.65 (1) and (2) (Penalty for violating ss. 346.62 to 346.64)
346.66 (Applicability of sections relating to accident and accident reporting)
346.68 and 346.69 (Duty upon striking unattended vehicle – upon striking property on or
adjacent to highway) – first offense within a year
346.70 (1) (2) or (3) 346.71, 346.72, 346.73 (Duty to report accident, etc.)
346.70 (4) (Police and traffic agencies to report)
346.70 (5) (Falsifying reports) – first offense within a year
346.77 to 346.81 (Bicycles and play vehicles)
346.82 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.77 to 346.81)
346.87 to 346.94 (Miscellaneous rules)
346.95 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.87 to 346.94)
347.01 to 347.06 (General Provisions)
347.06 to 347.29 (Lighting equipment)
347.30 (Penalty for violating lighting equipment requirements)
347.35 to 347.49 (Other equipment)
347.50 (Penalty for violating ss. 347.35 to 347.49)
348.01 to 348.02 (Size weight, load – general provisions)
348.05 to 348.10 (Size and load)
348.11 (Penalty for violating size and load limitations)
348.15 to 348.20 (Weight)
348.21 (Penalty for violating weight limitations)
348.25 to 348.27 (Permits)
348.28 (Permits to be carried – penalty)
TRANS 305 (Equipment violations)
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 5 9/29/14
8.01.020 Other Laws Adopted. There are also hereby adopted by reference the
following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes but the prosecution of such offenses under
this ordinance shall be as provided in Chapters 340 to 348 of the Wisconsin Statutes and
the penalty for violation thereof shall be limited to a forfeiture as provided in Section 13
of this ordinance.
941.01 (1) (Negligent operation of vehicle off highway)
941.045 (Drinking in motor vehicles on highway)
8.01.030 Operating After Revocation or Suspension. Unless such revocation or
suspension was for a violation of Section 346.04(3); 346.63(1); 346.63(2); 346.67;
940.06; 940.08; 940.09; 940.25, Wisconsin Statutes, and in other cases only if such
violation was the first offense within the past five (5) years.
8.02.000 SPEED LIMITS. The Common Council of the City of Port Washington
hereby determines that the statutory speed limits on the following street or portions
thereof are unreasonable, unsafe or imprudent and modifies such speed limits under
authority granted by S.349.11 of the statutes as follows:
8.02.010 Speed Limits Increased. Speed limits established by S. 346.57(4)(e) and (f),
Wis. Stats., are increased as hereinafter set forth upon the following streets or portions
thereof:
A. 35 miles per hour:
1. On Seven Hills Rd. from a point starting 0.46 of a mile north of its
intersection with S.T.H. 32 south to a point 0.13 of a mile south of its
intersection with S.T.H. 32.
2. On S. Spring St. from the north curb line of Port View Dr. to the south City
limits.
3. On Moore Rd. between W. Pierre Lane and the North City Limits.
4. (Repealed 5/03)
5. On Sunset Rd. from the East curb line of State Hwy.32 to the West curb line
of Park St.
6. On Sunset Rd. west of its intersection with County LL to the western City
Limits.
7. On North Spring Street from the north curb line of Mallinger Drive north to its
intersection with County Trunk KK.
B. 45 miles per hour:
1. On Seven Hills Rd. from its intersection with S.T.H. 33 south to the southern
City Limits.
2. On West Grand Avenue from the west curb line of Martin Drive, extended to
the western City Limits.
3. On Division Street from a point 577 feet south of the south curb line of
Western Avenue south to the southern City Limits.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 6 9/29/14
8.02.020 Speed Limits Decreased.
A. 15 miles per hour, pursuant to Sec. 346.57 (4)(a):
1. The area of N. Wisconsin St. from Beutel Rd. to the entry to St. Peter’s
Church parking lot.
2. The area of N. Freeman Drive from Grand Avenue north to the entry to St.
John’s Lutheran Church Parking Lot.
B. 25 miles per hour, pursuant to secs. 346.57 (5) and 349.11 (1)(a), Stats.:
1. On South Wisconsin Street from the south curb line of Chestnut Street south to
CTH C (S. Division Street).
2. On South Beach Road from its intersection with South Wisconsin Street east to
the public parking lot adjacent to Lake Michigan.
3. On Western Avenue from its intersection with South Wisconsin Street west to
CTH C (S. Division Street).
8.03.000 THROUGH HIGHWAYS DESIGNATED. In the interest of public safety
and pursuant to §349.07, Wis. Stats., the following streets or portions thereof are declared
to be through highways, and traffic signals giving notice thereof shall be erected by the
Board of Public Works in accordance with Section 9 of this ordinance.
1. All of State Trunk Highway 32, except for northbound traffic which shall stop
at its intersection with Grand Ave.
2. All of State Trunk Highway 33, except for eastbound traffic which shall stop
at its intersection with Spring St.
3. North Spring St. from City limits to and including north curb of Grand Ave.
4. South Webster St. from north curb of Michigan St. to and including the south
curb of Webster St.
5. West Dodge St. from west curb of Wisconsin St. to and including east curb of
Webster St.
6. North Wisconsin St. from north curb of Grand Ave. to and including south
curb of Jackson St.
7. West Van Buren St. from west curb of Wisconsin St. to east curb of N.
Webster St.
8. West Oakland Ave. from east curb of South Spring St. to and including west
curb of Division St.
9. South Division St. from south curb of Chestnut St. to and including east curb
of Western St.
10. West Chestnut St. from west curb of Webster St. to and including east curb of
Park St.
11. South Park St. from south curb of Grand Ave. to and including north curb of
North Holden St.
12. West Whitefish Rd. from west curb of North Wisconsin St. to east curb of
North Holden St.
13. West Walters St. from west curb of North Wisconsin St. to east curb of North
Holden St.
14. North Garfield Ave. from West Grand Ave. to Woodland Ave.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 7 9/29/14
15. North Holden St. between Van Buren and Barry Ave.
“8.04.000 ONE-WAY STREETS. Pursuant to Section 349.10, Wis. Stats., the
following streets or portions thereof are declared to be one-way streets and no person
shall operate any vehicle thereon except in the indicated direction at any time unless
otherwise set forth herein:”
1. North Holden St. from the south curb of West Van Buren St. to the north curb
of West Jackson St. in a southerly direction.
2. West Jackson St. from the east curb of North Holden St. to the west curb of
North Webster St., in an easterly direction.
3. North Johnson St. from East Van Buren St. from to North Powers St., in a
southerly direction.
4. North Powers St. from North Johnson St. to East Dodge St., in a northerly
direction.
5. East Van Buren St. from North Johnson St. to North Powers St., in an easterly
direction.
6. West Washington St. from North Webster St., in a northerly direction.
7. South Webster St. from Foster St. to Michigan St. in a southerly direction
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Sundays.
8. West Michigan St. from South Webster St. to South Coe St., in a westerly
direction between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Sundays
9. North Catalpa St. from East Woodruff St. to East Van Buren St., in a
southerly direction.
10. East Van Buren St. from North Catalpa St. to North Johnson St., in an easterly
direction.
11. Upper Lake Park Road.
12. Hospital alley from West Walters St. to West Dodge St., in a southerly
direction except the northerly 302 feet thereof.
13. South Maple St. from a point located 55 feet south of the south right-of-way
line of West Grand Ave., in a southerly and then westerly direction,
continuing to the west right-of-way of South Madison St.
14. West Main Street, from N. Milwaukee Street to N. Wisconsin Street in an
easterly direction.
15. East Grand Avenue from the east curb line of Franklin Street to the east end
of East Grand Avenue, in an easterly direction.
16. Road in Coal Dock Park, starting at the circle.
8.05.000 PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING REGULATED.
8.05.010 Parking Limits. When signs are erected in any blocks giving notice thereof, no
person shall park a vehicle for longer than the period hereinafter specified or at any time
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and the following
holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day and Christmas Day, or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Fridays, or
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 8 9/29/14
at such other specific time as may be more particularly set forth herein and upon the
following streets or portions of streets:
A. No Parking:
1. The north side of West Oakland Ave. for a distance of 100 feet west of the east curb
line of South Park St.
2. The south side of West Oakland Ave. from the west curb of South Park St. to the
Chicago and Northwestern Railroad right-of-way.
3. The west side of Park St. for a distance of 25 feet north of the north curb line of
Oakland Ave.
4. The east side of South Park St. from the south curb of Chestnut St. to the north curb
of Oakland Ave.
5. The south side of West Dodge St. from the west curb of Wisconsin St. to the east line
of Harrison St.
6. The west side of North Moore Rd. for a distance of 559 feet in a northerly direction
from the north curb of West Grand Ave. and also beginning at a point 867 feet
northerly from the north curb of West Grand Ave. and thence northerly to the south
curb of North Park St.
7. The east side of South Park St., for a distance of 240 feet in a northerly direction from
the north curb line of West Chestnut St., except between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m. the following day.
8. The south side of West Chestnut St. from the east curb of South Park St. to the west
curb of Keeney Ave.
9. Both sides of the alley lying west of Assessors Lot 554 between West Chestnut St.
and the Wisconsin Electric Power Company right-of-way.
10. The south side of Pierre Ln. lying between N. Wisconsin St. and N. Milwaukee St.
11. The north side of Landolt St. between North Holden St. and North Webster St.
12. (Repealed 8/18/2009)
13. On the west side of North Wisconsin St. from the north curb of West Washington St.
to the south curb of West Jackson St.
14. On the south side of West Washington St. from the east curb of North Wisconsin St.
from the east curb of North Wisconsin St. for a distance of 150 feet westerly from
said curb.
15. The east side of South Park St. for a distance of 50 feet south of the south curb line of
Oakland Ave.
16. The west side of South Park St. for a distance of 50 feet south to the south curb line of
Oakland Ave.
17. The east side of a public alley west of North Montgomery St. from the north line of
Dodge St. to the south line of Walters St.
18. The east side of South Park St. from the south curb of Grand Ave. to a point 100 feet
south thereof.
19. The west side of Ravine St. from the north line of Western Ave. to a point 215 feet
north thereof.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 9 9/29/14
20. On the east side of South Spring St. from the south line of Lincoln Ave. to the north
line of Oakland Ave.
21. The north side of East Jackson St. from the east line of North Wisconsin St. to the
west line of North Franklin St.
22. On the south side of E. Washington Street commencing at a point 60 feet east from
the east curb line of N. Franklin Street and extending to a point 234 feet east of the
east curb line of N. Franklin Street.
23. The east side of South Park St. from the north curb of Chestnut St. northerly a
distance of 264 feet to the south line of an alley.
24. (Repealed) 8/18/2009
25. (Repealed) 11/16/2010
26. On the east side of North Webster Street from the south curb line of West Jackson
Street to the north curb line of West Main Street between 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on
days when school is in session.
27. The north side of east Whitefish Rd. from the east curb of North Wisconsin St. to a
point 85 feet easterly thereof.
28. (Repealed) 8/18/2009
29. (Repealed) 8/18/2009
30. The south side of East Pierron from the east curb of North Wisconsin St. to a point 71
feet easterly thereof.
31. (Repealed) 11/16/2010
32. Notwithstanding the provisions of 8.05.040 (5), the north side of East Grand Ave.
from a point 61 feet east of the east curb line of Franklin St., extended, to a point 83
feet easterly thereof.
33. The west side of North Holden St. from the south curb of West Van Buren St. to a
point 109 feet thereof between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when school is in
session.
34. The west side of North Spring St. from the north curb of West Grand Ave. to a point
83 feet northerly thereof.
35. (Repealed)
36. The north side of West Van Buren St. from the east curb of North Holden St. to a
point 167 feet easterly thereof between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when school
is in session.
37. The south side of East Woodland Ave. from the west curb of North Crowns St. 116
feet west to Woodland Avenue’s intersection with the alley running north and south
between Woodland Ave. and West Melin St. from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
38. The W. J. Niederkorn Library Parking Lot from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
39. The west side of North Webster St. from the south curb of West Jackson St. to a point
300 feet south thereof between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when school is in
session.
40. (Repealed)
41. (Repealed) 11/16/2010
42. The east side of North Wisconsin St. from the south curb line of Norport Dr. to a
point 170 feet southerly thereof.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 10 9/29/14
43. On West Van Buren from the west curb of North Holden St. to a point 160 feet
westerly thereof.
44. (Repealed 8/18/2009)
45. In the public parking lot located in Upper Lake Park, south and west of the eastern
portion of the roadway located in the park, between 5:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. from
December 1 to March 31.
46. (Repealed)
47. (Repealed)
48. (Repealed)
49. On the east side of North Wisconsin St. from the north curb line of East Grand Ave.
to a point 81 feet northerly thereof.
50. On the west side of North Wisconsin St. from the north curb line of West Grand Ave.
to a point 81 feet northerly thereof.
51. The east side of North Wisconsin St. from the north curb line of East Main St. from
the north curb line of East Main St. to a point 59 feet northerly thereof.
52. On the west side of South Wisconsin St. from the south curb line of West Grand
Ave. to a point 46 feet southerly thereof.
53. (Repealed) 11/16/2010
54. (Repealed 8/18/2009)
55. (Repealed)
56. Vehicles with trailers either unattached or attached thereto on both sides of East
Jackson St. from the east curb line of North Franklin St. easterly to Lake St.; on both
sides of East Pier St. from a point 100 feet easterly of the east curb line of North
Franklin St. easterly to Lake St.; both sides of East Washington St. from City St.
easterly to Lake St.; both sides of City St. from East Jackson St. to East Washington
St.; Lake St. from East Jackson St. to East Washington St.
57. On the south side of West Beutel from the west curb line of North Wisconsin Street
to a point 89 feet westerly thereof.
58. No parking of vehicles except vehicles with trailers attached and not-to-exceed forty
feet in total length shall be permitted in that portion of the Marina parking lot lying
south of Pier 2 of said Marina extended westerly.
59. (Repealed)
60. (Repealed 8/18/2009)
61. No parking of vehicles except vehicles with trailers attached and not-to-exceed the
total of forty feet in length shall be permitted in that parking lot lying east of City
St., north of Washington St., south of Pier St., and west of Lake St., except the
westerly tier of parking spaces in said lot.
62. The north side of West Washington St. for a distance of 180 feet in a westerly
direction from the west curb of North Wisconsin St.
63. West Beutel St. from the west curb line of North Wisconsin St. to a point 92 feet
westerly thereof.
64. On the west side of South Wisconsin Street from a point 229 feet south of the south curb
line of West Grand Avenue to the north curb line of Western Avenue.
65. On the north side and south sides of Johnson St. from the west curb line of North
Powers St. to a point 80 feet westerly thereof.
66. On the east side of South Wisconsin St. from a point 280 feet south of the south curb
line of East Grand Ave. to the south curb line of Chestnut St.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 11 9/29/14
67. Commencing at a point on the north side of Johnson St. 193 feet west of the west
curb line of North Powers St. to a point 71 feet westerly and northwesterly thereof.
68. On the south side of Johnson St. from the intersection of the west curb line of North
Powers St. extended southeasterly to a point 164 feet westerly thereof.
69. On the easterly side of Johnson St. from the curb line of South Van Buren St.
extended to a point 320 feet southerly thereof during school hours.
70. On the westerly side of Johnson St. from the southerly curb line on Van Buren St. to
a point 348 feet southerly during school hours.
71. On the east side of Spring St. from the south curb line of West Grand Ave. to the
north curb line of Lincoln Ave.
72. (Repealed)-2/7/2012
73. On the north side of Jackson St. between North Webster St. and Hillcrest Ct. during
school hours.
74. On the south side of Seven Hills Rd. between the east curb line of North Wisconsin
St. and the west curb line of Parknoll Lane.
75. (Repealed 8/18/2009)
76. On the west side of South Park St. from a point 128 feet south of the south curb line
of Chestnut St. extended to a point 214 feet southerly thereof.
77. The south side of Thomas Dr. from the west curb line of North Wisconsin St. to a
point 660 feet west thereof.
78. The north side of Thomas Dr. from the west curb line of North Wisconsin St. to a
point 168 feet west thereof.
79. On the west side of Freeman Dr. from a point 554 feet northerly of the north curb
line of West Grand Ave. to a point 644 feet northerly from such north curb, from
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
80. On the south side of West Walters St. from a point 206 feet east of the east curb of
North Holden St. to a point 465 feet easterly thereof.
81. (Repealed)
82. On the east side of Hillcrest Ct. from the north curb line of West Jackson St. to a
point 90 feet north, from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when school is in session.
83. On the west side of Hillcrest Ct. from the north curb of West Jackson St. to a point
110 feet north, from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on days when school is in session.
84. On the north side of Oakland Ave., from the west curb line of S. Park St. extended to
a point 364 feet westerly thereof.
85. On the west side of Ravine St. from the south edge of the bridge over Mineral
Springs Creek south to the south right-of-way of the Chicago & Northwestern
Railroad right-of-way.
86. (Repealed)
87. The west side of South Park St. from a point 190 feet south of the south curb of
Chestnut St. extended westerly, to a point 380 feet southerly thereof.
88. (Repealed) 11/16/2010
89. No parking, stopping, or standing, including but not limited to no dropping off of
passengers, on the east side of North Holden St. from the south curb line of Norport
Dr. to the north curb line of James Dr., from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when
school is in session.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 12 9/29/14
90. On the west side of North Harrison St., from the south curb line of Van Buren St., to
a point 150 feet southerly thereof, from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when school
is in session.
91. The east side of North Wisconsin St. from the south curb line of East Kane St. to a
point 45 feet south thereof.
92. The north side of West Chestnut St. for a distance of 160 feet in an easterly direction
from the east curb of Park St.
93. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 105 feet west from the west curb
line of North Franklin St.
94. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 50 feet east from the east curb line
of North Milwaukee St.
95. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 59 feet west from the west curb
line of North Milwaukee St.
96. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 55 feet east from the east curb line
of North Montgomery St.
97. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 45 feet west from the west curb
line of North Montgomery St.
98. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 70 feet east from the east curb line
of North Webster St.
99. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 125 feet west from the west curb
line of North Webster St.
100. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distanced of 105 feet east from the east curb
line of North Moore Rd.
101. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 65 feet east from the east curb line
of North Park St.
102. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 45 feet west from the west curb
line of North Moore Rd.
103. On the north side of Grand Ave. starting at the west curb line of North Spring St. and
proceeding east to a point 242 feet west of the west curb line of North Maple St.
104. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 230 feet west from the west curb
line of North Spring St.
105. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 50 feet east from the east curb line
of North Garfield Ave.
106. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 90 feet west from the west curb
line of North Garfield Ave.
107. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 200 feet east from the east curb
line of North Crocker St.
108. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 65 feet west from the west curb
line of North Crocker St.
109. On the north side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 125 feet west from the west curb
line of North Crocker St. and proceeding west to a point 265 feet west from the west
curb line of North Crocker St.
110. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 55 feet east from the east curb line
of Summit Dr.
111. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 120 feet west from the west curb
line of South Eva St.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 13 9/29/14
112. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 40 feet east from the east curb line
of South Eva St.
113. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 220 feet west from the west curb
line of South High St.
114. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 40 feet east from the east curb line
of South High St.
115. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 40 feet west from the west curb
line of South Garfield Ave.
116. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 40 feet east from the east curb line
of South Garfield Ave.
117. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 265 feet west from the west curb
line of South Spring St.
118. On the south side of Grand Ave. starting at the east curb line of South Spring St. and
proceeding east to the west curb line of Madison Ave.
119. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 35 feet east from the east curb line
of Madison St.
120. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 40 feet west from the west curb
line of South Maple St.
121. On the south side of Grand Ave. starting at the east curb line of South Maple St. and
proceeding east to a point 170 feet west from the west curb line of South Park St.
122. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 55 feet east of the east curb line of
South Park St.
123. On the south side of Grand Ave. starting at a point 435 feet east of the east curb line
of South Park St. and proceeding east to a point 675 feet east of the east curb line of
South Park St.
124. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 220 feet west from the west curb
line of South Webster St.
125. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 175 feet east from the east curb
line of South Webster St.
126. On the north side of Grand Ave. starting at a point 105 feet west of the west curb
line of North Maple St. and proceeding east to the west curb line of North Maple St.
127. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 55 feet west of the west curb line
of South Milwaukee St.
128. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 35 feet east from the east curb line
of South Milwaukee St.
129. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 185 feet west from the west curb
line of South Wisconsin St.
130. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 100 feet east from the east curb
line of South Milwaukee St.
131. On the south side of Grand Ave. for a distance of 70 feet west from the west curb
line of South Park St.
132. On the north side of Sumac Ct. for a distance of 450 feet east from the east curb line
of Westport Dr.
133. On the south side of Elm Court from the west curb line of Westport Drive for a
distance of 250 feet.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 14 9/29/14
134. On the north side of Oak Court from the east curb line of Westport Drive for a
distance of 280 feet.
135. On the south side of Hickory Court from the west curb line of Westport Drive for a
distance of 525 feet.
136. On the north side of Maple Court from the east curb line of Westport Drive for a
distance of 320 feet.
137. On the west side of Woodview Circle from the north curb line of Terrace Drive for a
distance of 360 feet.
138. On the south and east sides of Michael Court from the south curb line of Thomas
Drive for a distance of 410 feet.
139. On the south side of East Main Street from a point 75 feet east of the east curb line
of North Franklin Street to the east end of East Main Street.
140. On the north side of East Main Street from a point 175 feet east of the east curb line
of North Franklin Street to the east end of East Main Street.
141. On both sides of the public roadway lying between and connecting Veteran’s Park
and Upper Lake Park.
142. (Repealed 5/15/07)
143. On the west side of South Spring Street from the south curb of West Grand Avenue
to a point 1089 feet southerly thereof.
144. On the north side of East Jackson Street from its intersection with the west curb line
of Lake Street to a point 140 feet westerly thereof.
145. On the east side of Lake Street from the north curbline of E. Jackson Street to a
point 440 feet north thereof;
146. On the west side of Lake Street from the north curbline of E. Jackson Street to a appoint 410
feet north thereof;
147. On the west side of South Spring Street from the south curb line of Third Avenue
south to the City limits.
148. On the east side of South Spring Street from the south curb line of Third Avenue,
extended, south to the City limits.
149. (Repealed)
150. On the south side of Parkway Drive for a distance of 504 feet east from the east curb
line of Parknoll Lane.
151. On the north side of Parkway Drive for a distance of 553 feet east from the east curb
line of Parknoll Lane.
152. On the west side of Port View Drive from the south curb line of Grand Avenue to
the south curb line of Lincoln Avenue, extended.
153. On the west side of Port View Drive from the south curb line of Lincoln Avenue,
extended, to a point 320 feet south thereof.
154. On the east side of Port View Drive from the north curb line of Lincoln Avenue to a
point 265 feet north thereof.
155. On the east side of Port View Drive from the south curb line of Lincoln Avenue to a
point 86 feet south thereof.
156. On the north side of Lincoln Avenue from the east curb line of Port View Drive to a
point 153 feet east thereof.
157. On the south side of Lincoln Avenue from the east curb line of Port View Drive to a
point 83 feet east thereof.
158. (Repealed 8/18/2009)
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 15 9/29/14
159. (Repealed 8/18/2009)
160. On the north side of W. Monroe St. from the west curb line of N. Wisconsin Street
to a point 58 feet west thereof.
161. On the east side of Bywater Drive from a point 1,224 feet south of the south
pavement line of Sunset Rd. to a point 56 feet south thereof.
162. On the east side of Bywater Drive from a point 541 feet north of the north curb line
of Maritime Dr. to a point 50 feet north thereof.
163. On the west side of Bywater Drive from a point 541 feet north of the north curb line
of Maritime Dr. to a point 146 feet north thereof.
164. On the North Side of E. Grand Avenue from a point 22 feet east of the east curb line
of Franklin St. extended to a point 92 feet easterly thereof.
165. On the east side of N. Franklin St. from the south curb line of E. Jackson St. to a
point 55 feet south thereof.
166. On the west side of N. Franklin St. from the south curb line of E. Jackson St. to a
point 55 feet south thereof.
167. On the south side of E. Washington St. from the east curb line of N. Franklin St. to a
point 60 feet easterly thereof from April 1 to May 31, and from September 7 to
October 31 and from June 1 to September 6 from 2:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
168. On the north and south sides of Pier Street from the east curb line of N. Franklin
Street to a point 42 feet easterly thereof from April 1 to May 31, and from
September 7 to October 31.
169. On the eastside of N. Holden Street from the north curb line of Van Buren Street
north to the south curb line of Landolt Street, from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days
when school is in session.
170. On the west side of N. Park Street, from the west curb line of N. Moore Road south
to the north curb line of Grand Avenue.
171. On the east side of N. Park Street from the west curb line of Moore Road to a point
560 feet southerly thereof.
172. On the east side of N. Franklin Street, starting at the north curb line of E. Jackson
Street to a point 140 feet northerly thereof.
173. On the west side of N. Franklin Street, starting at the north curb line of E. Jackson
Street to a point 715 feet northerly thereof.
174. On the east side of N. Wisconsin Street, starting at the south curb line of E. Kane
Street to a point 45 feet southerly thereof.
175. On the east side of N. Wisconsin Street, starting at the south curb line of E.
Whitefish Road to a point 65 feet southerly thereof.
176. On the east side of N. Wisconsin Street, starting from the north curb line of E.
Whitefish Road to the south curb line of E. Pierron Street.
177. On the west side of N. Wisconsin Street, starting from the north curb line of E.
Whitefish Road to a point 455 feet northerly thereof.
178. On the east side of N. Wisconsin Street from the north curb line of E. Pierron Street
to a point 50 feet northerly thereof.
179. On the east side of N. Wisconsin Street, starting at the south curb line of E. Monroe
Street to a point 95 feet southerly thereof.
180. On the east and west sides of N. Wisconsin Street, starting from the north curb line
of E. Monroe Street to a point 700 feet northerly thereof.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 16 9/29/14
181. On the east side of N. Wisconsin Street from the north curb line of E. Norport Drive
to the south curb line of E. Beutel Road.
182. On the west side of N. Wisconsin Street to a point 180 feet southerly thereof of the
south curb line of E. Beutel Road.
183. On the east and west sides of N. Wisconsin Street from Beutel Road northerly to the
south curb line of CTH LL.
184. On the west side of N. Powers Street, starting at the north curb line of Johnson Street
to a point 165 feet northerly thereof.
185. On the east side of N. Powers Street, starting at the south curb line of Johnson Street
to a point 350 feet northerly thereof.
186. On the south side of E. Van Buren Street, starting at the west curb line of N. Powers
Street to a point 70 feet westerly thereof.
187. On the east side of Catalpa Street, starting at the south curb line of Woodruff Street
to the north curb line of Van Buren Street.
188. On the north side of Woodruff Street, starting from the east curb line of N.
Wisconsin Street to the west curb line of N. Powers Street from December 1st to
April 1st.
189. On the south side of E. Dodge Street, starting from the east curb line of N.
Wisconsin Street to the west curb line of N. Powers Street from December 1st to
April 1st.
190. On the north side of E. Van Buren from the east curb line of Catalpa to a point 60
feet easterly thereof.
191. On the west side of South Webster Street, starting at a point, 170 feet south of the
south curb line of Foster Street, to a point 155 feet southerly thereof.
192. On the north side of West Monroe Street, for a distance of 40 feet east of the east curb line
of Benjamin Street.
193. On the west side of South Webster Street, starting at a point, 170 feet south of the south
curbline of Foster Street, to a point 155 feet southerly thereof.
194. The west side of Lake Street from a point 680 feet north of the north curbline of E. Jackson
Street and northerly into Upper Lake Park.
195. On the north side of Hales Trail, for a distance of 380 feet east of the north curb line of
Pierron Street.
196.On the south side of Hales Trail for a distance of 90 feet east of the Interurban Trail and for a
distance of 191 feet west of the Interurban Trail.
197. On the north side of West Grand Avenue, from a point 470 feet east of the east curb line of
Grandview Drive, westerly to Jackson Road.
198. On the south side of West Grand Avenue from a point 298 feet west of the west curb line of
Summit Drive, westerly to Jackson Road.
199. On the south side of W. Van Buren Street from the east curb line of N.
Webster Street to a point 150 feet easterly thereof;
200. On the south side of E. Van Buren Street from the west curb line of N. Johnson
Street to a point 125 feet westerly thereof;
201. On the left side of the one way road in Coal Dock Park and on the Coal Dock Park road from
South Wisconsin Street east to the one-way portion of the road.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 17 9/29/14
B. 15-Minute Parking:
1. From 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday and Saturday, and 8:00 a.m.
to 8:30 p.m. on Friday from a point 50 feet north of the north line of Woodruff St. to a
point 120 feet north of the north line of Woodruff St.
2. The south side of Jackson St. from the east curb of Franklin St. to a point 100 feet east.
3. (Repealed)
4. The north side of West Grand Ave. from 59 feet westerly of the west curb line of
North Wisconsin St. to a point 121 feet westerly thereof from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, except Holidays.
5. The east side of North Wisconsin St. starting from a point 59 feet north of the north
curb line of East Main St. extending to a point 100 feet north of the north curb line of
East Main St.
6. (Repealed)
7. From 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Thursday through Sunday, on the south side of W. Grand
Avenue starting at a point 675 feet east of the east curb line of S. Park Street and
proceeding east for a distance of 48 feet.
8. On the east side of Harborview Lane beginning 45 feet south of the north curb line of
Grand Ave. proceeding north for a distance of 60 feet.
9. On the south side of the Marina parking lot starting at the southwest corner of said
parking lot and proceeding east for a distance of 60 ft.
10. On the north side of W. Grand Avenue, the first parking stall west of the City Hall
driveway, in front of 116 W. Grand Avenue.
11. On the south side of East Grand Avenue, the first parking stall east of South Wisconsin
Street.
12. On the south side of W. Grand Avenue, the first parking stall west of S. Wisconsin Street.
13. The east side of South Wisconsin Street, the second and third parking stalls north of Sauk
Creek from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays.
14. The north side of East Pier Street, the first parking stall west of North Franklin Street from
5:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday.
C. 30-Minute Parking:
1. The east side of Moore Rd. from the north curb line of Pierre Ln., north to City limits.
2. (Repealed)
3. (Repealed)
4. The east side of North Holden Street from the north curb line of West Jackson Street
northerly a distance of 271 feet from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when school is in
session.
5. The north side of Jackson St., from the east curb line of Holden St. to the west curb
line of North Webster St. from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. when school is in session.
6. (Repealed)
7. The east side of Moore Road for a distance of 116 feet north from the north crosswalk
boundary at West Grand Avenue from 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
8. The five (5) northernmost parking spaces in the easternmost row of parking spaces in the
public parking lot bounded by East Grand Avenue on the south, East Main Street on the
north, the west boundary of the North Slip on the east, and the east boundary lines of the
properties at 100, 114, 122 and 128 North Franklin Street on the west (said lot also identified
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 18 9/29/14
as Municipal Lot C-4 in Figure 1 of Section 8.05.030), between the period from April 1 to
October 31, inclusive.
D. One-Hour Parking:
1. The west side of North Milwaukee St. for 110 feet south of the south curb line of
West Dodge St.
2. Eliminated 12/01/2009
3. Eliminated 12/01/2009
4. Eliminated 12/01/2009
5. On the west side of South Wisconsin Street from a point 46 feet south of the south
curb line of Grand Avenue to a point 230 feet south of the south curb line of Grand
Avenue.
6. On the east side of South Wisconsin Street from a point 70 feet south of the south curb line of
East Grand Avenue to a point 140 feet southerly thereof.
E. 2-Hour Parking:
1. On the north side of Grand Ave. commencing 55 feet east of the east curb line of
North Montgomery St. then easterly for 155 feet.
2. The north side of West Chestnut St. from the west curb of the alley immediately west
of Keeney Ave. to the east curb of Park St.
3. The east side of Milwaukee St. between Grand Ave. and Morgan St.
4. (Repealed 6/99)
5. The east side of Keeney Ave. from the south curb of Chestnut St. to the north curb of
Oakland Ave.
6. (Repealed 8/18/2009)
7. The north side of West Oakland Ave. for a distance of 290 feet west of the west curb
line of Keeney Ave.
8. The south side of West Oakland Ave. for a distance of 300 feet west of the west curb
line of Keeney Ave.
9. (Repealed) 11/1/2011
10. (Repealed) 11/1/2011
11. East Main St.
12. The east side of Ravine St. from the north line of Western Ave. to a point 215 feet
north thereof.
13. (Repealed) 11/16/2010
14. (Repealed) 11/16/2010
15. The west side of North Webster St. from the north curb of West Jackson St. to the
south curb of West Van Buren St. from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., the days when school
is in session.
16. The north side of West Jackson St. from the east curb line of North Webster St. to the
west curb line of North Milwaukee St. between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. when school
is in session.
17. Hillcrest Ct. from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on days when school is in session.
18. On the north side of West Van Buren St. from the east curb of North Holden St. to the
west curb of North Webster St. and on the south side of West Van Buren St. from the
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 19 9/29/14
east curb of North Holden St. to the west curb of North Webster St. from 7:00 a.m.
until 4:00 p.m. on school days.
19. On the north side of West Beutel from the west curb line of North Wisconsin St. to
the east curb line of North Benjamin St., from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. except Sundays
and Holidays.
20. Both sides of East Jackson St. from the east curb line of North Franklin St. easterly to
Lake St. from 6:00 p.m., Friday to Sunday at 12 midnight and on holidays from May
1 to October 1.
21. On the north and south sides of Pier Street, from the east curb line of North Wisconsin Street
to the west curb line of North Franklin Street except the first parking stall on the northside of
East Pier Street, west of Franklin Street, that will be 15 minute parking from 5:00 p.m. to
9:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday.
22. Both sides of East Washington St. from City St. easterly to Lake St. from 6:00 p.m.
Friday to Sunday at 12 midnight and on holidays from May 1 to October 1.
23. Both sides of City St. from East Jackson St. to East Washington St. from 6:00 p.m.
Friday to Sunday at 12 midnight and on holidays from May 1 to October 1.
24. Both sides of Lake St. from East Jackson St. to East Washington St. from 6:00 p.m.
Friday to Sunday at midnight and on holidays from May 1 to October 1.
25. West Grand Ave. between Montgomery St. and Webster St.
26. The west side of North Milwaukee St. from the north curb line of W. Grand Avenue,
north to a point 75 feet thereof.
27. On the north side of Grand Ave. commencing 50 feet east of the east curb line of
North Montgomery St. then easterly for 175 feet.
28. East Wisconsin St.
29. North Wisconsin St. from Grand Ave. to Pier St. except for the east side of North
Wisconsin St. starting from a point fifty-nine feet north of the north curb line of East
Main St. extending to a point one hundred feet north of the north curb line of East
Main St.
30. West Main St. from North Wisconsin St. to North Milwaukee St.
31. The south side of East Grand Ave. and east of North Franklin St.
32. The east side of North Wisconsin St. from Pier St. to East Jackson St.
33. The south side of East Jackson St. from the east line of North Wisconsin St. to the
west line of North Franklin St.
34. The north side of East Washington St. for a distance of 51 feet in an easterly direction
from a point 308 feet east of the east curb line of North Franklin St. to a point 359
feet easterly thereof.
35. The south side of East Washington St. for a distance of 183 feet in an easterly
direction from a point 234 feet east of the east curb line of North Franklin St. to a
point 417 feet easterly thereof.
36. On the south side of E. Washington St. from the east curb line of N. Franklin St. to a
point 60 feet easterly thereof except during the dates and times set forth in Section
8.05.010 A. 169, when parking is prohibited.
37. (Repealed)
38. The east side of North Milwaukee St. from the north curb of West Grand Ave. to 75
feet northerly thereof.
39. (Repealed)
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 20 9/29/14
40. On the north and south sides of Pier St. from the east curb line of N. Franklin St. to a
point 42 feet easterly thereof except during the dates set forth in Section 8.05.010 A.
170, when parking is prohibited.
41. On the north and south sides of Pier St. commencing at a point 42 feet from the east
curb line of N. Franklin St. and extending to a point 215 feet east of the east curb line
of N. Franklin St.
42. North Franklin Street
43. The north side of E. Grand Avenue, west of the west curb line of N. Franklin Street
and east of the south curb line of Wisconsin Street
44. The south side of E. Grand Avenue from the east curb line of S. Wisconsin Street to the west
curb line of N. Franklin Street, except for the first parking stall east of S. Wisconsin Street, in
which 15-minute parking is permitted.
45. The north row of parking spaces in the public parking lot bounded by the north
boundary of the North Slip on the south, East Washington Street on the north, Lake
Street on the east, and Harborview Lane on the west (said lot also identified as
Municipal Lot M-1 in Figure 1 of Section 8.05.030).
46. The south row of parking spaces in the public parking lot bounded by the north boundary of
the North Slip on the south, East Washington Street on the north, Lake Street on the east, and
Harborview Lane on the west (said lot also identified as Municipal Lot M-1 in Figure 1 of
Section 8.05.030) at all times, except Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. when parking in said row shall be allowed by monthly parking permit only.
F. 4-Hour parking:
1. The east side of South Park St. for a distance of 208 feet in a southerly direction from the
south curb of West Grand Ave., except the north 100 feet thereof.
2. The west side of South Park St. for a distance of 350 feet in a southerly direction from the
south curb of West Grand Ave.
8.05.020 Parking Meters. Parking meters shall be installed by the Board of Public Works in
compliance with the provisions of 8.05.010.
A. Parking Meter Zones and Time Limits. No person shall, without depositing the parking
meter fees hereinafter required, park a vehicle in any parking meter zone, including public
parking lots, for longer than the period specified on the parking meter, at any time between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
Fridays, except Sundays and the following legal holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. Notwithstanding the
time and date limitations set forth herein, no vehicle shall be parked upon any public parking
lot for more than 24 consecutive hours, and no vehicle shall be parked in a public parking lot
except in areas where permitted.
B. Parking Meter Fees. Upon parking any vehicle in a parking meter zone, including public
parking lots, at any time during which the provisions of this ordinance are in effect, the
operator of a vehicle shall deposit or cause to be deposited in the parking meter or meters
controlling the parking spaces utilized, immediately after parking, such coin or coins of the
legal tender of the United States of America and in such amounts as specified on the parking
meter, and failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this section. The operator or citizen
must turn the handle of the parking meter after depositing the coin or coins to put the meter
in operating condition.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 21 9/29/14
C. Miscellaneous Provisions.
C-1 In all parking meter zones, a parking meter shall be installed for each parking space.
All parking spaces shall be plainly marked by lines on the street surface.
C-2 Parking meters shall be installed upon the sidewalk or curb immediately adjacent to
each designated parking space. Each parking meter shall indicate by a proper legend the
established rate and legal parking time, and when in operation, shall also indicate by a
dial or pointer the duration of the legal parking and any over parking.
C-3 Any vehicle parking in any parking meter zone any time during which the provisions
of this section are in effect shall be legally parked within the marked lines of the
designated parking space. The parking of any vehicle, which because of its size requires
more than one parking space for legal parking, shall be controlled by the several
individual parking meters adjacent to all parking spaces utilized.
C-4 The coins hereby required to be deposited are levied and assessed as fees to provide
revenue to meet the cost of regulation of parking, to make provisions for additional
parking places off the street, and such other expenses and purposes deemed reasonably
necessary to provide for the convenience, safety and welfare of persons using the street
and highways of this city for vehicular traffic, including general street and highway
maintenance, repair and construction.
C-5 No persons shall deposit, or cause to be deposited in any parking meter, any slug
device, foreign substance or substitute a coin of the United States.
C-6 No person shall deface, injure, tamper, or willfully break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any parking meters.
C-7 Notwithstanding the time and date limitations as set forth in Section 8.05.020 A., no
person shall park a vehicle in any of the following parking meter zones, known as the
Marina parking meter zones, for a longer period than twenty consecutive hours upon
deposit of ten cents per hour:
1. The westerly tier of parking spaces in the parking lot bounded by East Washington
Street, City Street, East Pier Street, and Lake Street.
2. The parking lot bounded by Lake Street, East Pier Street, East Jackson Street and the
private property to the west.
3. (Repealed) 8/17/2010
4. The parking lot extending from the centerline of Pier 2 of the Marina extended
westerly and bounded by Lake Street, Lake Michigan and the north line of the City
Park.
5. East Jackson Street from its intersection with Lake Street east to the end of East
Jackson Street.
D. Permit Parking. Monthly parking permits shall be available which shall entitle the
holder to occupy a parking space in the following public parking lots, as identified by
signs, during the periods specified herein, without the requirement that any coins be
deposited into the parking meter of such parking space:
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 22 9/29/14
1. The public parking lot bounded by East Grand Avenue on the south, an alley running
from North Franklin Street west to North Wisconsin Street on the north, the east
boundary line of the property at 126 East Grand Avenue on the east, and the east
boundary line of the property at 118 East Grand Avenue on the west, all year, except
those portions of said public parking lot identified by signs as 15-minute parking
spaces.
2. The public parking lot bounded by East Grand Avenue on the south, East Main Street on the
north, the west boundary of the North Slip on the east, and the east boundary lines of the
properties at 100, 114, 122 and 128 North Franklin Street on the west (said lot also identified
as Municipal Lot C-4 in Figure 1 of Section 8.05.030), but excluding the five (5)
northernmost parking spaces in the easternmost row of parking spaces in said lot between the
period from April 1 to October 31, inclusive, during which times parking in said parking
spaces is limited to 30 minutes.
3. The south row of parking spaces in the public parking lot bounded by the north boundary of
the North Slip on the south, East Washington Street on the north, Lake Street on the east, and
Harborview Lane on the west (said lot also identified as Municipal Lot M-1 in Figure 1 of
Section 8.05.030), Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
only.
A monthly parking permit shall be available for such fee as determined from time to time by
resolution of the Common Council. Except as provided in Section 8.05.020 D. 3., above, the
parking permit shall be valid for up to ten consecutive hours on any weekday between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. A permit issued under this section shall be valid for an entire calendar
month and the cost shall not be prorated. The permit shall be issued to an individual and shall
not be transferable to another person. Not more than one permit shall be issued to any applicant,
individually or through any agent, representative or employee, during any calendar month. The
permit shall be in such form as determined by the City Administrator, and may be obtained from
the Police Department upon payment of the prescribed fee and completion of an application in
such form as determined by the City Administrator. No person shall duplicate a parking permit
issued under this section.
C-8 The five (5) northernmost parking spaces in the easternmost row of parking spaces in the
public parking lot bounded by East Grand Avenue on the south, East Main Street on the
north, the west boundary of the North Slip on the east, and the east boundary lines of the
properties at 100, 114, 122 and 128 North Franklin Street on the west (said lot also identified
as Municipal Lot C-4 in Figure 1 of Section 8.05.030), between the period from April 1 to
October 31, inclusive.
8.05.030 All-Night Parking Regulated. A. When signs have been erected at or
reasonably near the corporate limits of the city as provided in S.349.13, Wis. Stats., no
person shall park any vehicle for a period between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any of the
following streets, except physicians on emergency calls:
1. On any street within the city, between the period from 2:00 a.m. December 1, to 6:00
a.m. April 1, inclusive.
2. On State Trunk Highway 32 and 33 within the city, on all days.
B. The Police Department may, at the discretion of the commanding officer of the shift
during which a request is made, permit one or more vehicles per residential unit to park
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 23 9/29/14
on a city street otherwise prohibited under A.1. above, upon making a determination that
said parking prohibition is unreasonably burdensome to the occupants of said residential
unit. Said permission shall be granted for a single day at a time, on an occasional basis
only, pursuant to general policy guidelines determined by the Chief of Police.
C. 1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.05.020 A., no vehicle shall be parked
overnight in the following parking lots, as identified in Figure 1 hereinbelow, from
October 1st to April 30th, inclusive, without a permit:
(a) Municipal Lot C-1
(b) Municipal Lot C-2
(c) Municipal Lot C-3
(d) Marina Lot M-1
(e) Marina Lot M-2
(f) Marina Lot M-3
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.05.020 A., no vehicle shall be parked
overnight in the following parking lots, as identified in Figure 1 hereinbelow, from May
1st to September 30th, inclusive, without a permit:
(a) Municipal Lot C-1
(b) Municipal Lot C-2
(c) Municipal Lot C-3
3. As used in Sections 8.05.030 C.1. and 2., “overnight” shall mean continuously from
7:00 p.m. one day to 7:00 a.m. the following day. Permits shall be valid for a calendar
month at a fee to be determined from time to time by resolution of the Common Council.
The permit fee shall not be prorated. The application and permit forms shall be as
determined by the Police Department. A permit may be obtained from the Police
Department upon completion and approval of an application and payment of the
prescribed fee. A permit shall be issued to a specific vehicle and shall not be
transferable. When issued a permit shall allow overnight parking only in the parking lot
designated in the permit.
8.05.040 Angle Parking Permitted. Angle parking within defined areas shall be
permitted and where clearly designated by official traffic signs on the following streets:
1. On the west side of South Milwaukee Street and south of Grand Avenue.
2. On the south side of East Main Street from North Wisconsin Street to North Franklin
Street, except for that space or portion of said street reserved for the parking of vehicles
used by physically disabled persons, as provided in Section 8.05.050 N.
3. On the east side of Lake Street from a point 440 north of the north curbline of E. Jackson
Street to a point 370 feet northerly thereof;
4. On South Franklin Street and south of East Grand Avenue.
5. On the north side of East Grand Avenue from a point 22 feet east of the east curb line of
Franklin Street extended, to a point 92 feet easterly thereof.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 24 9/29/14
6. On the north and south sides of W. Main Street, between N. Milwaukee Street and N.
Wisconsin Street.
7. On the west side of Lake Street from a point 410 feet north of the north curbline of E.
Jackson Street to a point 125 feet north thereof;
8. On the north side of E. Main Street from Franklin Street east to the first driveway.
8.05.050 Miscellaneous Parking Provisions.
A. 1. Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following words or phrases have the
designated meanings:
(a) “Authorized emergency vehicle,” “camping trailer,” “mobile Home,” “motor bus,”
“motor home,” “recreational vehicle,” “school bus,” “trailer” and “vehicle” shall have
the meaning assigned to such terms under sec. 340.01 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as
amended.
(b) “Park” or “parking” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, whether
carrying property or passengers or not, and whether drawn by a motor vehicle or not,
except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading property or passengers.
(c) “Street” and “highway” shall have the meaning assigned to such terms under sec. 340.01
of the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended. “Public right-of-way” means any way or area
which the public has a right to travel or use.
2. Street, highway and public right-of-way parking restricted. Except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter, no person shall park any vehicle on any street, highway or
public right-of-way of the City for more than twenty-four (24 consecutive hours.
3. Parking restrictions for camping trailers, recreational vehicles, trailers and
certain other vehicles; enforcement. No person owning or having control of any
camping trailer, mobile home, motor bus, motor home, recreational vehicle, school bus or
trailer shall park the same upon any street, highway or public right-of-way of the City for
a period exceeding four (4) days, whether consecutive or in the aggregate, per month.
4. Exceptions. The provisions of subsection A.3 hereof shall not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles, and shall not prohibit, nor be deemed to prohibit, the lawful parking
of any vehicle described in subsection A.3. upon any street, highway or public right-ofway
of the City specifically designated for such purpose, or as authorized by a valid
parking permit.
B. No person other than regular employees and elected officials of the city shall park a
motor vehicle in the parking lot north and adjacent to the municipal building between
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
C. No person shall leave a motor vehicle parked or standing unattended with its motor
running.
D. No person shall park any commercial vehicle in a district zoned for residence purposes
under the city zoning code.
E. No person shall stop or leave any vehicle standing in the following designated
loading zones, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading or in receiving or discharging passengers and while the
vehicle is attended by a licensed operator so that it may be promptly moved in
case of an emergency.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 25 9/29/14
1. The North side of Oakland Avenue from a point 364 feet west of the west
curb extended of S. Park Street, to a point 708 feet westerly thereof.
2. The south side of East Main Street from a point 180 feet east of the east curb
line on North Wisconsin Street to a point 198 feet easterly thereof.
3. The north side of East Main Street from a point 28 feet west of the west curb
line on North Franklin Street to a point 56 feet westerly thereof.
4. The north side of East Washington Street from a point 141 feet east, of the
east curb line of North Franklin Street to a point 229 feet easterly thereof.
5. The north side of East Pier Street to a point 32 feet east of the east curb line of
North Wisconsin Street to a point 85 feet easterly thereof.
6. (Repealed 8/06)
7. On the south side of West Main Street from a point 137 feet west of the west
curb of North Wisconsin Street to a point 49 feet westerly thereof from 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
8. (Repealed) 11/16/2010
9. On the south side of West Foster Street, for a distance of 39 feet west of the
west curb line of South Webster Street.
F. Miscellaneous Parking Provisions. No person shall park any vehicle in any alley at
any time.
G. From May 1, through September 30, self-contained recreational vehicles, defined as a vehicle
which contains electric power and lights, water system, toilet and sewage holding tank, shall not
be parked on any city street, alley or parking lot in an area bounded by the east curb line on North
Franklin Street, the north curb line of East Jackson Street until it intersects with the west curb line
of Lake Street, northerly and including all streets and alleys and parking areas or parks to the
north limits of the Upper Lake Park, easterly to the shore of Lake Michigan southerly along the
shore of Lake Michigan to the south line of the Marina Peninsula Park, northerly and westerly
along the north slip of the harbor and the south line of Washington Street to the east curb line of
North Franklin Street, EXCEPT where specifically and exclusively provided for and then only
upon payment of a permit fee of ten ($10.00) dollars for each twenty-four hours or portion
thereof, obtainable from the authorized representative of the City of Port Washington. In
addition, those persons granted a Marina Parking Permit who are actively using Marina facilities
may be allowed to sleep overnight in the above designated areas for no more than 4 overnights in
a 7-day period. The type of vehicles in which temporary overnight parking and sleeping is
permitted are: recreational vehicles, camping trailers, motor homes, buses, conversion vans and
truck campers. There shall be no more than 3 vehicles parked overnight in the above-designated
areas. Any temporary overnight parking permit granted under this section is subject to revocation
or suspension for cause by the City upon a citation or complaint being issued to a permittee and
signed by a law enforcement officer, building inspector, local health officer or Harbormaster.
H. Parking for Police and Fire Department Personnel Only. No person other than Police
and Fire Department Personnel shall park a motor vehicle on the south side of West
Washington Street from a point 150 feet west from the west curb line of North Wisconsin
Street to the first curb line of North Milwaukee Street.
I. Parking for Fire Department Personnel Only. No person other than Fire Department
Personnel shall park a motor vehicle on the east side of North Wisconsin Street between
Pier Street and Washington Street.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 26 9/29/14
J. No person shall move any vehicle for purposes of evading limitations set forth in these
ordinances or otherwise interfere with any marks or activities or any city official with the
intention of evading or preventing the enforcement of parking provisions herein.
K. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than fifteen (15) minutes in the two (2)
parking spaces, as identified by signs, located in the public parking lot bounded by East
Grand Avenue on the south, an alley running from North Franklin Street west to North
Wisconsin Street on the north, the east boundary line of the property at 126 East Grand
Avenue on the east, and the east boundary line of the property at 118 East Grand Avenue
on the west.
The penalty for violation of this ordinance shall be twenty-five ($25.00) dollars for each
twenty-four hour period, or portion thereof.
L. No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle except a school bus in the
following designated passenger loading/unloading zones, which shall be reserved for the
temporary loading or unloading of passengers by school buses while such buses are
actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers and while such buses are
attended by a licensed operator so that such buses may be promptly moved in case of an
emergency:
1. The west side of North Holden Street from its intersection with the north curb line of
West Jackson Street, extended, to a point 256 feet northerly thereof from7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. on days when school is in session.
2. The south side of West Jackson Street from the west curb line of North Webster Street to
the east curb line of North Holden Street, extended, from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days
when school is in session.
M. No person shall stop, park or leave standing any school bus in the following designated
passenger loading/unloading zones, which shall be reserved for the temporary loading or
unloading of passengers by vehicles other than school buses while such vehicles are actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers and while such vehicles are attended by a licensed
operator so that such vehicles may be promptly moved in case of an emergency:
1. The west side of North Holden Street from the south curb line of West Van Buren Street
to a point 325 feet southerly thereof from7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when school is in
session.
2. The east side of North Holden Street from the south curb line of West Van Buren Street
to a point 277 feet southerly thereof from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when school is
in session.
N. Pursuant to sec. 346.505(2), Stats., no person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle,
whether attended or unattended and whether temporarily or otherwise, within, upon, or so as to
obstruct, block or otherwise limit the use of the designated space or portion of the following
streets, highways or parking facilities, which shall be reserved, by official traffic signs indicating
the restriction, for vehicles displaying special registration plates or special identification cards for
physically disabled persons, as defined under sec. 346.503(1), Stats.:
1. The easterly most parking space located on the south side of East Main Street, between
North Wisconsin Street and North Franklin Street.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 27 9/29/14
2. The westerly most parking space located on the north side of East Pier Street, between
North Wisconsin Street and North Franklin Street.
3. The first parking space located on the south side of East Pier Street, east of Harborview
Lane.
4. The first parking space located on the east side of S. Wisconsin Street north of Sauk
Creek.
5. A parking space located on the east side of South Webster Street from a point 238 feet
south of the south curb line of W. Grand Avenue to a point 274 feet from the south curb
line of W. Grand Ave.
6. The first parking space located on the west side of South Webster Street, south of West
Foster Street.
7. The first parking space located on the south side of West Foster Street, west of South
Webster Street.
8. From a point on the north side of Whitefish Rd., 155 feet east of the east curbline of N.
Holden St. to a point 20 feet easterly thereof.
9. On the west side of Lake Street, the northern most 30 feet of the angled parking.
O. Use Of School Bus Warning Lights.
1. Duties of school bus operators.
(a) Warning lights required. Notwithstanding the provisions of sec. 346.48(2)(b)(2),
Wis. Stats., adopted by reference in section8.01.010 and except as provided in
subsection 1(b) of this section, the operator of a school bus shall use the school
bus flashing red warning lights in a residence or business district in the city when
pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at a location at
which there are no traffic signals and such persons must cross the street or
highway before being loaded or after being unloaded. Such flashing red warning
lights shall be actuated by the operator at least 100 feet before stopping to load or
unload pupils or other authorized passengers, and the operator shall not
extinguish such lights until loading or unloading is complete and persons who
must cross the street or highway are safely across. Where the curb and sidewalk
are laid on one side of the road only, the operator shall use the flashing red
warning lights when loading or unloading passengers from either side.
(b) Warning lights prohibited. Pursuant to sec. 349.21(2), Wis. Stats., the operator
of a school bus shall not use the school bus flashing red warning lights when
pupils or other authorized passengers are loaded or unloaded directly from or
onto the school grounds or that portion of the right-of-way between the roadway
and the school grounds in a zone designated by “school” warning signs as
provided in sec. 118.08(1), Wis. Stats. In which a street or highway borders the
grounds of a school.
(c)
2. Other vehicles to stop.
The operator of a vehicle which approaches from the front or rear of any school bus
which has stopped on a street or highway and is displaying flashing red warning lights
shall stop the vehicle not less than 20 feet from the bus and shall remain stopped until the
bus resumes motion or the school bus operator extinguishes the flashing red warning
lights. The operator of any school bus which approaches from the front or rear of another
school bus which has stopped and is displaying flashing red warning lights shall display
its flashing red lights while stopped. This subsection shall not apply to operators of
vehicles proceeding in the opposite direction on a divided street or highway.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 28 9/29/14
5. Regulations for County owned Park and Ride Lot on Seven Hills Road.
A. Sales and solicitation is prohibited at county park and ride lot.
B. Parking in excess of 72 hours is prohibited at county park and ride lot
C. The use of county park and ride lot for special events is prohibited unless permission
is requested from and granted by Ozaukee County Public Works Committee.
D. Except for emergencies or with the approval of the Ozaukee County Sheriff’s
Department, parking detached trailers is prohibited at county park and ride lot.
For purposes of this subsection, a “trailer” is defined as a vehicle without motive
power designed for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure and
for being drawn by a motor vehicle, but does not include a mobile home.
E. Parking trucks that weigh in excess of 8,000 pounds is prohibited at the county park
and ride lot.
8.05.060 Yield Right-of-Way Intersections. The operator of a vehicle proceeding on the
following streets shall yield the right-of-way to traffic on intersecting streets at the indicated
intersections:
1. North Benjamin Street at its intersection with W. Jefferson Street.
2. (Repealed)
3. (Repealed) 8/17/2010
4. (Repealed) 5/3/05
5. Whitefish Road at its intersection with Hales Trail.
6. Landolt Street at its intersection with North Webster Street.
7. West Larabee St. at its intersection with North Crocker St. and North Garfield St.
8. South High Street (southbound) at its intersection with Second Avenue.
9. West Norport Drive at its intersection with North Benjamin Street.
10. West Third Avenue at its intersection with West Fourth Street.
11. Westbound traffic on Washington Street where it intersects with Milwaukee Street.
12. (Repealed)
13. North Lakeview Drive at its intersection with East Pierron Street.
14. Western Avenue at its intersection with South Park Street.
15. Northbound traffic on Pierre Lane where it intersects with Orchard Lane.
16. Crestview Drive at its intersection with Sunrise Drive.
17. Antoine Drive at its intersection with Lakeview Avenue.
18. James Drive at its intersection with Lakeview Avenue.
8.05.070 Stop Signs. Every operator of a vehicle shall cause such vehicle to stop and in
the manner prescribed by sec. 346.46, Wis. Stats.
A. When so required by Statutes of Wisconsin herein adopted by reference.
B. When approaching an official stop sign at the following locations:
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 29 9/29/14
1. On Freeman Drive where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
2. On South Tower and South Summit Drive where it intersects with West Grand
Avenue.
3. On West Lincoln Avenue where it intersects with South Summit Drive.
4. On South Summit Drive where it intersects with West Second Avenue.
5. On Port View Drive where it intersects with South Spring Street.
6. On West Third Avenue where it intersects with South Spring Street
7. On South Garfield Avenue where it intersects with West Fourth Avenue.
8. On South Tower Drive where it intersects with West Second Avenue.
9. On South Tower Drive where it intersects with West Lincoln Avenue.
10. On South Eva Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
11. On South Eva Street where it intersects with West Lincoln Avenue.
12. On South High Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
13. On South High Street where it intersects with West Lincoln Avenue.
14. On South Garfield Avenue where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
15. On South Garfield Avenue where it intersects with West Lincoln Avenue.
16. On West Lincoln Avenue where it intersects with South Spring Street.
17. On West First Street where it intersects with South Spring Street.
18. On West Second Street where it intersects with South Spring Street.
19. On West Oakland Avenue where it intersects with South Spring Street.
20. On West Sherman Avenue where it intersects with South Spring Street.
21. On South Madison Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
22. On South Maple Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
23. On North Maple Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
24. On West Larabee Street where it intersects with North Spring Street.
25. On West Melin Street where it intersects with North Spring Street.
26. On Simplicity Company driveway where it intersects with North Spring Street.
27. On West Woodland Avenue where it intersects with North Spring Street.
28. On West Melin Street where it intersects with North Garfield Avenue.
29. On North Crocker Avenue where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
30. On North Garfield Avenue where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
31. On North Spring Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
32. On South Spring Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
33. On North Park Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
34. On North Park Street where it intersects with North Moore Road.
35. On City shed’s driveway where it intersects with North Park Street.
36. On City shed’s driveway where it intersects with North Moore Road.
37. On Usow Street where it intersects with North Moore Road.
38. On West Pierre Lane where it intersects with North Moore Road.
39. On North Moore Road where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
40. On South Park Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
41. On West Chestnut Street where it intersects with South Park Street.
42. On South Park Street where it intersects with West Oakland Avenue.
43. On South Park Street where it intersects with Sunset Road.
44. On South Keeney Avenue where it intersects with West Oakland Avenue.
45. On South Ravine Street where it intersects with West Oakland Avenue.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 30 9/29/14
46. On West Western Avenue where it intersects with South Division Street.
47. On West Oakland Avenue where it intersects with South Division Street.
48. On South Division Street where it intersects with West Chestnut Street.
49. On West Chestnut Street where it intersects with South Webster Street.
50. On West Michigan Street where it intersects with South Coe Street.
51. On South Coe Street where it intersects with West Oakland Avenue.
52. On West Foster Street where it intersects with South Webster Street.
53. On West Foster Street where it intersects with South Coe Street.
54. On South Webster Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
55. On South Milwaukee Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
56. On South Wisconsin Street where it intersects with East Grand Avenue.
57. On East Beutel Road where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
58. On East Norport Drive where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
59. On North Lakeview Avenue where it intersects with East Monroe Street.
60. On East Monroe Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
61. On East Pierron Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
62. On East Whitefish Road where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
63. On North Lakeview Avenue where it intersects with East Whitefish Road.
64. On East Douglas Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
65. On North Lakeview Avenue where it intersects with East Douglas Street.
66. On East Walters Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
67. On East Cleveland Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
68. On East Prospect Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
69. On East Woodruff Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
70. On East Dodge Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
71. On East Kane Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
72. On West Beutel Road where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
73. On North Benjamin Street where it intersects with West Beutel Road.
74. On West Beutel Road where it intersects with North Holden Street.
75. On West Norport Road where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
76. On West Norport Road where it intersects with North Holden Street.
77. On West James Drive where it intersects with North Holden Street.
78. On Lincoln School driveway where it intersects with West James Drive.
79. On West Theis Street where it intersects with North Benjamin Street.
80. On West Monroe Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
81. On North Benjamin Street where it intersects with West Monroe Street.
82. On North Nelson Drive where it intersects with West Whitefish Road.
83. On West Whitefish Road where it intersects with North Holden Street.
84. On North Holden Street where it intersects with West Whitefish Road.
85. On North Stanford Street where it intersects with West Whitefish Road.
86. On North Benjamin Street where it intersects with West Whitefish Road.
87. On West Whitefish Road where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
88. On West Jefferson Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
89. On North Webster Street where it intersects with West Jefferson Street.
90. On West Jefferson Street where it intersects with North Holden Street.
91. On West Fairview Drive where it intersects with North Holden Street.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 31 9/29/14
92. On West Walters Street where it intersects with North Holden Street.
93. On North Webster Street where it intersects with West Walters Street.
94. On North Montgomery Street where it intersects with West Walters Street.
95. On North Benjamin Street where it intersects with West Walters Street.
96. On West Walters Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
97. On North Milwaukee Street where it intersects with West Walters Street.
98. On West Pierre Lane where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
99. On North Montgomery Street where it intersects with West Dodge Street.
100. On North Milwaukee Street where it intersects with West Dodge Street.
101. On West Dodge Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
102. On North Harrison Street where it intersects with West Dodge Street.
103. On West Van Buren Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
104. On North Harrison Street where it intersects with West Van Buren Street.
105. On North Milwaukee Street where it intersects with West Van Buren Street.
106. On North Montgomery Street where it intersects with West Van Buren St.
107. On West Van Buren Street where it intersects with North Webster Street.
108. On North Webster Street where it intersects with West Van Buren Street.
109. On West Orchard Lane where it intersects with North Holden Street.
110. On West Landolt Street where it intersects with North Holden Street.
111. On West Jackson Street where it intersects with North Webster Street.
112. On North Webster St. (southbound) where it intersects with W. Jackson St.
113. On North Montgomery Street where it intersects with West Jackson Street.
114. On North Milwaukee Street where it intersects with West Jackson Street.
115. On West Jackson St. (eastbound) where it intersects with N. Milwaukee St.
116. On North Harrison Street where it intersects with West Jackson Street.
117. On North Wisconsin Street where it intersects with East Jackson Street.
118. On East Jackson Street where it intersects with North Franklin Street.
119. On East Pier Street where it intersects with North Franklin Street.
120. On East Pier Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
121. On East Washington Street where it intersects with North Franklin Street.
122. On West Washington Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
123. On East Washington Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
124. On North Milwaukee Street (southbound) where it intersects with West
Washington Street.
125. On West Washington Street (eastbound) where it intersects with North
Milwaukee Street.
126. On West Washington Street where it intersects with North Webster Street.
127. On West Main Street where it intersects with North Webster Street.
128. On North Webster Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
129. On North Montgomery Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
130. On North Milwaukee Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
131. On East Main Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
132. On East Main Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street
133. On West Main Street where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
134. On North Wisconsin Street where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
135. On North Wisconsin Street where it intersects with West Van Buren Street.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 32 9/29/14
136. On North City Street where it intersects with East Jackson Street.
137. In alley behind National Foods (Piggly Wiggly) where it intersects with East
Washington Street.
138. On East Grand Avenue (westbound) where it intersects with North Franklin
Street.
139. On West Grand Avenue (eastbound) where it intersects with North and South
Spring Street.
140. On Sunset Road (westbound) where it intersects with South Spring Street.
141. On North Lakeview Avenue where it intersects with East Whitefish Road-
East Walters St.
142. On North Lakeview Avenue where it intersects with East Whitefish Road.
143. On East Jackson Street where it intersects with North Lake Street.
144. On North Lake Street where it intersects with East Jackson Street.
145. On Pierre Lane where it intersects with Holden Street.
146. Southbound traffic on Pierre Lane where it intersects with Orchard Lane.
147. On Westport Drive where it intersects with Port View Drive.
148. On Summit Drive where it intersects with Port View Drive.
149. On City Street northbound where it intersects with Pier Street.
150. On City Street southbound where it intersects with Pier Street.
151. On Orchard Lane where it intersects with Pierre Lane.
152. On CTH LL where it intersects with North Wisconsin Street.
153. On Wisconsin Street and on Grand Avenue when indicated to do so by the
traffic control signal.
154. On North Lakeview Avenue (northbound) where it intersects with East
Norport Drive
155. On Beutel Road (southbound) where it intersects with East Norport Drive.
156. On Parkview Lane (southbound) where it intersects with East Norport Drive.
157. On Parkway Drive where it intersects with East Norport Drive.
158. On Larabee Street where it intersects with North Garfield Avenue.
159. On Pierre Lane where it intersects with the hospital alley.
160. On Spring Street and on Grand Ave. when indicated to do so by the traffic
control signal
161. On Keeney Street where it intersects with Chestnut Street.
162. On Barry Avenue where it intersects with North Holden Street.
163. On Barry Avenue where it intersects with North Benjamin Street.
164. On City Street southbound where it intersects with East Washington Street.
165. On East Pier Street eastbound where it intersects with North Lake Street.
166. On North Lake Street northbound where it intersects with East Washington
St.
167. On North Lake Street southbound where it intersects with East Washington
St.
168. Northbound traffic on the public street east of the shopping center where it
intersects with East Washington Street.
169. On Parknoll Lane where it intersects with Parkway Drive.
170. On Parkway Drive where it intersects with Parknoll Lane.
171. On Thomas Drive eastbound where it intersects with N. Wisconsin Street.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 33 9/29/14
172. On Benjamin Street northbound where it intersects with Thomas Drive.
173. On Lakeview Avenue where it intersects with Pierron Street.
174. On West Sherman Avenue where it intersects South Madison Street.
175. On Mineral Springs Drive where it intersects with Sunset Road.
176. On Westport Drive where it intersects with Sunset Road.
177. On Maple Court where it intersects with Westport Drive.
178. On Hickory Court where it intersects with Westport Drive.
179. On Sumac Court where it intersects with Westport Drive.
180. On Cedar Drive where it intersects with Westport Drive.
181. On Oak Court where it intersects with Westport Drive.
182. On Elm Court where it intersects with Westport Drive.
183. On Cedar Drive where it intersects with Willow Drive.
184. On North Frances Street where it intersects with West Norport Drive.
185. On Michael Court where it intersects with Thomas Drive.
186. On Briarwood Lane where it intersects with Noridge Trail.
187. On Groeschel Road where it intersects with East Norport Drive.
188. On Main Street where it intersects with Milwaukee Street.
189. On East Monroe Street where it intersects with North Lakeview Avenue.
190. On Grant Street where it intersects with West Norport Drive.
191. On Merry Court where it intersects with West Norport Drive.
192. On South Madison Street where it intersects with West Sherman Avenue.
193. On Spinnaker Drive where it intersects with Noridge Trail, at both such
intersections.
194. On Third Street where it intersects with Garfield Street.
195. On Niesen Road where it intersects with E. Norport Drive.
196. On Briarwood Lane where it intersects with Niesen Road.
197. On Greisch Court where it intersects with Niesen Road.
198. On Noridge Trail where it intersects with E. Norport Drive.
199. On Nelson Drive where it intersects with West James Drive.
200. On Summit Drive where it intersects with Lincoln Avenue.
201. On Cedar Court where it intersects with Cedar Drive.
202. On Willow Court where it intersects with Willow Drive.
203. On Apple Court where it intersects with Willow Drive.
204. On Willow Drive where it intersects with Port View Drive.
205. On Second Avenue where it intersects with Port View Drive.
206. On North Montgomery Street where it intersects with West Washington
St..
207. On LaBrisa Court where it intersects with Regatta Drive.
208. On Nautica Drive where it intersects with Grandview Drive.
209. On Nautica Drive (northbound) where it intersects with Melin Street.
210. On Roger Street (southbound) where it intersects with Melin Street.
211. On Grandview Drive where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
212. On Laura Lane where it intersects with Martin Drive.
213. On Martin Drive (eastbound) where it intersects with Bley Parkway.
214. On Bley Parkway (southbound) where it intersects with West Second Ave.
215. On Brian Court where it intersects with West Second Avenue.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 34 9/29/14
216. On Bley Parkway (westbound) where it intersects with Martin Drive.
217. On Martin Drive where it intersects with West Grand Avenue.
218. On Regatta Drive (westbound) where it intersects with Nautica Drive.
219. On Regatta Drive (southbound) where it intersects with Melin Street.
220. On Pierron Street at its intersection with Hales Trail.
221. On Sauk Drive (northbound) where it intersects with Pierre Lane.
222. On Melin Street (westbound) where it intersects with Regatta Drive.
223. On West Pierre Lane at its intersection with North Montgomery Street.
224. On the alley way parallel to and west of North Montgomery Street at its
intersection with West Pierre Lane.
225. On Mallinger Drive where it intersects with Spring Street.
226. On Niagra Lane where it intersects with Ashley Avenue.
227. At Ashley Court where it intersects with Ashley Avenue.
228. At Niagra Court where it intersects with Niagra Lane.
229. At Ashley Avenue where it intersects with Mallinger Drive.
230. On Terrace Drive where it intersects with Parkway Drive.
231. On Woodview Circle where it intersects with Terrace Drive.
232. On Bywater Drive where it intersects with Maritime Drive.
233. On Bywater Drive where it intersects with Sunset Road.
234. On Glenlyon Lane where it intersects with Ashley Avenue.
235. On Algoma Drive where it intersects with North Spring St.
236. On North Spring Street where it intersects with County Trunk Highway KK.
237. On Niagara Lane where it intersects with Algoma Drive.
238. On Ashley Avenue where it intersects with Algoma Drive.
239. On Glenlyon Lane where it intersects with Ashley Avenue.
240. On Ashley Avenue where it intersects with Cumberland Lane.
241. On Chisolm Lane (southbound) where it intersects with Cumberland Lane.
242. On Glenlyon Lane where it intersects with Cumberland Lane.
243. On Mineral Springs Drive (southbound) where it intersects with Maritime
Dr.
244. On Bywater Drive (southbound) where it intersects with Maritime Drive.
245. On West James Drive where it intersects with North Benjamin Street.
246. On Theis Lane where it intersects with West James Drive.
247. On Lincoln Avenue where it intersects with Port View Drive.
248. On Northbound S. Park Street where it intersects with Chestnut Street.
249. On Greystone Drive at Sunset Road
250. On Galena Drive (eastbound) at Greystone Drive
251. On Galena Drive (westbound) at Greystone Drive
252. On Granite Lane (eastbound) at Greystone Drive
253. On Granite Lane (westbound) at Greystone Drive
254. On Granite Lane (eastbound) at Garnet Lane
255. On Granite Lane (westbound) at Jade Street
256. On Granite Lane (eastbound) at Jade Street
257. On Shalestone Drive (eastbound) at Greystone Drive
258. On Shalestone Drive (westbound) at Greystone Drive
259. On Emerald Court at Shalestone Drive
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 35 9/29/14
260. On Garnet Lane (northbound) at Shalestone Drive
261. On Garnet Lane at Galena Drive
262. On Amber Lane at Greystone Drive
263. On Willow drive (eastbound) at Amber Lane
264. On Willow Drive (westbound) at Amber Lane
265. On Willow Drive (eastbound) at Greystone Drive
266. On Willow Drive (westbound) at Greystone Drive
267. On Boulder Pass (westbound) at Amber Lane
268. On Boulder Pass (eastbound) at Greystone Drive
269. On Greystone Drive at 2nd Avenue
270. On Amber lane at 2nd Avenue
271. On Stanford Street where it intersects with Jefferson Street
272. On Pine Cone Trail at Aster Street
273. On Evergreen Terrace at Aster Street
274. On Aster Street at Highway LL (east and west side)
275. On Conifer Court at Pine Cone Trail
276. On Aster Street at Sweetwater Boulevard (west and east side)
277. On Foxglove Street at Aster Street
278. On Indigo Drive at Aster Street (north and south side)
279. On Blazing Star Circle at Indigo Drive
280. On Blazing Star Circle at Aster Street
281. On N. Sweetwater Boulevard at Highway 33 (W. Grand Avenue)
282. On Willow Pond Way at Misty Ridge Lane
283. On Willow Pond Way at Windrush Drive
284. On Splitwood Drive at Willow Pond Way
285. On Splitwood Drive at Windrush Drive
286. On Windrush Drive at Willow Pond Way
287. On Misty Ridge Lane at Highway 32
288. On Second Avenue at Summit Drive.
289. On Kaiser Drive at Hales Trail.
290. On E. Van Buren at N. Powers Street
291. On Stanford Street where it intersects with Monroe Street.
292. On Webster Street where it intersects with Monroe Street.
293. On Monroe Street where it intersects with Nelson Drive.
294. On Jefferson Street where it intersects with Grant Street.
The Board of Public Works is hereby directed to procure, erect and maintain appropriate
standard traffic signs, signals and markings giving notice and adequate warning of this
ordinance to users of the streets and highways, as provided in sec. 8.09.010 of this
Municipal Code.
8.05.080 Nonmoving Traffic Violations, Enforcement. All persons charged with a
“nonmoving traffic violation”, as used herein being any parking of a vehicle in violation
of a statute or an ordinance, shall be subject to Section 345.28, Wisconsin Statutes, as
may be amended, revised or modified. Such person may pay the applicable amount of
forfeiture to the Port Washington Police Department within 28 days of issuance of the
violation citation. In such event, the citation shall not be filed in court. If the alleged
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 36 9/29/14
violator fails to pay the applicable amount of forfeiture or fails to appear in court, the Port
Washington Police Department, by its authorized representative, may proceed to issue a
summons or may notify the Department of Transportation that a citation has been issued
and remains unpaid. In the latter case, the Port Washington Police Department may
request suspension of the registration of the vehicle involved or request that registration
be refused of any vehicle owned by the person under Section 341.10 (7) (m), Wisconsin
Statutes, or both.
8.06.000 WEIGHT LIMITS AND HEAVY TRAFFIC ROUTES.
8.06.010 Class B Highways Designated. All streets and alleys within the City of Port
Washington, Wisconsin, except the following enumerated streets and alleys, are hereby
designated Class “B” Highways and shall be subject to the weight and limitations
imposed by S. 348.16, Wis. Stats.
1. All of State Trunk Highways 32 and 33 within the City limits, unless otherwise
designated by the county board.
8.06.020 Special and Season Weight Limitations. The Board of Public Works shall
have the authority to impose special or seasonal weight limits to prevent injury to the
roadway of any highway, bridge or culvert within the jurisdiction of the city or for the
safety of users of such highway, bridge or culvert and shall be responsible for erecting
signs giving notice thereof in accordance with s. 349.16, Wis. Stats.
8.06.030 Heavy Traffic Routes; Restrictions on Use of Other Streets By Heavy
Traffic. A. Heavy traffic routes. The following streets or parts of streets within the City
are hereby designated heavy traffic routes:
Name of Street Location
1. North Maple Street From north curb line of W. Grand Ave. to north line
of N. Maple Street
B. In this section, “heavy traffic” means all vehicles not operating completely on
pneumatic tires and all vehicles or combination of vehicles, other than motor buses,
designed or used for transporting property of any nature and having a gross weight of
more than 6,000 pounds.
C. Other streets. No vehicle, except a motor bus, which is not operating completely on
pneumatic tires or has a combined gross vehicle load weight exceeding 6,000 pounds,
shall be operated or moved on any street or alley in the City not part of the heavy
traffic route designated in Subsection A. of this section, except for the purpose of
obtaining orders for supplies or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or
from a place of business or residence which has an entrance on such street, provided
that in no event shall the weight of the vehicle or combination of vehicles and load on
such street exceed the limitations of sec. 348.15(3), Stats. pertaining to “class A”
highways or sec. 348.16(3), Stats. pertaining to pickup or delivery on “class B”
highways.
D. Notwithstanding Subsection C. of this section, no vehicle, except a motor bus, which
is not operating completely on pneumatic tires or has a combined gross vehicle load
weight exceeding 6,000 pounds, shall be operated or moved on Larabee Street
between North Spring Street and North Maple Street, except for the purpose of
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 37 9/29/14
obtaining orders for supplies or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or
from a residence which has an entrance on such street, provided that in no event shall
the weight of the vehicle or combination of vehicles and load on such street exceed
the limitations of sec. 348.15(3), Stats. pertaining to “class A” highways or sec.
348.16(3), Stats. pertaining to pickup or delivery on “class B” highway
8.06.40 Parking. (Repealed)
8.07.000 ACCIDENT REPORTS. The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident
shall within 12 days after such accident file with the city police department a copy of the
report required by s. 346.70, Wis. Stats., if any. If the operator is unable to make such
report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making such
report shall have the duty to comply with this section. Such reports shall be subject to the
provisions and limitations in ss. 346.70 (4)(f) and 346.73, Wis. Stats.
8.08.000 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
8.08.010 Abandonment of Vehicles.
(Repealed)
8.08.020 Leaving of Wrecked, Non-operating Vehicle on Street.
(Repealed)
8.08.030 Disposition of Wrecked or Discarded Vehicles.
(Repealed)
8.08.040 Impounding.
(Repealed)
8.09.000 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS.
8.09.010 Board of Public Works to Procure and Erect Signs and Signals.
The Board of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to procure, erect and
maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to the rules
of the state highway division giving such notice of this ordinance as required by state
law. Signs shall be erected in such locations and manner as the Board of Public Works
shall determine will best effect the purposes of this ordinance and give adequate warning
to users of the street or highway.
8.09.020 Removal of Unofficial Signs and Signals. The Board of Public Works shall
have the authority granted by Section 349.09, Wis. Stats., and is hereby directed to order
the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device placed, maintained or displayed in
violation of this ordinance of Section 346.41, Wis. Stats. Any charge imposed on a
premise for removal of such an illegal sign, signal or device shall be reported to the
Common Council at its next regular meeting for review and certification.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 38 9/29/14
8.11.000 TURNING REGULATED. The Common Council of the City of Port
Washington hereby determine that traffic conditions warrant the following additional
restrictions on turning to those set forth in Section 349.10(1), Wis. Stats.
8.11.010 U-Turns Prohibited. No person shall make a U-turn at the following locations:
1. At the intersection of Grand Avenue and Franklin Street.
8.11.020 Disorderly Conduct with a Motor Vehicle. Whoever does any of the
following may be ordered to forfeit as hereinafter provided:
1. Upon any street or highway, public or private property, makes or causes to be made
any unreasonable noise, which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace and quiet of any
person in the vicinity thereof by squealing tires of his/her motor vehicle, or by causing
loud and unnecessary acceleration of such motor vehicle.
2. Operates a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause dirt, stones, rubber or other
debris to be thrown by the wheels of such motor vehicle upon the person or property of
another or to be thrown in a manner creating or tending to create an unreasonable risk or
hazard to others upon the roadway or adjoining pedestrian walkway.
3. Operates or uses a motor vehicle upon any street or highway, public or private
property, within the City limits where a compression brake is in any way engaged on
such motor vehicle, or any unit a part thereof, causing noise which disturbs or tends to
disturb the peace and quiet of any persons in the vicinity thereof, except when engaged or
activated to avert imminent danger. For purposes of this section, a “compression brake”
means a device primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal
combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of or
in addition to wheel brakes. This section shall not include or apply to fire trucks or fire
equipment.
8.12.000 REGULATION AND LICENSING OF BICYCLES.
A. Definition. The term “bicycle”, as used in this section, shall mean a device propelled
by the feet acting upon pedals and having wheels, any 2 of which are not less than 14
inches in diameter.
B. Registration Required. No City resident shall ride or use a bicycle having wheels of
20 or more inches in diameter upon any public highway, street, alley or pedestrian way
unless it is registered as herein provided. The transferee of ownership of a registered
bicycle shall register it within 2 working days following such transfer.
C. Registration Procedure. A bicycle shall be registered by completion of a registration
application at the Police Department or City Hall setting forth the owner’s name and
address, a complete description of the bicycle and any other required information, and by
payment of the appropriate registration fee. Upon registration, the City shall issue a
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 39 9/29/14
sticker to be permanently affixed to the bicycle in such a manner as it may require, unless
the bicycle is being transferred to a different owner and bears an intact sticker.
D. Bicycle Required to be in Safe Condition. No bicycle shall be registered that is not
in safe mechanical condition as determined by the Port Washington Police Department.
It shall be the responsibility of persons 16 years of age or older, or a parent or guardian of
a child under 16 years of age, to inspect and maintain said bicycle in safe mechanical
condition.
E. Registration Fees. The registration fee for each bicycle shall be $3.00 for an
indefinite registration period. Registration shall be transferable upon a transfer of
ownership for a fee of $1.00. The fee for replacement of a non-intact registration sticker
not accompanied by a transfer of registration shall be $1.00.
F. Rules for Operation of Bicycles. Every person operating a bicycle in the City shall
be subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter and to applicable State Statutes
relating to equipping and operating bicycles.
G. Warning. The first time a child is detained by a law enforcement officer for violation
of any of the provisions of this section, his parent, guardian or person having such legal
custody may be advised as to the provisions of this section and further advised that any
violation of this section occurring thereafter by this child or any other child under his care
or custody may result in a penalty being imposed as hereinafter provided.
H. Penalties.
1. Persons Under 12 Years of Age. Any person under 12 years of age who violates any
of the provisions of this section shall be reprimanded at the discretion of the police
officer in a manner prescribed as follows:
a. The officer may, when appropriate, issue a warning card to the parents of a
juvenile who is detained for a violation of any of the provisions of this section,
informing them of the violation.
b. The violation shall be considered a matter of record and the appropriate police
department juvenile incident report completed for referral. At that time a
determination will be made as to whether to refer the matter to a juvenile court for
further action or to summon the offender, accompanied by a parent or guardian, to
police headquarters to discuss the nature of the violation, or
c. The violation shall not be considered a matter of record and the bicycle may be
impounded for a period of time not to exceed 30 days.
2. Persons 12 Years of Age or Over. Any person 12 years of age or over who violates
any of the provisions of this section shall be reprimanded or cited at the discretion of the
police officer in a manner prescribed as follows:
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 40 9/29/14
a. The violation shall not be considered a matter of record and the operator may
be warned or referred for appropriate follow up, including a parental conference,
or
b. For any violation of Ch. 346, Wis. Stats., applicable to bicycles, the violator
may be issued a citation and be required to appear in court or post bond in the
amount as prescribed by the uniform bond schedule.
3. Persons 18 Years of Age or Over. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates
any of the provisions of this section shall be issued a citation and shall be required to
appear in court or post bond in the amount prescribed by the uniform bond schedule.
I. Impounding. Whenever a bicycle shall be impounded for violations of the provisions
of this section, it shall be surrendered at the Police Department at the expiration of the
impoundment period to the owner if an adult or the parents or the guardian of the
offender. In the case of the seizure of a bicycle because it has been found in the
possession of a person not the legal owner thereof and the bicycle is not reclaimed by the
legal owner thereof, it shall be sold at public auction after the expiration of 120 days from
the date of seizure. The proceeds of the sale shall be remitted to the City Treasurer.
8.12.010 Bicycle Helmets.
1. Any person less than 16 years of age operating or riding on a bicycle on a public
roadway, public sidewalk, public bicycle path, or any other public right-of-way under the
jurisdiction and control of the City shall wear a protective helmet designed for bicycle
safety. Such helmets shall meet or exceed the impact standards for protective bicycle
helmets set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Memorial
Foundation.
A. A person under 16 years of age shall not operate a bicycle, unicycle, skate
board or scooter, nor shall they wear in-line or roller skates, nor ride upon a
bicycle, unicycle, skate board, scooter, in-line or roller skates as a passenger,
at a public skate board recreation facility under the jurisdiction and control of
the City unless that person is wearing a properly fitted and fastened
protective helmet that meets or exceeds the impact standards for bicycle
helmets set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or the Snell
Memorial Foundation, or standards subsequently established by those
entities.
2. No parent or guardian of any child shall authorize or knowingly permit such child to
violate any of the provisions of this ordinance.
3. This ordinance applies to a child seated in an auxiliary child’s seat or trailer designed
for attachment to a bicycle.
4. Except as provided herein, violation of this section is an infraction punishable by a
fine of not more than twenty-five (25) dollars. The parent or legal guardian having
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 41 9/29/14
control or custody of the minor whose conduct violates this section shall be jointly and
severably liable with the minor for the amount of a fine imposed pursuant to this
subdivision.
5. The court may waive any fine for such person found guilty of violating the provisions
of this ordinance if the person supplies the court with proof that between the date of the
violation and the appearance date for such violation, the person purchased or otherwise
obtained a helmet which meets the requirements of this ordinance.
8.13.000 PENALTY. The penalty for violation of any provision of this ordinance shall
be a forfeiture as hereinafter provided together with the cost of prosecution imposed as
provided in Section 345.20 to 345.53, Wis. Stats.
8.13.010 Uniform Offenses. Except as provided in 8.13.040 for nonmoving traffic
offenses, forfeitures, for violation of any provision of Chapter 341 to 348 adopted by
reference in Section 1 of this ordinance shall conform to forfeitures for violation of the
comparable state offense, including any variations or increases for second offense.
8.13.020 Special Local Regulations. Where not specifically provided to the contrary in
8.13.010, above, the forfeiture for violation of 8.02.000 through 8.12.000 of this
ordinance shall be not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00 for the first offense and
not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 for the second offense within 2 years.
8.13.030 Miscellaneous. The forfeiture for violation of any provision of 8.01.020 of this
ordinance shall be not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00.
8.13.040 Parking. A. The forfeiture for all parking violations shall be ten ($10.00)
dollars if paid by mail or otherwise to the City Clerk within 72 hours of such violations;
shall be fifteen ($15.00) dollars if paid after 72 hours and within 10 days; shall be twenty
($20.00) dollars if paid after 10 days and within 28 days; shall be thirty-five ($35.00)
dollars if paid after 28 days.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the forfeiture for a violation
related to parking spaces or portions of streets, highways or parking facilities reserved for
vehicles used by physically disabled persons shall be not less than $150.00 nor more than
$300.00.
C. The forfeiture for all other parking violations shall be ten ($10.00) dollars if paid by
mail or otherwise to the City Clerk within 72 hours of such violations; shall be fifteen
($15.00) dollars if paid after 72 hours and within 10 days; shall be twenty ($20.00)
dollars if paid after 10 days and within 28 days; shall be thirty-five ($35.00) dollars if
paid after 28 days.
8.14.000 ENFORCEMENT. This ordinance shall be enforced in accordance with the
provisions of SS. 345.20 to 345.53, Ch. 299 and S. 66.12, of the Wis. Stats.
8.14.010 Uniform Citation. The uniform citation promulgated under S. 345.11, Wis.
Stats., shall be used for all violations under this ordinance including ordinances for which
a statutory counterpart exists.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 42 9/29/14
8.14.020 Parking Citations. Citations for all nonmoving traffic violations under this
ordinance shall conform to S. 345.28, Wis. Stats., and shall permit direct mail payment of
the applicable minimum forfeiture to the Police Department within five (5) days of the
issuance of the citation in lieu of court appearance. The issuing officer shall specify
thereon the amount of the applicable forfeiture as provided in this ordinance.
8.14.030 Notice of Demerit Points and Receipts. Every officer accepting a forfeiture
penalty or money deposit under this ordinance shall receipt therefore in triplicate as
provided in S. 345.26 (3) (b), Wis. Stats. Every officer accepting a stipulation under the
provisions of this ordinance shall comply with the provisions of SS. 343.27 (2) Wis.
Stats. and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in substantially
the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under S.
345.11, Wis. Stats.
8.14.040 Forfeitures in Treasury Officer to Post Bond, Qualify. Any officer accepting
deposits or forfeited penalties under this ordinance shall deliver them to the City
Treasurer within 20 days after receipt. Any officer authorized to accept deposits under S.
345.26, Wis. Stats., or this ordinance shall qualify by taking the oath prescribed by S.
19.01, Wis. Stats., and filing an official bond in the sum of $1,000.00 as described by S.
19.01.
8.15.000 REFERENCE TO STATUTES. References to specific statutory sections
wherever used in this ordinance shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes of 1971.
8.16.000 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. All ordinances regulating
traffic upon the streets, alleys, and highways of the City of Port Washington, Wisconsin,
and all ordinances or parts of ordinances heretofore enacted by the Common Council of
the City of Port Washington, Wisconsin, are hereby repealed.
8.17.000 SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed severable
and it is expressly declared that the Common Council would have passed the other
provisions of this ordinance irrespective of whether or not one or more provisions may be
declared invalid and if any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the
application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby.
8.18.000 EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after October 1, 1972, upon passage and publication as provided by law.
8.19.000 SNOWMOBILES.
8.19.010 State Snowmobile Laws Adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided
in this ordinance, the statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with
respect to snowmobiles in the following enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes
are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this ordinance as if fully set forth
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 43 9/29/14
herein. Acts required to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or
prohibited by this ordinance.
350.01 (Definition)
350.02 (Crossing Highways)
350.03 (Operations of Snowmobiles on or in the Vicinity of a Highway)
350.04 (Snowmobile Races, Derbies and Routes)
350.05 (Persons under 12 Operating a Snowmobile)
350.06 (Firearms and Bows)
350.07 (Driving Bear, Deer or Other Game Prohibited)
350.08 (Owner Permitting Operation)
350.09 (Head Lamps, Tail Lamps and Brakes)
350.10 (Miscellaneous Provisions for Snowmobiles Operation)
350.12 (Registration of Snowmobiles)
8.19.020 Snowmobile Routes Designated.
A. Except as provided in SS. 350.02 and 350.03, Wis. Stats., no person shall operate a
snowmobile upon any public right-of-way, in any public park, golf course or on any other
public property in the City except as hereinafter designated. The following are
designated snowmobile areas:
1. Parks, Golf Courses and Recreational Areas. Operation of snowmobiles on
marked routes or trails is authorized in the following public parks, golf
courses and recreational areas subject to approval of the City Park Board:
i. Upper Lake Park, west of the easternmost roadway;
ii. The Athletic Field, within the prescribed, signed area;
iii. The former WEPCO right-of-way, where so indicated;
iv. The North and South industrial areas
B. The City Park Superintendent is directed and authorized to procure, erect and
maintain appropriate snowmobile route, trail or limit markers.
C. Snowmobiles operated on designated snowmobile routes over public highways shall
observe the rules of the road for motor vehicles set forth in Ch. 346, Wis. Stats., and
(Chapter 8 of this code) (Ordinance dated October 6, 1970), which is hereby adopted by
reference and made part of this ordinance as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to
be performed or prohibited by such laws is required or prohibited by this ordinance.
8.19.030 Additional Regulations.
A. Speed. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public right-of-way or
highway within the City of Port Washington at a speed in excess of that
permitted or posted for other motor vehicles or in any public park, or area, at a
speed in excess of 20 miles per hour.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 44 9/29/14
B. Hours of Operation. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon (any public
highway or other public property) (in any public park) (public or private golf
course or recreational area) (lake) or (upon any private premises open to the
public for snowmobiling) within the City of Port Washington between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
C. Unattended Vehicles. No person shall leave or allow a snowmobile owned or
operated by him to remain unattended on any public highway or public property
while the motor is running or with the starting key left in the ignition.
D. Operation on Sidewalks or Malls Prohibited. No person shall operate a
snowmobile on any sidewalk, pedestrian way or mall within the City.
E. Operation on Private Premises Restricted. No person shall operate a
snowmobile on any private property not owned or controlled by him within the
City without the express consent or permission of the owner.
F. Snow Cover. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the City of Port
Washington in any previously designated area in the absence of an average
snow cover in that area of less than three (3) inches.
G. Operation on Icebound Waters. No person shall operate or ride upon a
snowmobile on Lake Michigan at any time or place.
8.19.040 Accidents and Accident Reports.
A. If he can do so without serious danger to his own snowmobile or to persons on
board, the operator of a snowmobile involved in a snowmobile accident with the
City of Port Washington shall stop his snowmobile and shall render to other
persons affected thereby such assistance as may be practicable and necessary to
save them from or minimize any danger caused by the accident and shall give his
name and address and identification of his snowmobile to any person injured and
to the owner of any property damaged in the accident.
B. If the snowmobile accident results in death or injury to any person or total
property damage in excess of $200.00, every operator of a snowmobile involved
in such accident shall, as soon as possible, notify the City Police Department of
the accident and shall, within 10 days after the accident, file a written report
thereof with the department on forms prescribed by it.
C. If the operator of a snowmobile is physically incapable of making the report
required by this section and there was another occupant in the snowmobile at the
time of the accident capable of making the report, he shall make such report.
D. “Snowmobile accident” means a collision, accident or other casualty involving a
snowmobile.
8.19.050 Snowmobile Renters Licensed.
A. No person shall engage in the business of renting or leasing of snowmobiles to
the public or of renting or leasing use of a snowmobile track or other private
property to the public for the operation of snowmobiles thereon in the City of
Port Washington unless he has a license therefore as provided in this section.
City of Port Washington Chapter 8 – Page 45 9/29/14
B. Application for snowmobile renters’ licenses shall be filed with the clerk and
shall include the name of the owner of the premises of which such business will
be conducted, the proposed period and hours of operation, the name of the
person, firm or corporation which will conduct such business, the state
registration number of such commercial owner, if any, and the registration
numbers of any snowmobiles to be leased by such business and such other
information as the Common Council shall require to consider such application.
The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $15.00, which shall be refunded
to the applicant in the event a license is denied.
C. No license shall be issued unless approved by the Common Council after a public
hearing on the application. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication
of a Class 1 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. The Council shall approve
issuance of the license only if it determines that the public health, safety and
welfare will not be adversely thereby and that the following terms and conditions
are met:
1. The applicant must file proof of liability insurance in force covering the
premises to be licensed and any snowmobile to be rented or offered for
use to the public by the applicant with limits of $50,000/
$300,000/$10,000.
2. The use of the premises must conform with the requirements of the
zoning regulations of the City and be approved by the building inspector.
3. Snowmobiles shall be operated on the premises or leased for offpremises
operation only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
4. The licensing period shall be for one year from July 1 to June 30. A
reduction of up to 50% in the license fee may be granted by the Council
for original licenses granted after June 30, but no reduction or refund of
the fee shall be granted for any other reason.
5. The Clerk shall issue a renewal license to any person, firm or corporation
holding a valid license under this section upon payment of the annual
license fee, provided, however, that any such applicant who has been
convicted within the preceding 12 months of violation of this ordinance
of any State Statute regulating or restricting the use of snowmobiles or
snowmobile renters shall not be entitled to license renewal until renewal
is approved by the Council after a public hearing as required under
8.19.050 C.
8.19.060 Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this ordinance shall
upon conviction thereof forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $20 together with the cost
of prosecution for the first offense and not less than $25 nor more than $50 together with
the cost of prosecution for the second offense within a year.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 1 9/16/14
CHAPTER 9
Licenses And Permits
Table of Contents
9.01.000 LICENSE COMMITTEE
9.01.010 License Applications to the License Committee
9.02.000 RECORD OF LICENSES
9.03.000 LICENSE PERIOD
9.04.000 INTOXICATING LIQUOR & FERMENTED MALT
BEVERAGE AND WINE
9.04.010 State Statutes and Rules Adopted
9.04.020 Licenses
9.04.030 Classes of Licenses; Fees
9.04.040 Application for License
9.04.050 Licensing Procedures; Qualifications for Granting License;
Investigations and Recommendations
9.04.060 Granting of License; Conditional Approval
9.04.070 License Conditions and Restrictions Generally
9.04.080 Closing Hours
9.04.090 Posting of License
9.04.100 Duplicate License
9.04.110 Transfer of License
9.04.120 License Quotas
9.04.130 Suspension, Revocation or Non-renewal of License
9.04.140 Underage Persons on Licensed Premises
9.04.150 Prohibition of Intoxicating Liquor, Cereal Malt Beverages or any
Other Alcoholic Beverage in Sexually Oriented Businesses
9.05.000 TAXICABS
9.05.010 Taxicabs Defined
9.05.020 Taxicab License
9.05.030 Application for License
9.05.040 Public Convenience and Necessity
9.05.050 Renewal
9.05.060 License Fees
9.05.070 Insurance
9.05.080 Inspection
9.05.090 Register
9.05.100 Revocation
9.05.110 Suspension
9.05.120 Taxicab Regulations
9.05.130 Fraud in Obtaining License
9.05.140 Doctor’s Certificate Required
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 2 9/16/14
9.06.000 TAXICAB DRIVER’S LICENSE
9.06.010 Requirements
9.06.020 Fee
9.06.030 Record of City Clerk
9.06.040 Badge
9.06.050 Revocation and Suspension
9.06.060 Regulations
9.06.070 Fraud in Obtaining License
9.07.000 DIRECT SALES AND SOLICITATIONS
9.07.010 Registration Required
9.07.020 Definition
9.07.030 Exemptions
9.07.040 Registration Requirements
9.07.050 Investigations; Denial of Application
9.07.060 Registration and Issuance of License
9.07.070 Registration of Direct Sellers and Solicitors
9.07.080 Records of Violations
9.07.090 Revocation of License
9.07.100 Severance Clause
9.08.000 FUND SOLICITORS
9.08.010 Permit Required
9.08.020 Exceptions
9.08.030 Cause for Revocation
9.09.000 CLOSING OUT SALES (Repealed)
9.10.000 AMUSEMENT LICENSE
9.10.010 License Required
9.10.020 Application
9.10.030 Fees
9.10.040 Suspension
9.11.000 SALE OF WEAPONS
9.11.010 License Required
9.11.020 Application for License
9.11.030 Issuance
9.11.040 Daily Report on Sales
9.11.050 Permit to Purchase
9.11.060 Revocation
9.12.000 MILK DISTRIBUTOR
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 3 9/16/14
9.13.000 CIVIC FUNCTIONS AND PROMOTIONS
9.14.000 DOGS
9.14.010 Dog and Cat Licenses
9.15.000 CABARET LICENSE AND PERMIT
9.15.010 Cabaret Establishments
9.15.020 License Procedures
9.15.030 Granting of Licenses
9.15.040 Conditions and Restrictions
9.15.050 Refusal to Renew License
9.15.060 Suspension or Revocation of License
9.15.070 Automatic Revocation
9.16.000 HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
9.16.010 Room Tax Levy
9.16.020 Filing Requirements
9.16.025 Confidentiality of Room Tax Reports and Related Information;
forfeitures
9.16.030 Interest and Penalties
9.16.040 Review
9.16.050 Board of Tax Appeals
9.17.000 ALARM SYSTEM PERMITS
9.17.010 Alarm System Permits
9.17.020 Definitions
9.17.030 Administrative Rules
9.17.040 Permits For Private Alarm Systems
9.17.050 Automatic Dialing Devices; Audible Alarms
9.17.060 Testing
9.17.070 Fee For Answering Alarms
9.17.080 City Liability
9.17.090 Revocation of Permits
9.18.000 PAWN BROKERS AND SECOND HAND ARTICLE AND
JEWELRY DEALERS
9.18.010 State Law Adopted
9.19.000 NON-ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
9.20.000 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
9.21.000 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS RETAILER
LICENSE
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 4 9/16/14
9.22.000 LICENSING AND REGULATION OF SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESSES
9.22.010 Purpose and Findings
9.22.020 Definitions
9.22.030 Classification
9.22.040 License
9.22.050 Application for License
9.22.060 Standards for Issuance of License
9.22.070 Fees
9.22.080 Display of License
9.22.090 Renewal of License
9.22.100 Inspection
9.22.110 Suspension
9.22.120 Revocation
9.22.130 Administrative Review Procedure
9.22.140 Transfer of License
9.22.150 Physical Layout of Sexually Oriented Business
9.22.160 Location
9.22.170 Responsibilities of the Licensee
9.22.180 Additional Regulations for Escort Agencies
9.22.190 Additional Regulations Concerning Sexually Oriented Businesses
9.22.200 Prohibition Against Children in a Sexually Oriented Business
9.22.210 Hours of Operation
9.22.220 Exclusions
9.22.230 Enforcement
9.22.240 Penalties and Prosecution
9.22.250 Severability
9.22.260 Conflicting Ordinances Repealed
9.23.000 HORSE AND CARRIAGE RIDES
9.23.010 Definitions
9.23.020 License required; exception
9.23.030 Regulations
9.23.040 Licenses
9.23.050 Police Authority; Suspension or Revocation; Common Council
Action; Penalty
9.24.000 LICENSING AND REGULATING OF BEEKEEPING
9.25.000 PENALTY
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 5 9/16/14
CHAPTER 9
Licenses and Permits
9.01.000 LICENSE COMMITTEE. The License Committee shall consist of the City
Clerk, the Chief of Police, and 3 Aldermen to be appointed by the Mayor at the annual
organization meeting of the Common Council.
9.01.010 License Applications to the Committee. Except where otherwise provided
herein, all applications for licenses and permits under this Chapter shall be referred to the
License Committee for recommendation to the Common Council as to issuance. No
license or permit shall be issued by the Common Council until a recommendation of the
License Committee is heard, except that the City Clerk or the Clerk’s designee may issue
a Provisional Operator’s License pursuant to the procedures set forth in Wisconsin State
Statutes Section 125.17 (5), as they may be amended from time to time.
9.02.000 RECORD OF LICENSES. The City Clerk shall keep a complete record of
each license issued, and of all renewals, suspensions and revocations thereof, which
record shall be kept on file with the original application for a license.
9.03.000 LICENSE PERIOD. Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, the
license period is from July 1 to June 30th of each year.
9.04.000 INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES
AND WINE.
9.04.010 State Statute and Rules Adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided
in this chapter, all provisions of Ch. 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes and administrative
rules of the state Department of Revenue in Ch. Tax 8, Adm. Code, defining and
regulating the sale, procurement, dispensing and transfer of intoxicating liquor, fermented
malt beverages and wine, including provisions relating to prescribed procedures and the
penalty to be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes or rules, as they
may be amended from time to time, are adopted and made a part of this chapter by
reference. A violation of any such provisions shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
Sections of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats. adopted by reference or as may be altered, amended or
recreated in any manner whatsoever shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
125.07(1) (Alcohol Beverages; Restrictions Relating to Underage Persons)
125.07(2) (Sales of Alcohol Beverages to Intoxicated Persons)
125.07(3) (Presence in Places of Sale; Penalty)
125.07(4) (Underage Persons; Prohibitions; Penalties)
125.09(2) (Possession of Alcohol Beverages on School Grounds Prohibited)
125.33(9) (Campuses and Retailers to Purchase from Wholesalers)
125.69(6) (Campuses and Retailers to Purchase from Persons Holding Permits)
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 6 9/16/14
9.04.020 Licenses.
A. When Required. No person, except as provided by Section 9.04.010, shall distribute,
vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or wholesale, deal or traffic in, or, for the
purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating liquor, fermented
malt beverage or wine, or cause the same to be done, without having procured a license
or permit as provided in this section, nor without complying with all the provisions of
this section and all statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State and City applicable
thereto.
B. Separate Licenses Required for Each Place of Sale. A separate license shall be required
for each stand, place, room or enclosure or for each suite of rooms or enclosures which
are in direct connection or communication where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale; and no license shall be issued to any person
for the purpose of possessing, selling or offering for sale any intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverage in any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment.
9.04.030 Classes of Licenses; Fees. There shall be the following classes of licenses
which when the fee specified is paid and the license issued shall permit the holder to sell,
deal or traffic in intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages as provided in Chapter
125.000, Wisconsin Statutes, as they may be renumbered and/or amended from time to
time:
1. Retail “Class A” Intoxicating Liquor License $325 effective July 1,
1993 and $500 effective July 1, 1994.
2. Retail “Class B” Intoxicating Liquor License $350 effective July 1,
1993 and $500 effective July 1, 1994.
3. Retail Class “A” Fermented Malt Beverage License $100 per year.
4. Retail Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage License $100 per year.
5. Temporary “Class B” Club Picnic License issued under Section 125.26
(6)-$5.00 per day or $10.00 per event.
6. Operator’s License-$20.00 per year/renewals; $25.00-new
7. Pharmacist’s Permit-$10.00 per year.
8. Part Time “Class A” and “Class B” and Class “A” and “B” License
issued under Section 125.51 (9), Wisconsin Statutes-The proportion of the
annual license fee as the number of months or fraction of a month
remaining until June 30 bears to 12.
9. Provisional Operator’s License-$15.00.
10. Retail “Class C” Wine License $100.00 per year.
11. Wholesalers’ License-$25.00 per year or fractional part thereof.
12. Brewer’s License-$25.00 per permit period or fractional part thereof.
13. Provisional Retail Licenses – issued under secs. 125.185 (1) – (6) of the
Wisconsin Statutes, a provisional retail license may be issued only to a
person who has applied for a Class “A”, Class “B”, “Class A”, “Class B”
or “Class C” license and authorizes only the activities that the type of
retail license applied for authorizes. Provisional retail licenses shall be
issued by the City Clerk and the fee for each provisional retail license
shall be $15.00. A provisional retail license expires 60 days after its
issuance or when the Class “A”, Class “B”, “Class A”, “Class B” or
“Class C” license is issued to the holder, whichever is sooner.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, the City Clerk
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 7 9/16/14
may not issue a provisional “Class B” license if the City’s quota for such
licenses under sec. 125.51 (4), Wis. Stats. prohibits the City from issuing
a “Class B” license. No person may hold more than one provisional retail
license for each type of license applied for by the holder per year.
Six-Month Licenses
1. Fermented Malt Beverages-3/4 of the annual license fee.
2. Intoxicating Liquor-1/2 of the annual license fee.
3. Wine-3/4 of the annual license fee.
9.04.040 Application for License.
A. Applications for intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverage licenses shall be
made in writing on the form provided by the City Clerk, shall be sworn to by the
applicant as provided by Section 125.04(3)(f), Wis. Stats. and shall be filed with
the City Clerk not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the Common Council
meeting at which the application is to be considered. At the time a license
application is filed with the City Clerk, the applicant shall remit a fee of $16.00 to
the City to pay the cost of publishing the application, or such other cost of
publication as may be determined from time to time by the City under secs.
125.04(3)(g) and 985.08, Wis. Stats.
B. Plan of Operation; Change of Plan. Each application for a new retail Class
“B” (fermented malt beverage) or “Class B” (intoxicating liquor) license filed
with the City Clerk shall include a written Plan of Operation, signed by the
applicant, verifying the information submitted by the applicant, except that a
Plan of Operation shall not be required of an applicant where such new
license is sought due to a change by a corporation, limited liability company
or partnership in its name or in its officers, directors, stockholders, members,
managers, or partners, provided that the remaining or successor agent has
been actively involved in the daily operations of the premises for the oneyear
period immediately preceding the effective date of such change. The
Plan of Operation shall include the information requested in the plan
questionnaire provided by the City Clerk. An applicant may withhold from
such Plan information the applicant considers to be a trade secret under
Section 134.90(1), Wis. Stats., or proprietary information that would give
competitors an unfair competitive advantage, provided that the applicant shall
state in the application the reasons for withholding such information. If, after
such license is granted or issued, a licensee intends to make a substantial
change to the original Plan of Operation, the licensee shall file a written
request with the City Clerk detailing such change. As used in this section,
“substantial change” means any change: (1) by a corporation, limited liability
company or partnership in its name or in its officers, directors, stockholders,
members, managers, or partners, unless the remaining or successor agent has
been actively involved in the daily operations of the premises for the oneCity
of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 8 9/16/14
year period immediately preceding the effective date of such change; (2) in
the description of the licensed premises; (3) in the identity of the licensee’s
agent or manager of the premises; (4) in the days or hours of operation; or
(5) in the food service, if less than 50% of the licensed business’s gross
receipts are, or are reasonably expected to be, derived from the sale of food.
No change shall occur until the request has been approved by the Common
Council, after review and recommendation by the License Committee.
Applications lacking any of the required information or materials shall not be
accepted by the City Clerk
9.04.050 Licensing Procedures; Qualifications for Granting License; Investigations
and Recommendations.
A. Referral for Inspection, Investigation and Recommendations. The City Clerk
shall notify the Police Chief, Fire Chief and Building Inspector of each new or
renewal application. These officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each
application and the premises sought to be licensed, together with such investigation as
necessary to determine whether the applicant and the premises comply with the
regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto, including those governing
sanitation in restaurants, and whether the applicant is a proper recipient of a license.
The Police Department shall investigate the applicant’s background, including, in the
discretion of the Department, requesting information from the state and other
communities in which the applicant previously resided or was employed, and
concerning the applicant’s arrest and conviction record. These officials shall file their
written recommendations with the City Clerk, based upon the information derived
from their inspections and investigations. No license shall be issued for premises not
in compliance with such laws and regulations. These officials may recommend
conditions to be placed upon a license consistent with the provisions of this chapter
and the laws of Wisconsin. The City Clerk shall first forward such information and
recommendations to the License Committee for its review and recommendation, and
then to the Common Council.
B. Security Plan; License Stipulation. Prior to the submission of an application for a
new retail Class “B” (fermented malt beverage) or “Class B” (intoxicating liquor)
license to the License Committee and the Common Council, the applicant or licensee
shall meet with the Police Chief to formulate a security plan for the safe operation
and use of the licensed premises. If agreed upon, the terms of a security plan shall be
attached to and incorporated in the applicant’s Plan of Operation under Section
9.04.040 B., and/or in a written license stipulation between the applicant or licensee
and the City. No condition which is part of a security plan may be in conflict with the
Wisconsin Statutes, any city ordinances regulating alcohol beverages, or any other
condition authorized to be placed upon a license by the Common Council. The Police
Chief shall provide a copy of the contents of the security plan and/or license
stipulation to the applicant or licensee, and shall include the same in the Chief’s
written recommendations to the City Clerk.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 9 9/16/14
C. Notice of Recommendation to Deny Application; Opportunity to Appear. If the
inspecting officials recommend the denial of the application, the applicant shall be
notified by the City Clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the Common Council
meeting at which the application is to be considered. The notice shall set forth the
basis for such recommendation and inform the applicant of the opportunity to appear
before the Council and to provide evidence as to why the application should be
approved. In addition, the applicant shall be notified that the consideration of the
application shall be heard in closed session, pursuant to Section 19.85(1)(b), Stats.,
unless the applicant requests such consideration to be held in open session.
D. (1) Natural persons. Licenses and permits related to alcohol beverages, issued
to natural persons under this chapter, may be issued only to persons who fulfill all
of the following requirements:
(a) Do not have an arrest or conviction record, subject to the
Wisconsin Fair Employment Act, ss. 111.321, 111.322 and
111.335, Stats.
(b) Have been residents of this state continuously for at least 90 days
prior to the date of application.
(c) Have attained the legal drinking age.
(d) Have submitted proof under s. 77.61(11), Stats.
(e) Have successfully completed, within the two years prior to the date
of application, a responsible beverage server training course at any
location that is offered by a vocational, technical and adult
education (technical college) district and that conforms to
curriculum guidelines specified by the board of vocational,
technical and adult education (technical college system board) or a
comparable training course that is approved by the department of
revenue or the educational approval board. This subdivision does
not apply to an applicant who held, or who was an agent appointed
and approved under s. 125.04(6), Stats., of a corporation or limited
liability company that held, within the past two years, a Class "A",
"Class A" or "Class C" license or a Class "B" or "Class B" license
or permit or a manager's or operator's license.
(2) Criminal offenders. No license or permit related to alcohol beverages may,
subject to the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act, ss. 111.321, 111.322 and
111.335, Stats., be issued under this chapter to any person who has habitually
been a law offender or has been convicted of a felony unless the person has
been duly pardoned.
(3) Corporations and limited liability companies. No license or permit may be
issued to any corporation or limited liability company unless that entity meets
the qualifications under subsections (1)(a) and (1)(d) and (2) of this section,
unless the agent of the entity appointed under s. 125.04(6), Stats. and the
officers and directors, or members or managers, of the entity meet the
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 10 9/16/14
qualifications of subsections (1)(a) and (1)(c) and (2) and unless the agent of
the entity appointed under s. 125.04(6), Stats. meets the qualifications under
subsections (1)(b) and (1)(e) of this section. The requirement that the entity
meet the qualifications under subsections (1)(a) and (2) of this section does
not apply if the entity has terminated its relationship with all of the individuals
whose actions directly contributed to the conviction.
(4) Operators' and managers' licenses. Subsection (1)(b) of this section does
not apply to applicants for operators' licenses issued under s. 125.17, Stats. or
to applicants for managers' licenses issued under s. 125.18, Stats. Managers'
licenses may be issued only to applicants who are residents of this state at the
time of issuance. Subsection (1)(c) of this section does not apply to applicants
for operators' licenses under s. 125.17, Stats. Operators' licenses may be
issued only to applicants who have attained 18 years of age. Subsection (1)(d)
and (1)(e) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
(a) Applicants for operators' licenses under s. 125.17, Stats.
(b) Applicants for managers' licenses under s. 125.18, Stats.
(c) Applicants for temporary Class "B" licenses under s.
125.26(6), Stats. who are not required to hold a seller's permit
under subch. III of ch. 77, Stats.
(d) Applicants for temporary "Class B" licenses under s.
125.51(10) who are not required to hold a seller's permit under
subch. III of ch. 77, Stats.
E. Health and sanitary requirements. No retail "Class B" or Class “B” license
shall be issued for any premises which does not conform to the sanitary, safety
and health requirements of the state Department of Safety and Professional
Services pertaining to buildings and plumbing, to the rules and regulations of the
state Department of Health Services applicable to restaurants and other licensed
facilities, and to all such ordinances and regulations adopted by the City.
F. Payment of Amounts Due City (Premises). No initial or renewal alcohol
beverage license shall be issued for any premises for which taxes, assessments, or
other claims owed to the City of Port Washington are delinquent and unpaid.
G. Payment of Amounts Due City (Persons). No initial or renewal alcohol
beverage license shall be issued to any person who is delinquent in the payment of
any taxes, assessments, or other claims owed to the City of Port Washington.
9.04.060 Granting of License; Conditional Approval.
A. Opportunity shall be given by the Common Council to any person to be heard for
or against the granting of any license. Upon the approval of the application by
the Common Council, the City Clerk shall, upon the filing by the applicant of a
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 11 9/16/14
receipt showing the payment of the required license fee to the City Treasurer,
issue to the applicant a license. Each license shall be numbered in the order in
which issued and shall specifically state the premises for which issued, the date
of issuance, the fee paid, and the name of the licensee. No license shall be issued
to an applicant unless all outstanding taxes, special assessments, local forfeitures
or other charges due and owing to the municipality have been paid. Any
issuance of such license with such outstanding financial obligations shall be void.
B. Approval; Conditional Approval. The Common Council shall review the
application, the applicant’s qualifications, the applicant’s Plan of Operation and
all other relevant factors and determine whether to grant the license under the
provisions of this chapter and the laws of Wisconsin. The Common Council may
place conditions upon a new license consistent with the provisions of this chapter
and not in conflict with the laws of Wisconsin. Violation of any such condition,
Plan of Operation under Section 9.04.040 B., or a license stipulation between the
applicant or licensee and the City shall be considered a violation of this section
and grounds for suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of the license.
C. Any license duly granted and not issued within sixty (60) days shall be subject to
review and possible revocation by the Common Council, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 125.12, Wisconsin Statutes. These licenses may not be regranted
during this sixty (60) day period. Any license issued requires the
business to be open a minimum of 150 days during the license period. In cases
of revocation under this section, no refund of the license fee is to be made.
9.04.070 License Conditions and Restrictions Generally. All retail alcohol
beverage licenses granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the regulations,
conditions, and restrictions imposed by Ch. 125, Wis. Stats. and all other ordinances
and regulations of the City applicable to such licenses, licensees or licensed
premises. In addition, pursuant to Section 125.10, Wis. Stats., the City adopts the
following conditions, restrictions and requirements which, unless otherwise noted,
shall apply to all retail alcohol beverage licenses:
1. Inspection. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents to the
entry of police or other duly authorized representatives of the City at all
reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search, and consents to
the removal from said premises of all things and articles they had in
violation of City Ordinances or State Laws, and consents to the
introduction of such things and articles in evidence in any prosecution
that may be brought for such offense.
2. Employing of Minor. No Retail alcohol beverage licensee shall employ
any underage person upon the licensed premises but this shall not apply to
hotels, restaurants or combination grocery stores and bowling alleys, nor
to members of the immediate family or household of the licensee.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 12 9/16/14
“Members of the immediate family and household” means the husband,
wife, parents, and children of the licensee over the age of 18 years and
residing in the household of the licensee.
3. Use of Curtains, Blinds, Screens. No Retail alcohol beverage licensed
premises shall, during the hours in which they are required to close or in
which the sale of liquor or malt beverages is prohibited, obstruct by the
use of curtains, blinds, screens, or in any other manner, a full and
complete view of the interior from the outside. During the hours in which
the sale of intoxicating liquors and malt beverages is permitted the
premises shall be properly and adequately lighted. However, a retail
alcohol beverage license shall entitle the holder thereof to serve such
beverages in a separate room at banquets or dinners during the hours in
which the sale of such beverages is permitted.
4. Restrictions on Clubs. No club shall sell intoxicating liquors or
fermented malt beverages except to members and to guests invited by
members.
5. Orderly Conduct Required. Each licensed premises shall at all times be
conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent
conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises.
6. Gambling Prohibited. No gambling or games or chance of any sort shall
be permitted in any form upon licensed premises. Slot machines, or any
device of chance are prohibited and shall not be kept upon the premises.
7. Health Rules. Each premise shall be conducted in a sanitary manner and
shall be in a safe and proper place for the purpose for which used. The
Health Officer may make reasonable and general rules for the sanitation
of all places of business possessing licenses under this section. Such rules
or regulations may be classified and made applicable according to the
class of business conducted. All such rules and regulations shall have the
same force as this section and infractions thereof may be punished as
violations of this section.
8. Wearing Apparel. All persons involved in the operation of any licensed
premises under this section, whether as licensee, member of the
immediate family of the licensee, licensed operator, unlicensed operator
of the supervision of the licensee or licensed operator, waiter, waitress,
entertainer, dancer or other employee, shall observe the following
applicable minimum standards for such licensed premises:
The costume, uniform or attire, of any person involved in operation
of a licensed premises as set forth herein, shall be of a fully opaque
material and must completely cover the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft and buttocks at all
times. The costume, uniform or attire of any female person
involved in the operation of any license premises as set forth
herein shall completely cover the female breast below a horizontal
line across the top of the areola at its highest point, and the lower
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 13 9/16/14
portion of the female breast, but this restriction shall not include or
apply to any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited
by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing
apparel, provided the areola and any portion of the nipple are not
exposed in whole or in part.
9. Enclosed Area. All persons issued a Temporary Class “B” (Picnic) Beer
License shall provide and maintain an enclosed area within which beer
may be sold, served, consumed or stored at a picnic or similar gathering
of limited duration. As used in this section, “enclosed area” shall mean a
portion of the license holder’s premises separated from the remainder of
the premises by a fence or similar barrier approved by the Common
Council. A drawing showing the proposed location of the enclosed area
shall be included with the application for license at the time such
application is filed with the City Clerk.
10. Security Plan; License Stipulation. Each newly licensed retail Class
“B” (fermented malt beverage) or “Class B” (intoxicating liquor)
premises shall comply with a security plan governing the operation and
use of the premises, which may include the following elements and which
shall become a part of such license when issued:
(a) On Fish Day weekend, provision for security staff that shall be
supervised by a person at work on the premises who holds an
operator’s license.
(b) If less than 50% of the licensed business’s gross receipts are,
or are reasonably expected to be, derived from the sale of
food, installation of functioning digital security imaging
system equipment approved by the Police Department to
record the interior and/or exterior of the premises during
business hours.
(c) Digitally recorded video evidence shall be stored and readily
accessible for at least 30 days.
(d) Licensee to provide police with digital video recordings
immediately upon request, if reasonable cause exists to believe
that a law violation has occurred.
(e) Provision for and maintenance of designated smoking area for
patrons.
(f) Interior and exterior lighting of all areas of premises under
licensee’s control.
(g) Posting regulatory signs, e.g., hours, capacity, video
surveillance, etc. to aid law enforcement.
(h) Meetings with police immediately upon request to address law
enforcement concerns.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 14 9/16/14
(i) Licensee shall accept personal service by mail for any
citations issued to Licensee.
(j) Any other reasonable security measures not enumerated
above.
11. Violation of Plan, Stipulation or Agreement. No licensee may
violate a provision of a Plan of Operation, license stipulation, or
agreement entered into with the City or signed in consideration of a
license being issued by the City under this chapter or Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats. Any person who violates this provision shall be subject to
penalties as provided in Ch. 125, Wis. Stats. or in this chapter.
9.04.080 Closing Hours.
A. No premises for which a wholesale or retail “Class A” liquor license has been
issued shall be permitted to remain open for the sale of liquor:
1. If a wholesale license, between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except on
Saturday, when the closing hour shall be at 9:00 p.m.
2. If a retail license, between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. No premises for which a Retail “Class B” or Class “B” liquor or fermented malt
beverage license has been issued shall be permitted to remain open for the sale of
liquor or fermented malt beverages or for any other purpose between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. except as provided in this paragraph and Paragraph E.
On Saturday and Sunday, the closing hours shall be between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. On January 1, premises operating under a “Class B” or Class “B” license or
permit are not required to close.
C. Between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. no person may sell fermented malt
beverages on Class “B” or “Class B” licensed premises in an original unopened
package, container or bottle or for consumption away from the premises.
D. Class “A” premises may remain open for the conduct of their regular business
but may not sell fermented malt beverages between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
E. Hotels and restaurants, whose principal business is the furnishing of food and
lodging to patrons may remain open for the conduct of their regular business but
may not sell fermented malt beverages during the hours prohibited hereunder.
9.04.090 Posting of License. Every license issued pursuant to this section shall be
posted while in force in a conspicuous place in the room or place where intoxicating
liquors or fermented malt beverages are kept for sale. No person shall post such license or
be permitted to post such, upon premises other than those mentioned in the application, or
knowingly deface or destroy such license or permit, or remove such without the consent
of the licensee or permit holder.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 15 9/16/14
9.04.100 Duplicate License. Whenever a license or permit shall be lost or destroyed
without fault on the part of the holder, his agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof
under the original application shall be issued by the City Clerk upon satisfying himself as
to the facts, and upon the payment of a fee of $5.00.
9.04.110 Transfer of License. Every license or permit issued pursuant to this section,
may, for a fee of $10.00 be transferred by the Common Council from one premises to
another within the City, but no licensee shall be entitled to more than one transfer in any
one license year. No license can be transferred to another premises unless such premises
is already licensed or the premises from which transfer cannot be granted another license
unless the number of licenses in force is less than 19. Whenever a license is transferred,
the licensing authority shall forthwith notify the State Treasurer of such transfer. The
Class “B” fermented malt beverage license and the Class “B” intoxicating liquor license
must be transferred at same time.
9.04.120 License Quotas.
9.04.120 A. Retail “Class B” Intoxicating Liquor Licenses. As provided in Section
125.51 (4), Wisconsin Statutes, the number of licenses available to issue shall be
whichever of the following is the largest:
a. One license per 500 population or fraction thereof.
b. The number of licenses lawfully issued and in force within the City on
August 27, 1939.
c. The number of licenses lawfully issued and in force within the
municipality in the previous year.
9.04.120 B. Retail Class “A” Fermented Malt Beverage Licenses. No Quota.
9.04.120 C. Wholesaler’s Fermented Malt Beverage Licenses. 4.
9.04.130 Revocation, Suspension or Nonrenewal of License.
1. A. Revocation or Suspension; Procedure. Except where a different
procedure may be prescribed by another provision of this chapter, whenever
the holder of any license under this chapter violates any portion of this
chapter or Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., proceedings for the revocation or suspension
of such license may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure
established by Section 125.12, Wis. Stats., and the provisions therein relating
to a refusal to issue a new license shall likewise be applicable. Judicial
review shall be as provided in Section 125.12(2)(d), Wis. Stats.
B. Nonrenewal of License; Procedure. The City may refuse to renew a
license for the causes provided in Section 125.12(2)(ag), Wis. Stats. and/or in
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 16 9/16/14
Section 9.04.130 C. hereof. Prior to the time for the renewal of the license,
the Common Council or the License Committee shall notify the licensee in
writing of the City’s intention not to renew the license and provide the
licensee with an opportunity for a hearing. The notice shall state the reasons
for the intended action. The hearing shall be conducted before the Common
Council as provided in Section 125.12(2)(b), Wis. Stats. Judicial review shall
be as provided in Section 125.12(2)(d), Wis. Stats.
C. Grounds. Licenses may be revoked, suspended or nonrenewed by the
Common Council for any of the causes set forth in Section 125.12(2)(ag),
Wis. Stats., or for any violation of the Municipal Code of the City of Port
Washington, including, but not limited to, the following additional causes:
(1) The making of a material false statement in a license application.
(2) Failure to observe any lawful order of or interference with
police officers, or other law violation substantially related to the
operation of the licensed premises.
(3) Any violation of the health, building, electrical, or plumbing code
provisions of this Municipal Code relating to public health,
safety or welfare which is not repaired after notice of violation.
(4) Any violation of general statutory restrictions pertaining to
licensed premises and operations under Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
(5) Any failure to maintain the qualifications required of licensees
under Section 125.04, Wis. Stats., and as modified by this
chapter or as a condition of granting a license.
(6) Any violation of a license condition or restriction, Plan of
Operation, security plan, license stipulation, or agreement made
by or with the City in consideration of issuance of the license.
2. Search Warrants.
a. When complaint shall be made to the judge of the Circuit Court that
intoxicating liquor is being sold or kept for sale in any particular building
or premises in the City of Port Washington in violation of this section,
said judge, if he or she be satisfied that there is reasonable cause for such
belief, shall issue a warrant to search for such intoxicating liquor.
b. Such warrants shall be directed to any police officer of the City of Port
Washington commanding such officer to search the building or premises
designated and described therein, and to bring before the said judge of the
Circuit Court any such intoxicating liquor found being kept, sold, or kept
for sale in violation of the provisions of this section, and the person in
whose possession the same are found.
c. When any officer, in the execution of a search warrant shall seize any
intoxicating liquor for which a search is authorized by this subsection, all
such property or things shall be safely kept by the direction of the court
so long as shall be necessary for the purpose of being produced as
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 17 9/16/14
evidence on any trial and as soon as may be afterward returned to the
owner, destroyed, or otherwise disposed of as the judge of said court may
direct.
3. Exceptions.
a. No license shall be required for the use of intoxicating liquor in hospitals
or in bona fide institutions for the aged and infirm where such liquor is
used for medicinal, mechanical, or scientific purposes only, or for one
licensed to practice surgery or medicine in using alcohol in any form in
the bona fide treatment of the sick or in using or prescribing such alcohol
for such bona fide treatment.
b. No provision of this chapter shall apply to alcohol intended for use and
used in the manufacture and sale of any of the following when unfit for
beverage purposes, namely:
1. Denatured alcohol produced and used pursuant to acts of
Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder;
2. Patent, proprietary, medicinal, pharmaceutical, antiseptic,
and toilet preparations;
3. Flavoring extracts, syrups, and food products;
4. Scientific Chemical, mechanical and industrial products.
c. Any person who shall knowingly sell any of the products enumerated in
the preceding subdivision for intoxicating beverage purposes, or who shall
sell any of the same under circumstances from which he might reasonably
deduce the intention of the purchaser to use them for such purposes, shall
be guilty of a violation of this section.
d. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any person from
manufacturing wine or beer of any alcoholic content at this home or place
of residence to be consumed by himself, his family, and guests without
compensation.
9.04.140 UNDERAGE PERSONS ON LICENSED PREMISES. Pursuant to §125.07
(3) 8. and 9., Wis. Stats., underage persons are permitted to enter and remain on Class
“B” or “Class B” premises under the following circumstances:
1. The licensee makes application on a form to be provided by the City Clerk for a
written authorization from the Port Washington Police Department permitting
underage persons to be present pursuant to the requirements of Wis. Stats.
§125.07 (3).
2. The licensee stores all alcoholic beverages off the premises or in a locked portion
of the premises during any times when underage persons are allowed to enter or
remain on the licensed premises.
3. The licensee notified the City of Port Washington Police Department, in advance
of the times underage persons will be allowed on the licensed premises.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 18 9/16/14
4. Before issuing the authorization, the Port Washington Police Department shall
make the determination that the presence of underage persons on the licensed
premises will not endanger the health, welfare or safety of any member of the
community.
5. The licensee shall obtain a separate authorization for each date on which
underage persons will be present on the premises. No licensee may obtain more
than one (1) authorization per calendar year.
6. All other requirements of §125.07 (3), Wis. Stats., are complied with.
7. The licensee shall pay a fee of $25.00 for each application for authorization
pursuant to this ordinance. Such fee shall be paid at the time that the application
is made.
9.04.150 Prohibition of Intoxicating Liquor, Cereal Malt Beverage or any Other
Alcoholic Beverage in Sexually Oriented Businesses.
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Sections 9.04.000, et seq. or
9.15.000, et seq. of the Municipal Code, it shall be prohibited in a
sexually oriented business, as defined in Section 9.22.020 of the
Municipal Code, to serve, sell, use, provide or consume any intoxicating
liquor, cereal malt beverage or any other alcoholic beverage.
B. Penalties. Any person who, or any proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership,
association, or other legal entity which, violates any of the provisions of
this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) plus court costs and assessments per violation. A separate
offense and violation shall be deemed committed on each day on which a
violation occurs or continues. In addition, a violation of this ordinance
constitutes sufficient grounds for suspending, revoking or non-renewing
an alcohol beverage license under Section 125.12 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and Sections 9.04.130 of the Municipal Code.
9.05.000 TAXICABS.
9.05.010 Taxicabs Defined. Except for carriages licensed under Sections 9.23.00, et
seq., and except for vehicles, which operate on established routes regulated by the Public
Service Commission of Wisconsin, the term “taxicab” as used herein shall include all
vehicles carrying passengers for hire for which public patronage is solicited.
9.05.020 Taxicab License. No taxicab shall be operated upon the streets of this City
until a license therefore shall have been obtained from the Common Council.
9.05.030 Application for License. Application for license for taxicabs shall be made by
the owner thereof upon blank forms to be furnished by the City Clerk. Such application
shall contain the full name and address of the owner, the make, model and year of
manufacture, the Wisconsin State license number for the current year, engine number,
factory number of the motor vehicle.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 19 9/16/14
9.05.040 Public Convenience and Necessity. Whenever any applicant for a license shall
have complied with all conditions and regulations relative to the filing of the application,
the City Clerk shall forward said application to the Common Council for a public hearing
thereon to determine the public convenience and necessity. Notice of hearing shall be
given to all persons interested, including the owner of the vehicle, at least ten (10) days
before the date set for such hearing. The kind of notice, place of hearing and all facts
connected with or relating to such hearing shall be regulated by the Common Council.
The Common Council may issue or refuse such license as the public welfare,
convenience, or necessity may require, and shall refuse to issue a license when it shall
find that transportation facilities already are available and adequate to meet the public
need.
9.05.050 Renewal. A license issued hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year
but shall be subject to renewal without a further determination of public convenience and
necessity.
9.05.060 License Fees. The fee for a license hereunder shall be $10.00 per year or
fraction thereof for each licensed vehicle.
9.05.070 Insurance. No license to operate a taxicab shall be issued unless the owner
shall have filed with the City Clerk an insurance policy issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the State of Wisconsin, providing insurance coverage for such
taxicab (which must be specifically described in the policy) with a maximum liability of
$250,000 for the injury or death of any one person and $500,000 for injury or death of
any number of persons in any one accident, and $10,000 for property damage in any one
accident, which policy or policies shall insure said owner against his legal liability for
damage to the property of others, including baggage, but excluding property of the
assured or property hired or leased by the assured and for the bodily injury or death of
others, except to employees of the assured engaged in the course of their employment
resulting from the accident of collision, for which said owner or the operator of said
vehicle would be liable on account of the liability imposed upon said owner or upon the
operator of said vehicle for any acts of negligence of the said owner or of his agents or
servants or of any person operating said vehicle with the permission and consent of said
owner.
Said policy shall further provide that it cannot be cancelled until 20 days notice of such
cancellation shall have been given by registered mail to the City Clerk. The cancellation
or other termination of any insurance policy issued in compliance with this subsection
shall automatically revoke and terminate all licenses issued for the taxicab covered by
such insurance policy, unless another such policy shall be provided and in effect at the
time of such cancellation or termination.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 20 9/16/14
The owner of any such taxicab, at the time of filing with the City Clerk said insurance
policy, shall also file a receipted bill from the insurance company issuing said policy
showing that the premium for said policy for one year has been paid in full.
9.05.080 Inspection. No vehicle shall be licensed until it has been thoroughly and
carefully examined by the Chief of Police, or such person as he may designate, and found
to be in a thoroughly satisfactory and safe condition for the transportation of passengers,
clean, of good appearance, well painted, and that said vehicle complies with all the other
provisions of this section. Such examination shall be made and a report filed with the
City Clerk before the license is issued. If such examination and inspection shows that
such vehicle does not comply with any one or more of the provisions of this section, no
license shall be issued.
9.05.090 Register. The City Clerk shall keep a register of the name of each person
owning or operating any vehicle licensed under this section, together with the license
number and description, make, and the name and address of the insurance companies and
the date of the expiration of such insurance and furnish the Chief of Police with a copy
thereof. The records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable times.
9.05.100 Revocation. Licenses granted under this section may be suspended or revoked
at any time by the Common Council for any violations of any of the provisions of this
section and also if the vehicle for which said license was issued shall not be of good
appearance, clean and safe. Licenses suspended or revoked because the vehicle is not of
good appearance, clean or safe shall not be reissued until the vehicle shall be put in good
condition for use by the public to the satisfaction of the Common Council.
When a taxicab license is revoked or cancelled as herein provided, it shall be the duty of
the City Clerk to immediately notify the owner to cease at once to operate the vehicle for
which the license has been revoked as a taxicab.
9.05.110 Suspension. All licenses to operate taxicabs issued to any person as provided
by this section shall be suspended automatically for a period of 15 days upon said person,
his agents, servants or employees being convicted of a violation of any of the provisions
of this section or section 9.06.
9.05.120 Taxicab Regulations.
A. License Non-Transferable. Licenses issued or granted under this section shall be
non-assignable and non-transferable.
B. Identification Required. The serial number of said licenses shall be printed or
painted on each side and on the rear of each taxicab, in figures at least 2 inches
high and ¼ inch wide, at a point not lower than ½ the height of the taxicab. The
name of the owner of each taxicab shall be printed on both sides and rear of each
cab in like letters.
C. Fares to be Posted. Each taxicab shall have a card on which shall be printed in
plain legible figures the fares charged, posted in a conspicuous place inside the
cab in plain sight of passengers.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 21 9/16/14
D. No person operating, owning or controlling any vehicle licensed hereunder,
except for any shared ride taxi operated by the City of Port Washington or any
other political subdivision of the United States or the State of Wisconsin, shall
stop to pick up any passenger at any point between the point of original pick up
and the destination of the original passenger unless consented to by said
passenger. Any shared ride taxi operated by the City of Port Washington or as
other political subdivisions of the United States Government, or the State of
Wisconsin, may stop to pick up any passenger at any point between the point of
original pick up and the destination of the original passenger without the consent
or permission of the original passenger.
E. Inspection by Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall have the authority at all
times to inspect taxicabs, drivers, and the quality of service of taxicab owners
and drivers.
F. Condition of Cars-Report Periodically. The brakes, horn, lights and tires of
every motor vehicle used for hire under this section shall be examined and tested
as to sufficiency at least once every 90 days by a reliable garage keeper who shall
furnish a certificate as to the examination of said motor vehicle, and the
sufficiency of its brakes, horn, lights and tires, which certificate shall be filed in
the office of the City Clerk.
G. Drivers to be Licensed. No person licensed hereunder shall employ as a driver of
any taxicab any person other than a driver duly licensed under Section 9.06.000.
9.05.130 Fraud in Obtaining License. No person shall give any false information or
practice any fraud, misrepresentation, or subterfuge, to secure a license hereunder.
9.05.140 Doctor’s Certificate Required. No person shall be granted an operator’s
license pursuant to Sec. 66.054 (11), Wis. Stats., or 176.05, Wis. Stats., unless with his
original application for such license, and every second year thereafter commencing
January 1, 1974, there is submitted a doctor’s certificate certifying freedom from any
communicable disease not more than 20 days prior to such application being filed.
9.06.000 TAXICAB DRIVER’S LICENSES.
9.06.010 Requirements. Every person driving a taxicab must be licensed as such and
each applicant for a driver’s license must fulfill the following requirements:
1. Be at least 18 years of age.
2. Be of sound physique, with good eye-sight, and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo,
heart trouble, or any other infirmity of body or mind which might render him unfit
for the safe operation of the vehicle.
3. Be able to speak, read, and write the English language plainly.
4. Be clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or
habit-forming drugs.
5. Produce on forms to be provided by the City Clerk, through the Chief of Police,
affidavits of his good character from two reputable citizens of the City who have
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 22 9/16/14
known him personally and observed his conduct frequently during one year next
preceding the date of his application, and also a further testimonial from his last
employer.
6. Fill out upon a blank form to be provided by the City Clerk through the Chief of
Police, a statement giving his full name, including his full first name, his
residence or places of residence for 3 years previous to his moving to his present
address, his age, color, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, length of time
he has resided in the City, whether a citizen of the United States, place of
previous employment, whether married or single, whether he has ever been
convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor, whether he has ever been previously
licensed as a driver or chauffeur, and if so, when and by what authority, whether
his license has ever been revoked or suspended, and if so, for what cause, which
statement must be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed with the City
Clerk and kept as a permanent record. Such application must have endorsed upon
it the approval or disapproval of the Chief of Police and recommendation of the
Common Council.
7. Each applicant for a driver’s license under the provisions of this section shall be
examined by a person designated by the Chief of Police as to his knowledge of
and his compliance with all the provisions of this chapter, and the traffic
regulations, and if the result of this examination be unsatisfactory, he shall be
refused a license.
9.06.020 Fee. The fee for a driver’s license shall be $5.00 for the first year or fraction
thereof, to be returned upon the return of the badge. Every driver’s license shall expire
on December 31. Driver’s licenses shall be approved by the Council and signed by the
Mayor and the City Clerk.
9.06.030 Record of City Clerk. There shall be kept by the City Clerk a complete record
of each license issued to a driver and of all renewals, suspensions, and revocations
thereof, which record shall be kept on file with the original application of the driver for a
license.
9.06.040 Badge. There shall be delivered to each licensed driver a metal badge of such
form and style as the City Council may prescribe, with the license number thereon, which
badge must, under penalty of revocation of the license be constantly and conspicuously
displayed on the driver’s coat or outer garments while he is engaged in his employment.
No driver shall loan his badge or permit for another person to use the same.
9.06.050 Revocation and Suspension. A driver’s license may be suspended or revoked
at any time for a violation of any provision of this section, or for any cause deemed
sufficient by the Common Council, or the judge of any court in which such driver is
convicted of any offense, and the driver thereupon shall be deprived of his badge by the
authority suspending or revoking his license. When the license is suspended or revoked
by any official other than the Common Council, the driver’s badge and a record of such
suspension or revocation shall forthwith be forwarded to the Common Council. If the
penalty is suspension of license, the badge will be returned to the driver at the expiration
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 23 9/16/14
of the period for which the suspension was made. A second suspension for the same
reason, or a third suspension for any cause shall automatically revoke the driver’s license.
A driver whose license has once been revoked may again be licensed as a driver in the
City, providing a new license is granted by the Common Council. Where a license has
been suspended or revoked by the court, or a judge thereof, the approval of such court or
judge shall be necessary for the restoration or reissue of such license. Where any driver’s
license shall be suspended or revoked by the Common Council, the Chief of Police shall
immediately be notified thereof.
9.06.060 Regulations.
A. Drivers to Wear Caps. The driver of each taxicab shall wear a cap at all times
while operating a taxicab, with the name of the owner of said taxicab legibly
printed thereon.
B. Drivers to Report Accidents. Every driver of a taxicab shall report to the Chief
of Police, within 12 hours after the happening thereof, any accident involving
any injury to persons or damage to property wherein his vehicle is involved.
9.06.070 Fraud in Obtaining License. No person shall give any false information or
practice any fraud, misrepresentation, or subterfuge, to secure a license hereunder.
9.07.000 DIRECT SALES AND SOLICITATIONS.
9.07.010 Registration Required. It shall be unlawful for any direct seller or solicitor to
engage in direct sales or solicitations within the City of Port Washington without being
registered and licensed for that purpose as provided herein.
9.07.020 Definitions. In this ordinance:
1. “Direct Seller” means any individual who, for him/herself, or for a partnership,
association or corporation, sells goods or services or takes sales orders for the
later delivery of goods or services at any location other than the permanent
business place or residence of said individual, partnership, association or
corporation, and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, canvassers and
transient merchants. The sale of goods and services includes donations
requested or required by the direct seller for the retention of goods or services
by a donor or prospective customer.
2. “Permanent merchant” means a direct seller or one representing a merchant
who, for at least one year prior to the submission of an application pursuant to
this ordinance, has continuously operated an established place of business in this
City or has continuously resided in this City and now does business from his/her
residence.
3. “Goods” shall include personal property of any kind and shall include goods
provided incidental to services offered or sold.
4. “Solicitor” means any individual who, for him/herself or for any other person,
organization, society, association or corporation, personally solicits money,
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 24 9/16/14
property or financial assistance of any kind from persons other than members of
such organization, society, association or corporation.
5. “Charitable organization” shall mean any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic
or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation for which there
is provided proof of tax-exempt status pursuant to Sec. 501 (c) (3) or (4) of the
United States Internal Revenue Code.
6. “Clerk” shall mean the City Clerk.
7. “Applicant” shall mean each individual applying for registration and licensing
as a direct seller or solicitor.
8. “Registrant” shall mean each individual registered by the Clerk and to whom a
license has been issued.
9.07.030 Exemptions.
A. The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this ordinance:
1. Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods
to regular customers on established routes.
2. Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealer in such goods.
3. Any farmer or truck gardener selling agricultural products of the farm or
garden occupied or cultivated by such person.
4. Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away
from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale
by such merchant within this county and who delivers such goods in their
regular course of business.
5. Any person who has an established place of business where the goods
being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis and in which the buyer
has initiated contact with and specifically requested a home visit by said
person.
6. Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has
had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with a prospective customer.
7. Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and
any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
8. Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whose
complaint has been made to the Clerk that such person is a transient
merchant; provided that there is submitted to the Clerk, proof that such
person has purchased or leased for at least one year the premises from
which he/she is conducting business or proof that such person has
conducted such business in this city for at least one year prior to the date
complaint was made.
B. Charitable organizations shall be exempt from the requirements set forth
in 9.07.040 A and C and 9.07.060 if the organization has provided the
individual representing it with credentials stating the name of the
organization, the name of the representative and the purpose of the
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 25 9/16/14
solicitation and provided, further, that said individuals provide the Clerk
with the following information:
1. The individual’s name and permanent address.
2. The name and address of the organization represented.
3. The name and address of the officers or directors of the
organization.
4. The nature of the sales or solicitations.
5. Proposed dates and time of sales or solicitations.
A license operative for the dates provided to the Clerk shall be issued without charge
upon compliance with the foregoing. The Clerk shall then forward the information and
notice of the issuance of a license to the Chief of Police.
C. Any religious organizations for which there is provided proof of taxexempt
status pursuant to Sec. 501 (c) (3) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code shall be exempt from the requirements set forth in 9.07.040
A and C, and 9.07.060. The provisions of subsection (3) (b) above shall
be applicable to such organizations.
D. Any veteran who holds a special state license pursuant to Sec. 440.82 (2),
Stats., shall be exempt from the provisions of 9.07.040 and 9.07.060
provided that such veteran provides the Clerk with the following
information:
1. The veteran’s name and permanent address.
2. The nature of the sales or solicitations.
3. Proposed dates and times of sales or solicitations.
The Clerk shall then forward the above information to the Chief of Police.
9.07.040 Registration Requirements.
A. Applicants for licenses must complete and return to the Clerk a registration
form furnished by the Clerk which shall require the following information:
1. Name, permanent address, telephone number and temporary address,
if any.
2. Date of Birth, height, weight, and color of hair and eyes.
3. Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm association
or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed by or
whose merchandise is being sold.
4. Temporary address and telephone number from which sales or
solicitations will be conducted, if any.
5. Nature of sales or solicitations to be conducted and a brief description
of the goods and/or services offered.
6. Proposed dales and times of sales or solicitations.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 26 9/16/14
7. Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable.
8. Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by
applicant in the conduct of sales or solicitations.
9. Last 3 cities, villages and towns where applicant conducted similar
sales or solicitations.
10. Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after
leaving the City.
11. Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or
ordinance violation related to applicant’s sales or solicitations or other
transient merchant activities within the last five years, the nature of
the offense and the place of conviction.
B. Applicants shall present the following items to the Clerk for examination.
1. A driver’s license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required.
2. A State certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of
weights and measures where applicant’s business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by State authorities.
3. A State health officer’s certificate where applicant’s business involves
the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under
State law; such certificate to state that applicant is apparently free
from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90
days prior to the date the application for license is made.
C. No application shall be processed until the application fee has been paid to the
Clerk to cover the cost of processing said application. Said fee shall be $15.00.
D. No application shall be processed until the applicant signs a statement appointing
the Clerk his/her agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought
against the applicant arising out of any sale, service performed or solicitation by
the applicant in connection with the direct sales or solicitation activities of the
applicant in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served
personally.
9.07.050 Investigation; Denial of Application.
A. Upon receipt of a completed registration form, the Clerk shall immediately
refer it to the Chief of Police to make an investigation.
B. The Clerk shall refuse to issue a license to the applicant for any of the
following reasons:
1. The application contains any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 27 9/16/14
2. Complaints of a material nature have been received against the
applicant by authorities in any of the last three cities, villages or towns
in which the applicant conducted similar business.
3. The applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or
ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is
directly related to the applicant’s fitness to engage in direct selling or
solicitations.
4. The applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of
9.07.040.
C. Any person denied application for a license may appeal such action by filing
with the Common Council within 14 days after written notice of the denial a
written statement requesting a hearing and setting forth the grounds for the
appeal. The Common Council shall set a time and place for the hearing. Written
notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the applicant at least
72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing.
9.07.060 Registration and Issuance of Licenses.
A. Upon compliance with the foregoing requirements, filing of a bond and
payment of the license fee as hereinafter set forth the Clerk shall register the
applicant as a direct seller or solicitor and issue a license to the applicant. The
license shall be operative only during the days requested on the registration form.
B. Such license shall contain the signature of the Clerk, the name and address of
the direct seller or solicitor, the type of goods or services being sold or the nature
of the solicitation, the dates during which the license is operative and the license
number of any vehicle used for sales or solicitation.
C. Registrants shall exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen or police
officer.
D. Every applicant shall pay a license fee of $5.00 per day.
9.07.070 Regulation of Direct Sellers and Solicitors.
A. Prohibited Practices:
1. A direct seller or solicitor shall be prohibited from:
Calling at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m. except by appointment.
Calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing
the words “No Peddlers”, “No Solicitors” or words of similar meaning.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 28 9/16/14
Calling at the rear door of any dwelling place.
Remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner,
occupant or other person having authority over such premises.
2. A direct seller or solicitor shall not misrepresent or make false,
deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or
character of any goods or services offered for sale, the purpose of
his/her visit, his/her identity of the organization he/she represents. A
direct seller representing a charitable or religious organization shall
specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being
offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the
individual is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as a percentage
of the sale price of the goods or services.
3. No direct seller or solicitor shall impede the free use of sidewalks and
streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales or solicitations are
made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be
observed. No direct seller or solicitor shall have any exclusive right to
any location in the public streets, nor shall any be permitted a
stationary location thereon in excess of 15 minutes, nor shall any be
permitted to operate in a congested area where such operations might
impede or inconvenience the public use of such streets. Any move
from a stationary location shall be to a place not less than 100 feet
from such location, and the seller or solicitor shall not return to within
100 feet of any previous occupied location within 4 hours of having
moved from said location. For the purpose of this section, the
judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested and the public impeded
or inconvenienced.
4. No direct seller or solicitor shall make any loud noises or use any
sound amplifying device to attract customers or donors if the noise
produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a one-hundred foot
radius of the source.
5. No direct seller or solicitor shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate
in or around the area in which he/she is conducting business or making
solicitations.
B. Disclosure Requirements. The following requirements shall govern the conduct
of registrants:
1. After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a
prospective customer or donor, a direct seller or solicitor shall
expressly disclose his/her name, the name of the company or
organization he/she is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of goods
or services he/she offers to sell.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 29 9/16/14
2. If any sale of goods or services is made by a direct seller, or any sales
for the later delivery of goods or services is taken by the seller, the
buyer shall have the right to cancel said transaction if it involves the
extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25, if
accordance with the procedure as set forth in Sec. 423.203, Stats., the
seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of
that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of Sections
423.203 (1) (b) and (c), (2) and (3), Stats.
3. If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods,
he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a
written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the amount
paid in advance, whether full, partial or no advance payment is made;
the name, address and telephone number of the seller; the delivery or
performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided
and, if so, the terms thereof.
9.07.080 Records of Violations. The Chief of Police shall report to the Clerk all
convictions for violations of this ordinance and the Clerk shall note any such violation on
the record of the registrant convicted. The Clerk shall note any complaint or report of an
alleged violation made by a resident of this City or a police officer.
9.07.090 Revocation of License.
A. The registrant’s license may be revoked by the Common Council after notice
and hearing if the registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate
statement in the application for registration, made any fraudulent, false, deceptive
or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sales
or solicitation, violated any provision of this ordinance or was convicted of any
crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the
registrant’s fitness to engage in direct selling or solicitations.
B. Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the registrant at
least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain the
time and place of hearing and a statement of the acts or omissions upon which the
hearing will be based.
9.07.100 Severance Clause. The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be
severable, and if any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any
reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance; they shall
remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this ordinance shall stand
notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
9.08.000 FUND SOLICITORS.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 30 9/16/14
9.08.010 Permit Required. No person representing or pretending to represent, directly
or indirectly, or using the name of any lodge, club, charitable, philanthropic, educational,
patriotic, political or labor organization or any other association or society shall solicit
funds from the public for any purpose through the sale of tickets, tags, contributions,
advertising, or any other method where such person shares or receives, directly or
indirectly any part of such fund for such solicitation and promotion without having first
secured a permit to do so from the City Clerk and paid the fee of $7.00 per person
therefore, and no such permit shall be issued except on written application therefore,
which shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of the person, association or corporation making such
application and if an association or corporation, the certificate or resolution of
authorization from its governing board.
2. The name of the organization or society for whose benefit such solicitation
and promotion is to be carried on, together with the names and addresses of
the president and secretary, the location of the room or meeting place thereof
and a certificate or resolution of such organization consenting to the
enterprise.
3. The nature of the entertainment or enterprise proposed, the date and place
thereof and general plan of organization, the price of tickets, tags,
subscriptions and contributions and the plan and methods to be followed in
the sale or solicitation thereof.
4. The method of distribution of the funds or proceeds from any such
undertaking, including the names of the promoters and the organizations
represented, or under whose auspices the enterprise is conducted or purported
to be conducted and the respective percentage or amounts to be distributed or
allotted to each.
5. The names and addresses of 3 bona fide residents of the City as references.
9.08.020 Exceptions to Fee. In the case of solicitation by the regularly constituted and
duly authorized members of associations or organizations having nonprofit or exempt
status pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code, and where the entire funds or proceeds
derived from the solicitation for enterprises described in 9.08.010, go and belong to such
organization, the fee for each person shall be $2.00.
9.08.030 Cause for Revocation. Any misrepresentation or misstatement of a required
fact in said application shall be a ground for withholding or revocation of such permit by
the Common Council.
9.09.000 CLOSING OUT SALES-This entire section is repealed.
9.10.000 AMUSEMENT LICENSE.
9.10.010 License Required. Any person owning, conducting or managing for gain
within the City, any circus, or other performance, exhibition, theater, show, amusement,
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 31 9/16/14
concert, or musical entertainment shall obtain a license. This section shall not require a
license for a lecture on a scientific, moral, educational or literary subject, or for a concert
of music, given exclusively for a scientific, moral, educational, or literary object or for
any lecture, concert, performance, exhibition or show given or made by citizens of the
City none of whom makes a vocation of providing such amusement.
9.10.020 Application. Every application for a license required by this section shall be
made upon a blank furnished by the City Clerk and verified and shall contain the name,
place of residence, age and occupation of the applicant, the purpose for which a license is
desired and the place where and the time for which he proposes to carry on, conduct or
manage within the City any circus, exhibition, theater, show, amusement, concert,
musical entertainment or other performance. The City Clerk shall issue a license to the
applicant upon his compliance with this section upon payment of the proper fees.
9.10.030 Fees. The license fees shall be as follows:
1. Theaters and movie houses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $100.00/Yr.
2. Each coin-operated amusement machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . .$ 10.00/Yr.
3. Each circus, per appearance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $100.00
4. Each carnival, per day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 15.00
5. All others, per day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 10.00
9.10.040 Suspension. Any license granted herewith may be suspended by the Mayor
when such suspension is reasonably necessary for the preservation of decorum or the
public peace, by giving notice of such suspension to the licensee thereof, or anyone
apparently in charge of the hall, performance, theater, exhibition or show licensed, or the
person in charge of the premises upon which the same is located. The Mayor shall report
such suspension to the Common Council at its next regular meeting and such suspension
shall continue as long as the Mayor shall deem such suspension necessary unless the
Common Council shall order the suspension to be terminated. No license fee, or part
thereof, shall be refunded for any time such suspension was in operation.
9.11.000 SALE OF WEAPONS.
9.11.010 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of selling, or shall
sell or give away to any person, within the City, any blackjack, slingshot, billy, sandclub,
sandbag, bludgeon, metal knuckles, martial arts and karate-type weapons, revolver,
pistol, air rifle or other instrument or weapon which uses loaded or blank cartridges,
except rifles and shotguns used for hunting purposes, without securing a license so to do
as herein provided, and no person having such license shall sell or give away any such
weapons to any person within the City who has not secured a permit from the Chief of
Police to purchase such weapon in the manner herein provided.
9.11.020 Application for License. Any person desiring a license authorizing the sale of
any of the weapons or other articles mentioned in 9.11.010, shall make application to the
City Clerk in writing, setting out in such application the full name and residence of the
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 32 9/16/14
applicant, if an individual, and if a firm or corporation, the name and residence of each of
its members or officers. Such applicant shall also set out the location at which it is
intended or desired to conduct such business. Upon the receipt of such application the
City Clerk shall refer such application to the License Committee pursuant to Section
9.01.
9.11.030 Issuance. Upon approval of the application by the Common Council and
payment of an annual license of $5.00, the City Clerk shall issue the license.
9.11.040 Daily Report on Sales. Every person who is licensed to deal in the foregoing
weapons and other articles described in 9.11.010, shall make out and deliver to the Chief
of Police every day before 12:00 o’clock noon a legible and correct report of every sale
or gift made under authority of said license during the preceding 24 hours, which report
shall contain the date of such sale or gift, the name of the purchaser or donor, with his or
her address and age, the number, the kind, description and price of such weapon, the
number of the purchaser’s permit and the purpose for the purchase of such weapon. No
person engaged in the buying or selling of such deadly weapons, in wholesale or job-lots,
need make the above mentioned report, but such person shall permit the Chief of Police
to examine his books at any time.
9.11.050 Permit to Purchase. No person shall purchase or possess any of the weapons or
articles enumerated in subsection (1) until he has obtained a permit for such purpose from
the Chief of Police.
9.11.060 Revocation. The Common Council may revoke any permit or license issued
hereunder for cause after notice to the permitee or licensee and opportunity to be heard.
9.12.000 MILK DISTRIBUTOR. See 10.03.000 of this Code.
9.13.000 CIVIC FUNCTIONS AND PROMOTIONS. The Common Council may by
majority vote to issue a license to an organization for the purpose of conducting civic
functions or promotions and may authorize said organization to control concessions,
entertainment, parade and marching units, and allied activities, and to make charges
therefore, but such charges shall be subject to prior approval by the Finance Committee
of the City of Port Washington. Said organization shall have the opportunity to prescribe
such reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem advisable, and, when approved by
the Common Council of the City of Port Washington, shall have the same force and
effect as an act of the Common Council and may be enforced as though it were an act of
the Common Council.
9.14.000 DOGS. All dogs required to be licensed by State Statute shall be immunized
against rabies. Statutory evidence of such vaccination shall be presented to the City
Treasurer before issuance of any dog license.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 33 9/16/14
9.14.010 Dog and Cat Licenses. Except as provided in Wis. Stats. §174/054, the owner
of a dog or cat more than five (5) months of age on January 1 of any year, or five (5)
months of age within the licensed year, shall annually pay a dog or cat license tax and
obtain a license from the City Clerk. Fees for said licenses shall be as set forth in Wis.
Stats. §174.05 through 174.09.
9.15.000 CABARET LICENSE AND PERMIT.
9.15.010 Cabaret Establishments.
A. Regulation; License Required. No person or alcohol beverage licensee shall
suffer, cause or permit the operation or conduct of a cabaret except in strict
compliance with this section, and without first having obtained a license therefor
from the Common Council.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
1. Cabaret. A restaurant, tavern, bar or any similar business, other than an adult
cabaret as defined in sec. 9.22.020(s) of the Municipal Code, having all of the
following characteristics:
a. Serves alcoholic or non-alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages;
b. Provides musical or other entertainment or performance (such as
singers or dancers), whether live or recorded;
c. Provides space for dancing of patrons.
2. Cabaret Establishment. A location where the primary or secondary business
function is to operate or conduct a cabaret.
3. Patron. A customer or other person present at a cabaret establishment by
invitation or with the permission of the cabaret owner, operator, proprietor,
manager or lessee (or his agents or employees), whether or not such customer
or person has paid money, purchased anything of value or provided any other
consideration to enter or remain on the premises.
9.15.020 License Procedures.
A. Application. Upon sworn written application filed with the City Clerk on
forms the Clerk shall prescribe, and upon payment of the fee therefor, a cabaret
license may be granted or renewed by the Common Council for a premises,
subject to the conditions and restrictions set forth in Section 9.15.040 of this
ordinance. Whenever anything shall occur to change any fact or information set
forth in the application, the applicant or licensee shall file with the City Clerk a
written notice of such change within ten (10) days after the occurrence. The
application shall include:
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 34 9/16/14
1. The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers of the proposed
cabaret establishment.
2. The full name, current address and telephone number of the person or entity
owning the premises for which a license is requested.
3. For an individual or for each partner of a partnership or limited liability
partnership, each member of a limited liability company, each party to a joint
venture, and each agent of a corporation or other entity.:
a. Full name, current address and telephone number.
b. The last two addresses and dates of residence at each, for the threeyear
period immediately preceding the date of application.
c. Date of birth, height, weight, color of hair and eyes and social security
number.
d. The business or occupation for the three-year period immediately
preceding the date of application.
e. Whether the applicant has, within the three-year period immediately
preceding the date of application, been licensed to operate or conduct a
cabaret in this City or elsewhere.
f. Where and for what period the applicant operated or conducted such
cabaret under such license.
g. Whether a cabaret or similar license issued to the applicant has been
nonrenewed, suspended or revoked and, if so, a listing of the locations,
dates and explanation of the circumstances thereof.
h. Whether the applicant has been convicted of violating any law or
ordinance regulating the operation or conduct of a cabaret.
4. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of each officer,
director and shareholder of such corporation, together with the extent of the
ownership of each, and a statement whether such officer, director or
shareholder holds office or stock in any other corporation operating or
conducting a similar business in the State of Wisconsin. An agent registered
as such with the State of Wisconsin shall make such application.
5. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all persons employed by the
applicant at the proposed cabaret establishment at the time of application.
6. Certification of compliance of the proposed premises with all zoning,
building, fire, health, safety and sanitation ordinances and regulations of the
Municipal Code of the City of Port Washington and all such laws, codes and
regulations of the State of Wisconsin; or, in the alternative, as to building
alterations, applicant shall file a bond assuring that any work required to be
done to bring the premises into compliance therewith shall be accomplished
prior to the opening or continuation of the business.
7. A statement signed by the applicant and each partner of a partnership or
limited liability partnership, each member of a limited liability company, each
party to a joint venture, and each agent of a corporation or other entity that all
information contained in the application is true and correct.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 35 9/16/14
B. Fees. The fee for an annual license shall be one hundred dollars ($100). The
fee for applications approved during the year shall be prorated so that the portion
of the total annual fee due shall be determined in the same proportion which the
remaining number of months (or portions thereof) in the license year bears to 12.
A license for one (1) day only requires the payment of a fee of fifteen dollars
($15). No fees shall be refunded if a license is denied, non-renewed, suspended
or revoked.
C. License Period; Expiration. An annual cabaret license shall automatically
expire on the 30th day of June following the date of its issuance. A license for one
(1) day only shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on the date for which it was issued.
D. Time For Filing Application; Late Fee. Applications for a cabaret license
shall be filed with the City Clerk at least fifteen (15) days before the Common
Council may act on such license. Renewal licenses shall be applied for by June 1
of each year or be subject to a late filing fee of 15% of the license fee. Payment
of a late fee shall not entitle any applicant of premises to issuance of a renewal
license, and shall not relieve any person or entity from any other penalties
prescribed by these ordinances for failure to possess or obtain a license.
E. Publication of Notice. Notice of the filing of a cabaret license application
shall be published in a weekly newspaper published in the City of Port
Washington, and such publication shall be made at least once prior to the
Common Council acting thereon. The notice shall include the name and address
of the applicant, the kind of license applied for and the location of the proposed
cabaret establishment.
9.15.030 Granting of License.
A. Referral to Licensing Committee; Investigation. An Application for the
granting or renewal of a cabaret license shall be referred by the City Clerk to the
License Committee. The License Committee shall thereupon make an
investigation as to the advisability of granting or renewing such license, and shall
within a reasonable period report its findings and recommendation to the
Common Council. The License Committee shall have the assistance of the
Police, Fire and Building Inspection Departments in making such investigation,
including, but not limited to, in the discretion of the Police Department,
requesting information from the State, other municipalities and/or any community
where the applicant has previously resided or operated a cabaret or similar
business, concerning the applicant’s arrest and conviction record. Such
Departments shall furnish written recommendations to the License Committee
and to the City Clerk as to issuance of such license, together with the information
derived from such investigation. No license shall be granted, issued or renewed
by the Common Council or City Clerk until a recommendation of the License
Committee is heard.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 36 9/16/14
B. Action on Application. Upon hearing the recommendation of the License
Committee, the Common Council may act upon a cabaret license application at
any regular or special meeting. However, the Common Council may act upon
only those license applications that have been timely filed, are complete and in
proper form, and for which all fees have been paid. If the Common Council
decides to deny a new license, the City Clerk shall, within ten (10) days after such
denial, send written notification thereof to the applicant setting forth the reason (s)
for such denial.
C. Standards for Denial, Nonrenewal, Suspension or Revocation. The
Common Council may deny or refuse to renew a cabaret license, or, if such
license has been issued and is in effect, may suspend or revoke such license if any
one or more of the following are shown, which shall constitute good cause:
1. Operation of or conduct on the premises as proposed by the applicant or as
actually occurring does not comply with all applicable zoning, building, fire,
health, safety, sanitation and other ordinances and regulations of the
Municipal Code of the City of Port Washington and all such laws, codes and
regulations of the State of Wisconsin; or, in the alternative, as to building
alterations, applicant shall file a bond assuring that any work required to be
done to bring the premises into compliance therewith shall be accomplished
prior to the opening of business. Compliance therewith shall be determined
by appropriate City or State departments or staff, and shall be a condition
precedent to the opening or continuation of the business. No alterations,
changes or additions shall be made to a licensed premises without first
obtaining a permit for such alterations, changes or additions from the Building
Inspector.
2. An application form was not timely filed; is incomplete or in improper form;
or lacks payment of the required fee.
3. Any applicant has knowingly or with intent to deceive made any false,
misleading or fraudulent statements of fact in the application form or in any
other document required by the City in conjunction therewith.
4. The applicant does not possess the qualifications required under this chapter
to hold a cabaret license.
5. The applicant has violated any provision of this chapter; or that he keeps or
maintains a disorderly or riotous, indecent or improper house; or that he has
sold or given away any intoxicant to any underage person, or to persons
intoxicated or bordering on intoxication, or to known habitual drunkards; or
that he has not observed and obeyed any order of the Common Council or
police officers of the City made pursuant to law or for other good reason.
6. The granting, renewal or continuation of such cabaret license is against the
public interests and welfare of the community, either because of the
unsuitability of the location, undesirability or unreliability of the applicant,
licensee or his manager or agent, or because of the failure of the applicant,
licensee or his manager or agent to observe the provisions of this chapter in
the operation or conduct of a cabaret.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 37 9/16/14
9.15.040 Restrictions. The following restrictions shall apply:
1. No dancing shall be permitted within six (6) feet of a bar or counter over which
patrons are directly served food or beverages.
2. While dancing is in progress, the dance area shall be illuminated by at least 2-
foot candles per square foot.
3. The licensee or his agent shall obey all reasonable orders or directions of any
police officer.
4. The performance of any act, stunt or dance by performers upon the licensed
premises shall be given only on a raised portion of the floor separated from the
patrons by a railing or other device at least two (2) feet in height.
5. No licensee or his agent or employee shall permit any patron to participate in any
act, stunt or dance with performers.
6. No licensee shall permit any entertainer employed on the premises, other than a
musician, to sit at any table or in any booth or to fraternize elsewhere on the
premises with patrons.
7. No licensee or his agent or employee shall permit any entertainer, except a
musician, to perform on the licensed premises who is not 21 years of age or over.
Prior to said entertainer performing in the City of Port Washington, the licensee
shall file with the City Clerk on a form to be prescribed by said Clerk, the name,
age, last permanent address, booking agent, if any and list of arrests for
misdemeanors or felonies, if any. The establishment of the following by the
licensee shall constitute prima facie evidence of innocence as a defense to any
prosecution hereunder.
That the performer has executed a sworn affidavit to the facts set forth in the form
filed with the Clerk and said affidavit is filed with the Clerk.
That the licensee acted in good faith in reliance upon such sworn affidavit.
8. Separate and private dressing room facilities on the premises shall be provided
for any such entertainer.
9. All persons involved in the operation of any licensed premises under this section,
whether as licensee, member of the immediate family of the licensee, licensed
operator, unlicensed operator under the supervision of the licensee or licensed
operator, waiter, waitress, entertainer, dancer or other employee, shall observe
the following applicable minimum standards for such licensed premises:
The costume, uniform or attire of any person involved in the operation of a
licensed premises as set forth herein shall be of a fully opaque material and must
completely cover the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal
cleft and buttocks at all times. The costume, uniform or attire of any female
person involved in the operation of any license premises as set forth herein shall
completely cover the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 38 9/16/14
areola at its highest point, and the lower portion of the female breast, but this
restriction shall not include or apply to any portion of the cleavage of the female
breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing
apparel, provided the areola and any portion of the nipple are not exposed in
whole or in part.
10. Efficient means shall be employed to prevent ordinary sounds of music, dancing,
singing or entertainment within the cabaret from being heard on adjoining
premises or on the public street.
11. No cabaret establishment which is located within or abuts a building containing a
residential dwelling shall be permitted to provide music, dancing, singing or
entertainment between 12:00 midnight and 11:00 a.m. unless an applicant or
licensee has obtained a permit from the Common Council to provide music,
dancing, singing or entertainment at other hours.
12. The licensee shall have direct control over the licensed premises and the
operation of the business thereon; and shall be responsible for the conduct of his
agents and any person in his employ.
13. Good order shall be maintained at all times.
14. The cabaret license shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the licensed
premises, and each license shall by its terms be subject to nonrenewal,
suspension or revocation as herein provided.
15. No cabaret license shall be assignable or inure to the benefit of any person or
entity other than the person or entity to whom such license was originally issued.
No cabaret license shall be transferred between locations or persons, and no
license shall be sold or be subject to transfer of corporate assets or change of
corporate officers of directors.
9.15.050 Refusal to Renew License.
A. Notice of Intent Not to Renew; Hearing. The Common Council may refuse
to renew a cabaret license for any of the causes provided in Section 9.15.030. C.
of this ordinance. Prior to the time for renewal of the license, the Common
Council or the License Committee shall notify the licensee in writing of the City’s
intention not to renew the license and provide the licensee with an opportunity for
a hearing. The notice shall state the reason(s) for the intended action.
B. Procedure on Hearing. If the licensee does not appear at the hearing as
required by the notice, the reason(s) stated for such action shall be taken as true
and if the Common Council finds the reason(s) sufficient, the license shall be
nonrenewed and the City Clerk shall give written notice of such nonrenewal to the
person or entity whose license is nonrenewed. If the licensee appears at the
hearing as required by the notice and denies the reason(s) stated for such action,
both the City and the licensee may produce and cross-examine witnesses under
oath; and be represented by counsel. The licensee shall, upon request, be
provided a written transcript of the hearing at his or its expense. If based upon the
evidence presented at the hearing the Common Council finds the reason(s) stated
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 39 9/16/14
for such action to be true, the license shall be nonrenewed and the City Clerk shall
give written notice of such nonrenewal to the person or entity whose license is
nonrenewed. If the Common Council finds the reason(s) stated for such action to
be untrue, the proceeding shall be dismissed without cost to the licensee. The
Common Council shall decide the matter and shall prepare a written decision
which shall be filed with the City Clerk and a copy thereof mailed to the licensee
within 20 days after the conclusion of the hearing.
9.15.060 Procedure on Hearing.
A. Complaint; Summons; Hearing. Upon complaint made in writing under
oath by the Chief of Police or by any resident of the City and filed with the City
Clerk alleging that any person or entity licensed under this ordinance, or his or its
employee or agent, has violated the provisions of Section 9.15.030 C. or any other
provision of this ordinance, the Common Council shall issue a summons, to be
signed by the City Clerk and directed to any peace officer in the City,
commanding the licensee complained of to appear before the Common Council
on a day and at a place in such summons named, not less than three (3) days and
not more than ten (10) days from the date of issuance, and show cause why his or
its cabaret license should not be suspended or revoked. The summons and a copy
of the complaint shall be served on the licensee at least three (3) days before the
time at which the licensee is commanded to appear, and may be served either
personally or upon the person in charge of the cabaret establishment. The
complaint shall set forth the violation(s) allegedly committed, the date, time and
place of said violation(s) and the facts constituting the alleged violation(s).
B. Procedure on Hearing. If the licensee does not appear at the hearing as
required by the summons, the allegations of the complaint shall be taken as true
and if the Common Council finds the allegations sufficient, the license shall be
suspended or revoked in the discretion of the Common Council, and the City
Clerk shall give written notice of such suspension or revocation to the person or
entity whose license is suspended or revoked. If the licensee appears at the
hearing as required by the summons and denies the complaint, both the
complainant and the licensee may produce and cross-examine witnesses under
oath, and be represented by counsel. The licensee shall, upon request, be
provided a written transcript of the hearing at his or its expense. If based upon the
evidence presented at the hearing the Common Council finds the complaint to be
true, the license shall be suspended for not less than ten (10) days nor more than
ninety (90) days or revoked, in the discretion of the Common Council, and the
City Clerk shall give written notice of such suspension or revocation to the person
or entity whose license is suspended or revoked. If the Common Council finds
the complaint untrue, the proceeding shall be dismissed without cost to the
accused. The Common Council shall decide the matter and shall prepare a written
decision which shall be filed with the City Clerk and a copy thereof mailed to the
licensee within 20 days after the conclusion of the hearing. If the Common
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 40 9/16/14
Council finds the complaint to be malicious and without probable cause, the costs
shall be paid by the complainant. The Common Council may require the
complainant to provide security for such costs before issuing the summons under
Section 9.15.060 A. of this ordinance.
C. Automatic Revocation. Notwithstanding any procedures set forth in this
ordinance for the nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a cabaret license, in the
event a licensee is convicted of two (2) separate violations of any provision of this
ordinance in any one license year, any cabaret license issued hereunder shall be
immediately forfeited and revoked, in addition to any penalties which may be
imposed for such violations by law or such penalties as may be provided by
Sections 25.04.000, et seq. of this Municipal Code.
D. Effect of Revocation. When a cabaret license is revoked, it shall be so
entered of record by the City Clerk, and no other cabaret license shall be granted
to such person or entity within twelve (12) months of the date of its revocation,
nor shall any part of the fee paid for such license so revoked be refunded.
E. Operation Without a Licene; Public Nuisance. The operation of a cabaret
establishment without a valid license issued under this ordinance is deemed a
public nuisance and may be closed until the activity in violation of this ordinance
is abated. When the activity is abated, the building or place may be used for any
lawful purpose. Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the City from
enjoining such activity, or using other lawful methods to prevent such activity.
F. Judicial Review of Denial, Nonrenewal, Suspension or Revocation. The
action of the Common Council in granting or denying, nonrenewing, suspending
or revoking any cabaret license, or the failure of the Common Council to deny,
nonrenew, suspend or revoke any such license for good cause, may be reviewed
by the Circuit Court for Ozaukee County, upon application by any applicant,
licensee or resident of the City. The procedure on review shall be the same as in
civil actions instituted in the circuit court, as provided in sec. 125.12(2)(d), Stats.
9.15.070 Automatic Revocation. In the event any licensee is convicted of two (2)
violations, upon such second conviction, any license issued hereunder shall be
immediately forfeited, in addition to such penalties as may be provided by Sec 25.04 of
this code.
9.16.000 HOTEL/MOTEL TAX.
9.16.010 Room Tax Levy; Allocation and Use of Room Tax Revenues. There is hereby
imposed a tax on hotelkeepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing, at retail, rooms or
lodging to transients, for the privilege of furnishing such accommodations to the public,
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 41 9/16/14
irrespective of whether membership is required for use of the accommodations, at the rate of eight
percent (8%) of the gross receipts from the furnishing of such rooms or lodging. As used herein,
the terms “hotel,” “motel” and “transient” shall have the meanings given in sec. 77.52 (2)(a)1.,
Stats., as amended. The tax so imposed shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by
sec. 77.52 (2)(a)1., Stats., and may not be imposed on sales to the federal government and persons
listed under sec. 77.54 (9a), Stats., as amended. 68.75% (i.e., 5.5/8.0) of the annual revenues
generated from the room tax shall be allocated to and spent for tourism operations, promotion and
development; provided, however, that not less than one-eighth of the annual room tax revenues
shall be spent on tourism advertising and promotion. The remaining 31.25% (i.e., 2.5/8.0) of
annual revenues generated from the room tax shall be appropriated to the city general fund as part
of the annual budget.
9.16.020 Filing Requirements. Every person subject to the tax imposed herein shall file
its report and transmit the tax to the City Treasurer at the time such person is required to
file his Wisconsin sales tax report. Said report shall include a statement or gross receipts
from the first day of each month through the last day. A copy of the Wisconsin sales tax
report shall be attached to such report.
9.16.025 Confidentiality of Room Tax Reports and Related Information; forfeitures.
The room tax report, Wisconsin sales tax report and any related information filed with the
City Treasurer pursuant to the provisions of sec. 9.16.020 shall be and remain
confidential, except that such reports and information may be disclosed to those persons
using the reports and information in the discharge of duties imposed by law or of the
duties of their office or by order of a court. The City may publish statistics relating to the
imposition, collection and disbursement of room taxes, provided that such statistics are
classified so as not to disclose the identity of particular room tax and Wisconsin sales tax
reports. Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more than $500.
9.16.030 Interest and Penalties. Any unpaid tax shall bear interest at the rate of one (1)
percent per month from the due date of the report. A late filling fee of $10.00 shall be
imposed on any report not filed in a timely manner.
9.16.040 Review. Any person aggrieved by the tax imposed herein may petition the
Board of Tax Appeals setting forth the basis of such challenge.
9.16.050 Board of Tax Appeals. There is hereby created a Board of Tax Appeals
consisting of the City Treasurer and Aldermen. Such board shall prescribe such
reasonable rules and regulations as it deems advisable, provided, however, payment of
the tax imposed shall be a condition of any right to appeal.
9.17.000 ALARM SYSTEM PERMITS.
9.17.010 Alarm System Permits. Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide
minimum standards and regulations applicable to burglar, fire and holdup alarm systems,
alarm businesses and alarm users. Both society in general and public safety in particular
will be aided by providing a useful and usable system of private security which properly
balances quick response by law enforcement with minimization of law enforcement time
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 42 9/16/14
spent on alarms which are false or otherwise not the intended function of private security
systems. The intent of this Chapter is to prevent carelessness, improper maintenance or
any other cause which results in false police and/or fire alarms from privately owned
alarm systems. Such false alarms require police and/or fire apparatus which thereby
creates unnecessary expenses to the City, increased risk of damage to property or injury
to persons and dilutes police and fire protection to other parts of the City.
9.17.020 Definitions. In this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words and
their derivations have the meanings given herein.
a. The term “alarm business” means any business in which the owners or
employees engage in the activity of altering, installing, maintaining, repairing,
replacing, selling, or servicing alarm systems.
b. The term “alarm system” means an assembly of equipment and devices or
single device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into 110-volt AC line
or otherwise receives electrical energy arranged to signal the presence of a hazard
requiring urgent attention and to which the Police and Fire Department is
expected to respond. In this Chapter, the term “alarm system” shall include the
terms “automatic holdup alarm systems”, “burglar alarm systems”, “holdup alarm
systems”, and “manual holdup alarm systems” as those terms are hereinafter
defined, and fire alarm systems which monitor temperature, humidity or any other
condition directly related to the detection of fire. Excluded from this definition
and from the coverage of this Chapter are alarm systems used to alert or signal
persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located of an attempted,
unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt or fire.
c. The term “annunciator” means instrumentation of an alarm console at the
receiving terminal of a signal line through which both visual and audible signals
show when an alarm device at a particular location has been activated or which, in
the event of malfunction, may also indicate line trouble.
d. The term “answering service” refers to a telephone answering service
providing among its services the service of receiving on a continuous basis,
through trained employees, emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter
immediately relaying the message by live voice to the dispatch center of the
Police and Fire Department.
e. The term “automatic dialing device” refers to an alarm system which
automatically sends over regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise
a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
f. The term “automatic holdup alarm system” means an alarm system in which
the signal transmission is initiated by the action of the robber.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 43 9/16/14
g. The term “manual holdup alarm system” refers to an alarm system in which
the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attached or by
an observer thereof.
h. The term “burglar alarm system” refers to an alarm system which signals an
entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system.
i. The term “direct connect” means an alarm system which has the capability of
transmitting system signals to the Police or Fire Department.
j. The term “false alarm” means the activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the
owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents or other
undetermined cause. False alarms do not include alarms caused by tornadoes,
other violent climatic conditions, power outages and water pressure drops which
activate alarms.
k. The term “interconnect” means to connect an alarm system to a voice grade
telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a
standard telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an
emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system.
l. The term “central station” means an office to which remote alarm and
supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the
circuits.
m. The term “primary trunk line” means a telephone line leading directly into
the dispatcher center of the Police or Fire Department that is for the purpose of
handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis and which is identified as
such by a specific number included among the emergency numbers listed in the
telephone directory or numbers in sequence therewith.
n. The term “subscriber” means a person who buys or leases or otherwise
obtains an alarm system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to
monitor and/or service the alarm system.
9.17.030 Administrative Rules.
The Chief of Police shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the
implementation of this Chapter. Such rules shall require the approval of the Common
Council and shall be open to inspection by the public.
9.17.040 Permits For Private Alarm Systems.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 44 9/16/14
a. Permit Required. A permit shall be required for each alarm system now
installed on any premises within the City of Port Washington. Permits shall be
required prior to installation of any new private alarm system.
b. Permit Fee. A Fifteen Dollar ($15.00) permit fee shall be paid to the City
Clerk at the time of filing said application.
c. Permit Application. Applications for all permits required under this Chapter
shall be filed with the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall prescribe the
form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate
and act upon the permit application. Permits shall not be transferable.
d. Indemnification and Hold Harmless. All applicants for an alarm system permit
shall enter into an agreement with the City of Port Washington wherein they shall
indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all claims, suits, actions,
damages and expenses, including attorney fees, arising either in law or in equity
out of or by virtue of the enactment of this Chapter. The subject agreement shall
include, but not be limited to, a release of the City of Port Washington for any
loss of any nature whatsoever sustained by the applicant by virtue of the City
supplying the facilities contemplated under this Chapter.
9.17.050 Automatic Dialing Devices; Audible Alarms.
a. No person, firm or corporation shall use or cause to be used any telephone or
electronic device or attachment that automatically selects the public telephone
trunk line of the Police Department, Fire Department, or any other department,
bureau, officer or employee of the City of Port Washington, and then reproduces a
prerecorded message to report a burglary, fire or other emergency. Any system in
operation which is in violation of this Section shall be modified so that it is no
longer in violation of this Section or shall be disconnected.
b. Audible alarm systems shall have an automatic shut-off feature after the alarm
has sounded for five (5) minutes.
9.17.060 Testing.
a. No alarm business or alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages
to the Police or Fire Department shall be tested or demonstrated without prior
notification and approval of the Police and Fire Department dispatcher. Alarm
businesses or alarm system owners or lessors will be advised on proper test
procedure.
b. No alarm system relayed through intermediate services to the Police and Fire
Departments will be tested to determine the Police or Fire Department’s response
without first notifying the appropriate authority. However, the Police or Fire
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 45 9/16/14
Department may inspect or test on-site alarm systems authorized under this
Chapter.
c. Alarm systems shall be in compliance with all pertinent response policies of
the Police or Fire Department.
9.17.070 Fee For Answering Alarms.
a. Generally. Each false alarm requires response of public safety personnel,
involves unnecessary expense to the City, increases the risk of injury to persons or
damage to property and dilutes the overall public safety protection to the City.
Such false alarms constitute a public nuisance and must be abated.
b. Intentional. No person shall intentionally cause the activation of a burglar/fire
alarm device knowing that no criminal activity, fire or other emergency exists.
c. 1. False Alarms; Schedule of Administrative Charges. Any person, business,
corporation or other entity, except for a private or public school district, having a
permissible alarm system with alarm device(s) at one or more locations in
accordance with this Chapter shall pay to the City a charge for false alarms
responded to by the Police and/or Fire Departments according to the following
schedule for each calendar year for each location connected. Separate accounts
shall be kept of false alarms for criminal activity, and of false alarms for fire or
other emergencies:
A. False alarms responded to by the Police Department:
i. For the first false alarm per location, no charge
ii. For the second and subsequent false alarm per location, the
sum of $100 or the total actual cost of wages and benefits
paid to members of the department responding to such
alarms, whichever is greater.
B. False alarms responded to by the Fire Department (in addition to a
police response):
i. For the first false alarm per location, no charge
ii. For the second and subsequent false alarm per location, the sum of
$100 or the total actual cost of wages and benefits paid to members
of the department responding to such alarms, whichever is greater.
2. The schedule of administrative charges for false alarms set forth in Subsections
9.17.070 c.1.A. and B. of the Municipal Code may be amended from
time to time by resolution duly adopted by the Common Council.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 46 9/16/14
3. Failure to pay administrative charges for false alarms under Subsections
9.17.070 c.1.A. and B. of the Municipal Code shall itself constitute a violation of
this Section. Such administrative charges shall be collectible as a forfeiture upon
prosecution and conviction thereof, together with any additional forfeiture(s)
which may be imposed under subsection 9.17.070 d. of the Municipal Code for
violation of this Section for allowing or maintaining condition(s) or act(s) which
violate the intent of this Section, to-wit: eliminating and minimizing the
occurrence of false alarms, together with the costs of prosecution.
d. Other Violations. Any person, corporation or other entity violating this Section
in any manner, other than false alarm violations for which administrative charges
are imposed under Subsection 9.17.070 c. of the Municipal Code, shall be subject
to forfeiture as provided in Section 25.04.000 of the Municipal Code. When any
premises located in the City is owned, leased or occupied by two or more persons,
corporations or other entities as joint tenants, tenants in common, joint lessees or
in any other manner, each such person, corporation and other entity comply with
the provisions of this Section, and each such person, corporation or other entity
may be subjected to penalties for violation of this Section.
e. Default of Payment of Forfeiture or Costs. On default in payment of any
forfeiture or costs imposed under Subsections 9.17.070 c. and/or d. of the
Municipal Code, such person or responsible officer of the violating corporation or
other entity shall be confined in the County Jail until the same shall be paid but
not to exceed the length of time specified by the court, which length of time shall
not exceed six (6) months.
9.17.080 City Liability.
The City of Port Washington shall be under no duty or obligation to a subscriber or to
any other person concerning any provision of this Chapter, including, but not limited to,
any defects in an alarm system or any delays in transmission or response to any alarm;
however, this in no way shall be construed that it is not the proper function of law
enforcement to respond to alarms.
9.17.090 Revocation of Permits.
a. Hearing. Before a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked, a hearing
shall be held before the Chief of Police. Notice setting forth the time, place and nature of
the hearing shall be sent by mail or delivered to the permittee at the address shown on the
permit application not less than seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
b. Ground for Revocation. The Chief of Police may revoke a permit on the following
grounds:
1. The application for a permit contains a false statement of a material fact.
2. A licensee has repeatedly failed to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 47 9/16/14
3. An alarm system repeatedly actuates false alarms.
c. Appeals. Any permittee may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police by filing a
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the decision. Such
appeal shall be heard by the Common Council within thirty (30) days after filing the
appeal. The Common Council may affirm, amend or reverse the decision or take other
action deemed appropriate. An appeal timely taken suspends the revocation until the
Council gives its decision. The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place
of the hearing to the appellant by certified mail or personal delivery not less than seven
(7) days before the hearing. In conducting the hearing, the Common Council shall not be
limited by the technical rules of evidence.
9.18.000 PAWN BROKERS AND SECOND HAND ARTICLE AND JEWELRY
DEALERS.
9.18.010 State Law Adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
ordinance, all provisions of this Section 134.71, Wisconsin Statutes, defining and
describing regulations with respect to pawn brokers and second hand article and jewelry
dealers, including but not limited to the definitions, licenses, fees, and penalties, as said
section may be altered, amended or recreated, is hereby adopted and by reference made a
part of this ordinance as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or
prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by
this ordinance.
9.19.000 NON-ISSUANCE OF LICENSE. A. In the event that a license is granted by
the Common Council pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the Clerk shall hold and
not issue the license until the Treasurer certifies that all personal property taxes, room
taxes or other assessments are paid pursuant to Port Washington Municipal Code and all
assessments, claims and forfeitures resulting from a violation and conviction of any City
of Port Washington ordinance due and owing are paid in full.
9.20.000 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. A. The City of Port Washington Treasurer
shall charge to the person receiving such service, and the person receiving such service
shall pay any charges directed to the City of Port Washington for calibration or
certification services of the State of Wisconsin or other entity provided pursuant to any
state or local regulation.
B. Any person who fails to pay, within forty-five (45) days of invoicing, the charges for
such calibration or certification shall be charged interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
The charge and any interest may be added to the responsible person’s property tax bill.
9.21.000 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS RETAILER LICENSE.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 48 9/16/14
A. License Required. No person shall in any manner, or upon any pretense, or by any
device, directly or indirectly, sell, expose for sale, possess with intent to sell,
exchange, barter, dispose of or give away any cigarettes or tobacco products, as
defined in ss. 139.30(1) or 139.75(12), to any person not holding a license or permit
as herein provided or as provided in ss 134.65, 139.30 to 134.41 or 139.79, Wis.
Stats. without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk.
B. Application and Fee. Application for the license shall be made upon a form approved
and provided by the City Clerk. No license shall be issued by the City Clerk unless a
fee in the amount of $100.00 has been paid.
9.22.000 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Sections:
9.22.010 Purpose and Findings
9.22.020 Definitions
9.22.030 Classification
9.22.040 License
9.22.050 Application for License
9.22.060 Standards for Issuance of License
9.22.070 Fees
9.22.080 Display of License
9.22.090 Renewal of License
9.22.100 Inspection
9.22.110 Suspension
9.22.120 Revocation
9.22.130 Administrative Review Procedure
9.22.140 Transfer of License
9.22.150 Physical Layout of Sexually Oriented Business
9.22.160 Location
9.22.170 Responsibilities of the Licensee
9.22.180 Additional Regulations for Escort Agencies
9.22.190 Additional Regulations Concerning Sexually Oriented Businesses
9.22.200 Prohibition Against Children in a Sexually Oriented Business
9.22.210 Hours of Operation
9.22.220 Exclusions
9.22.230 Enforcement
9.22.240 Penalties and Prosecution
9.22.250 Severability
9.22.260 Conflicting Ordinances Repealed
9.22.010 Purpose and Findings.
(a) Purpose: It is the purpose of this Ordinance to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order
to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of citizens of the City of Port Washington,
and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City of Port Washington. The provisions of
this Ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is
neither the intent nor effect of this Ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this Ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 49 9/16/14
(b) Findings: Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses
on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the City, and on
findings incorporated in the cases of Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), City of
Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), FW/PBS Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215
(1990), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 529 U.S. 277
(2000), East of River Enterprises v. City of Hudson, Case No. 99-1801 (Unpublished)(Wis. Ct.
App., April 11, 2000), East of River Enterprises v. City of Hudson, Case No. 99-2667
(Unpublished)(Wis. Ct. App., Aug. 1, 2000) and Ben’s Bar, Inc. v. City of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702
(7th Cir. 2003), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to: Phoenix, Arizona;
Houston, Texas; Minneapolis, Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo,
Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas;
Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; Beaumont, Texas; Dallas,
Texas; Newport News, Virginia; Bellevue, Washington; New York, New York; and St. Croix
County, Wisconsin, and the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on Sexually Oriented
Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), and statistics obtained from the U.S. Dept. of
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Common Council
finds that:
(1) Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary and unlawful and unhealthy activities
that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently
no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur
on their premises.
(2) Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses, defined in this Ordinance as adult theaters
and adult cabarets, engage in higher incidences of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than
employees of other establishments.
(3) Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented business,
especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos,
or live sex shows.
(4) Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy
conditions.
(5) Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses
for the purposes of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
(6) At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented
businesses, including but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus
infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B, amebiasis, salmonella infections
and shigella infections.
(7) Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported
cases of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by the HIV virus in the United
States: 600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983, 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in 1985, and 253,448 through December
31, 1992.
(8) The State of Wisconsin Division of Health indicated that on July 25, 1986, there was 96 cases
of AIDS reported in the state, including 54 cases that resulted in death and that a ten-fold increase
in reported cases was expected between 1986 and 1991.
(9) The number of cases of early (less than 1 year) syphilis in the United States reported annually
has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982, and 45,200 through November 1990.
(10) The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high
level, with over one-half million cases being reported in 1990.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 50 9/16/14
(11) In his report of October 22, 1986, the Surgeon General of the United States has advised the
American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact,
intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components and from an infected
mother to her newborn.
(12) According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and
gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
(13) Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy in part, because the
activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the
activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain those facilities.
(14) Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually
oriented businesses where persons view adult oriented films.
(15) Crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex-related crimes, occur with more
frequency in neighborhoods where sexually oriented business are located.
(16) Studies of the relationship between sexually oriented business and neighborhood property
values have found a negative impact on both residential and commercial property values.
(17) There is an increase in the potential for infiltration by organized crime for the purpose of
unlawful conduct.
(18) The consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of sexually oriented businesses
exacerbates the deleterious secondary effects of such businesses on the community. In fact, the
Supreme Court has gone so far as to assert that “[common sense indicates that any form of nudity
coupled with alcohol begets undesirable behavior.” Ben’s Bar, 316 F.3d 702, citing New York State
Liquor Auth. v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714, 718 (1981).
(19) Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably
regulated in order to protect the substantial government concerns addressed in the above
subsections.
(20) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that
reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses.
Further, such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually
oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons
and employees, as well as the citizens of the City. It is appropriate to require reasonable
assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in
possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
(21) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day to
day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is
substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
(22) In the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases, it is desirable to obtain a limited
amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this
Ordinance is designed to prevent, or who are likely to witness such conduct.
(23) The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the City of Port Washington
will be promoted by the enactment of this Ordinance.
9.22.020 Definitions.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 51 9/16/14
(a) “Adult Arcade” means any place in or to which the public is permitted or invited,
wherein coin-operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled or
still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly
maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where
the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matters
exhibiting “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
(b) “Adult Bookstore” or “Adult Video Store” means a commercial establishment that has
as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or substantial
portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental, for
any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:
(1) books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides or other visual representations, which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas;” or
(2) instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for
stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the
offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” and still be categorized as an "adult bookstore" or "adult video store"
so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration
the specified materials that depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.” A principal business purpose need not be a primary use of an establishment so long as it is
a significant use based upon the visible inventory or commercial activity of the establishment.
This definition shall expressly exclude films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
similar photographic reproductions given an “R” rating by the Motion Picture Association of
America.
(c) “Adult Cabaret” means a nightclub, dance hall, bar, tavern, restaurant, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features:
(1) persons who appear nude or semi-nude; or
(2) live performances that are characterized by the exposure of “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas;” or
(3) films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the exhibition or display of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”
This definition shall expressly exclude films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other similar
photographic reproductions given an “R” rating by the Motion Picture Association of America.
(d) “Adult Motel” means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment, which:
(1) offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions, which are characterized by the depiction of “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas;” and has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises
the availability of this adult type or photographic reproductions; or
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 52 9/16/14
(2) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
(3) allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that
is less than ten (10) hours.
(e) “Adult Motion Picture Theater” means a commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions
are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” This definition shall expressly exclude films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions given an “R” rating by
the Motion Picture Association of America.
(f) “Adult Theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment
which regularly features persons who appear nude or semi-nude, or live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
(g) “Council” means the Common Council of the City of Port Washington, Ozaukee County,
Wisconsin.
(h) “Directly” means to require physical contact. For instance, when this Ordinance prohibits an
employee to receive a gratuity “directly” from a patron, it prohibits the direct touching of skin, other
body parts or clothing.
(i) “Distinguished” or “characterized by” means the dominant or principal theme of the object
referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas,” the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the
exhibition or display of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
(j) “Employee,” “employ” and “employment” describe and pertain to any person who performs any
service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
regardless of whether the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent,
or by another status. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair
or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
(k) “Escort” means a person who, for consideration, and for another person, agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease.
(l) “Escort Agency” means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or
advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other
consideration.
(m) “Establish” or “establishment” means and includes any of the following:
(1) the opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) the conversion of any existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to
any sexually oriented business;
(3) the addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented
business; or
(4) the relocation of any sexually oriented business.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 53 9/16/14
(n) “Licensee” means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business
has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
(o) “Nude”, “nudity” or “state of nudity”, means the showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, vulva or anus, with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or areola, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(p) “Operate” or “cause to be operated” means to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of
doing business. “Operator” means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business
who is authorized to exercise operational control of or over the business, or who causes to function
or who puts or keeps in operation the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing
to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an owner, part
owner, or licensee of the business.
(q) “Person” means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
limited liability partnership, association, or other legal entity.
(r) “Premises” means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and
all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to: the sexually oriented
business, the grounds, the private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent
thereto, under the ownership, control or supervision of the owner or operator of the business.
(s) “Regularly features” or “regularly shows” means a consistent or substantial course of conduct,
such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or
performances offered as part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business.
(t) “Semi-nude” or “semi-nude condition” means the showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva or anus, with not more than a complete opaque covering, or the showing
of the female breast with not more than a complete opaque covering of any part of the nipple or
areola.
(u) “Sexual encounter center” means a business or commercial establishment, that as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two (2) or more
persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of “specified sexual activities.” The
definitions of "sexual encounter center" or any "sexually oriented business" shall not include an
establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional
person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
(v) “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult
cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, or sexual encounter
center.
(w) “Specified Anatomical Areas” means
(1) the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered; or
(2) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, vulva, anus or
the nipple and areola of the human female breast.
(x) “Specified sexual activity” means:
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 54 9/16/14
(1) the fondling of another person’s genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts;
(2) actual sex acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation,
or sodomy; or
(3) excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in (1)
through (2) above.
(y) “Substantial enlargement” of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas
occupied by the business by more than twenty-five percent, as the floor areas exist on the date this
Ordinance takes effect.
(z) “Transfer of ownership or control” of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of
the following:
(1) the sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by
sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(3) the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership
or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death
of the person possessing the ownership or control.
9.22.030 Classification.
“Sexually oriented businesses” are classified as follows:
(a) adult arcades;
(b) adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(c) adult cabarets;
(d) adult motels;
(e) adult motion picture theaters;
(f) adult theaters;
(g) escort agencies;
(h) sexual encounter centers.
9.22.040 License.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (d) below, from and after the effective date of this Ordinance,
no sexually oriented business shall be operated or maintained in the City of Port Washington
without first obtaining a license to operate issued by the City of Port Washington.
(b) A license may be issued only for one (1) sexually oriented business located at one (1) fixed
and certain place. Any person, partnership, or corporation which desires to operate more than one
sexually oriented business must have a license for each such business.
(c) No licensee may transfer ownership or control of the sexually oriented business to any other
person, partnership or corporation.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 55 9/16/14
(d) All sexually oriented businesses existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance must
submit an application for a license within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this Ordinance.
9.22.050 Application for License.
(a) Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a license shall submit an application
to the City Clerk. The application shall be filed in triplicate and dated by the City Clerk. A copy of
the application shall be distributed promptly by the City Clerk to the City of Port Washington Police
Department and to the applicant.
(b) If the City of Port Washington Police Department is aware of any information bearing on the
applicant’s qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk.
(c) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the City of Port Washington.
All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this Ordinance.
(d) An application shall be considered complete if it includes all of the information required in this
Section.
(e) An applicant for a license shall furnish the following information under oath:
(1) Name and address.
(2) Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age. Written
proof of age may be in the form of either: (i) a copy of a birth certificate and current photo-graph, (ii)
a current driver’s license with photograph, or (iii) other photographic identification document issued
by a governmental agency and demonstrating proof of age.
(3) The name, business location, business mailing address and telephone number of the
proposed sexually oriented business.
(4) A statement as to whether the licensee of the sexually oriented business intends to serve,
sell, use, provide or consume any intoxicating liquor, cereal malt beverage or any type of alcoholic
beverage on the premises of the sexually oriented business.
(5) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the name of the corporation,
the date and state of incorporation, the names, addresses and ages of all share-holders of the
corporation owning more than five percent (5%) of the stock in said corporation and of all officers
and directors of the corporation, and the names and addresses of the registered agents.
(6) If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, or any other type of organization or entity
where two (2) or more persons have a financial interest, the application shall state the names,
addresses and ages of all persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or
other type of organization or entity.
(f) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total
floor space occupied by the business, shall accompany the application for a sexually oriented
business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but shall be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six (6) inches.
(g) If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he or she
shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If the person who wishes to operate a sexually
oriented business is other than an individual (such as a corporation, partnership or other entity),
each officer, director, general partner, member or other person identified in Subsections
9.22.050(e)(5) and (6) shall sign the application for a license as the applicant. Each applicant must
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 56 9/16/14
be qualified under this section and each applicant shall be considered as a licensee if the license is
granted.
(h) Within twenty-one (21) days of receiving an application for a license, the City Clerk shall notify
the applicant whether the application is granted or denied.
(i) Whenever an application is denied, the City Clerk shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for such action. If the applicant requests a hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of
notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held within ten (10) days thereafter, as hereinafter
provided.
(j) Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the application or his or her
refusal to submit to or cooperate with regard to any information required by this Ordinance shall
constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such license and shall be
grounds for denial thereof by the Common Council.
9.22.060 Standards for Issuance of License.
(a) The Common Council shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of the
following is found to be true:
(1) An applicant (including all individuals, officers, directors, shareholders, or persons with a
financial interest in the organization) is less than eighteen (18) years of age.
(2) An applicant is delinquent in a payment owed to the City of Port Washington for taxes,
fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation to a sexually
oriented business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information as required in Section 9.22.050 for issuance
of the license.
(4) The license application fee required by this Ordinance has not been paid.
(5) An applicant has given false or misleading answers, information or data on any license
application, or material facts were omitted from the application.
(6) The proposed sexually oriented business is not in compliance with the location restrictions
established or physical layout restrictions established for sexually oriented businesses in this
Ordinance.
(7) The applicant states or the Common Council subsequently discovers that the applicant
intends to serve, sell, use, provide or consume any intoxicating liquor, cereal malt beverages, or
any other type of alcoholic beverages on the premises of the sexually oriented business.
(b) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is
granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and the address of
the sexually oriented business.
9.22.070 Fees.
A license fee of $250.00 shall be submitted with the application for a license. If the application is
denied, one-half (1/2) of the fee shall be returned to the person who posted such fee, and the
remainder shall be applied toward processing and administrative costs.
9.22.080 Display of License.
The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place, at or near the entrance of the
sexually oriented business, so that it may be easily read at any time.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 57 9/16/14
9.22.090 Renewal of License.
(a) Every license issued pursuant to this Ordinance will terminate at the expiration of one (1) year
from the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. A license must be renewed
before operation is allowed to continue. A license may be renewed only by making an application
as provided for in Section 9.22.050. The application for renewal must be filed not later than sixty
(60) days before the license expires. The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by
the City of Port Washington and shall contain such information and data, given under oath or
affirmation, as is required for an application for a new license.
(b) A license renewal fee of $250.00 shall be submitted with the application for renewal. In
addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty in the amount of $100.00 shall be charged to any
applicant who files for a renewal less than sixty (60) days before the license expires. If the
application is denied, one-half (1/2) of the fee shall be returned to the person who posted such fee,
and the remainder shall be applied toward processing and administrative costs.
(c) If the City of Port Washington Police Department is aware of any information bearing on an
applicant’s qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk.
9.22.100 Inspection.
(a) For the purposes of ensuring compliance with this Ordinance, an applicant, operator or
licensee shall permit law enforcement officers, and any other federal, state, county or City agency
in the performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this Ordinance normally and
regularly conducted by such agencies, to inspect, at any time the business is occupied or open for
business, those portions of the premises of a sexually oriented business which patrons or
customers are permitted to occupy.
(b) The provisions of this Section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being
rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation.
9.22.110 Suspension.
(a) The Common Council shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for a sexually oriented
business for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it makes an initial determination that a
licensee, operator or employee of a licensee has:
(1) violated or is not in compliance with any section of this Ordinance; or
(2) refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by
this Ordinance.
(b) The Common Council, before suspending any license, shall give the licensee ten (10) days'
written notice of: the charges against him or her, the Council's initial determination and intent to
suspend a license, the opportunity to request a review of that initial determination, and the right to
an administrative appeal and hearing, as provided in Sec. 9.22.130 hereof.
9.22.120 Revocation.
(a) The Common Council shall issue a written intent to revoke a license for a sexually oriented
business if it makes an initial determination that a cause for suspension in Sec. 9.22.110 has
occurred and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.
(b) The Common Council shall revoke by written notice a license if it determines that any of the
following reasons exist:
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 58 9/16/14
(1) Discovery that false or misleading answers, information or data were given on any license
application, or material facts were omitted from the application;
(2) The licensee, operator or any employee of the licensee, violates any provisions of this
Ordinance or any rules or regulations adopted by the Council pursuant to this Ordinance; provided,
however, that in the case of a first offense by a licensee where the conduct was solely that of an
employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of thirty (30) days if the Council shall find that
the licensee had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation, and could not by the
exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive knowledge;
(3) The licensee becomes ineligible to obtain a license or permit;
(4) Any fee or charge required to be paid by this Ordinance is not paid;
(5) Any intoxicating liquor, cereal malt beverage or other alcoholic beverage is served or
consumed on the premises of the sexually oriented business;
(6) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the
premises;
(7) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(8) A licensee has knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time
when the licensee’s license was suspended or revoked;
(9) A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or other sexual act to occur in or on the licensed premises. This Sub-section will not
apply to an adult motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities to occur either: (i) in
exchange for money, or (ii) in a public place or within public view.
(c) The Common Council, before revoking any license, shall give the licensee ten (10) days'
written notice of: the charges against him or her, the Council's initial determination and intent to
revoke a license, the opportunity to request a review of that initial determination, and the right to an
administrative appeal and hearing , as provided in Sec. 9.22.130 hereof.
(d) The transfer of ownership or control of a license shall automatically and immediately revoke the
license.
(e) Any licensee whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a license for one (1) year
from the date of revocation.
9.22.130 Administrative Review Procedure.
Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes (2001-02 and as amended), concerning municipal
administrative procedure shall govern the administrative procedure and review concerning the
granting, denial, renewal, non-renewal, suspension or revocation of a license. A written request for
review of an initial determination shall be made by an aggrieved person to the City Clerk pursuant
to the provisions of Secs. 68.08 and 68.09, Stats. The Council shall review an initial determination
within 15 days of receipt of a request for review. An administrative appeal may be made by an
aggrieved person to the City Clerk pursuant to the pro-visions of Sec. 68.10, Stats. Within 15 days
of receipt of a notice of appeal, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing pursuant to the
provisions of Sec. 68.11, Stats. Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final determination under
Sec. 68.12, Stats. may seek judicial review of such final determination pursuant to the provisions of
Sec. 68.13, Stats.
9.22.140 Transfer of License.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 59 9/16/14
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually
oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated
in the application.
9.22.150 Physical Layout of Sexually Oriented Business.
(a) Any sexually oriented business having available for customers, patrons or members, any
booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activity must comply with the following requirements:
(1) Access. Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and
public areas of the sexually oriented business and, except as provided in Subsection (2)(B) hereof,
shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type devices.
(2) Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction
requirements:
(A) Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms or cubicles
and any non-public areas by a wall.
(B) Each booth shall have at least one side totally open to the public lighted aisle which may
be secured when the booth is in use by a door which extends from a height of not less than two
feet above the floor.
(C) All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the floor to a height of not
less than six (6) feet and be light colored, non-absorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
(D) The floor must be light colored, non-absorbent, smooth textured and easily clean- able.
(E) The lighting level of each booth, room, or cubicle, when not in use shall be a minimum of
five (5) foot candles at all times, as measured from the floor.
(3) Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No
occupant shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in
the booth. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth.
9.22.160 Location.
(a) No sexually oriented business shall be located:
(1) Within 500 feet of an existing sexually oriented business;
(2) Within 500 feet of any residential dwelling, including, but not limited to, houses,
apartments, condominiums, or flats;
(3) Within 500 feet of any pre-existing place of worship, including, but not limited to, any
church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is primarily used for religious worship and
related religious activities;
(4) Within 500 feet of any public or private educational facility, including, but not limited to, any
child day care establishment, nursery school, preschool, kindergarten, elementary school, junior
high school, middle school, high school, vocational school, secondary school, continuation school,
special education school, junior college and/or university. “School” includes the school grounds,
but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school;
(5) Within 500 feet from any public park or recreational area which has been designated for
park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park, playground, trail, swimming pool,
reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian/bicycle path or way, wilderness or
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 60 9/16/14
nature area or preserve, or other similar public land within the City which is under the control,
operation or management of the City and recreational authorities; or
(6) Within 500 feet of any premise that in any manner sells or dispenses alcohol or is licensed
pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the City or State.
(b) For purposes of this Section, distances are to be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the
part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the premises of a use listed in Subsection (a) hereof. The presence of a county, city, village,
town or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and
applying the distance requirements of this Section.
9.22.170 Responsibilities of the Licensee.
(a) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this Section
shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee if such act or omission occurs either with the
authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee, or as a result of the licensee’s negligent
failure to supervise the employee’s conduct, and the licensee shall be punishable for such act or
omission in the same manner as if the licensee committed the act or caused the omission.
(b) Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee for the purposes of determining whether the
licensee’s license shall be suspended, revoked, or renewed.
(c) No employee of a sexually oriented business shall allow any minor to loiter in, around or to
frequent a sexually oriented business. It shall be the duty of the licensee of each sexually oriented
business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented
business at all times during its regular business hours, and to prevent any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years of age from entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that
an attendant knew that a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked
for and was furnished:
(1) a valid operator’s, commercial operator’s or chauffeur’s driver’s license; or
(2) a personal identification card issued by the State of Wisconsin indicating that such person
is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
(d) The licensee shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner at all times.
(e) The licensee shall maintain at least five (5) foot candles of light in the public portions of the
establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles is
necessary to enable a patron to view any activity in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a
lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisle, pro- vided, however, that at no time
shall there be less than one (1) foot candle of illumination
of said aisles, as measured from the floor.
(f) The licensee shall insure compliance of the sexually oriented business and its patrons with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
(g) The licensee shall insure that no alcoholic beverages are served, sold, used, provided or
consumed on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
9.22.180 Additional Regulations for Escort Agencies.
(a) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b) A person commits an offense under this Section if the person acts as an escort, or agrees to
act as an escort, for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
9.22.190 Additional Regulations Concerning Sexually Oriented Businesses.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 61 9/16/14
(a) It shall be prohibited in a sexually oriented business for a person to appear in a state of nudity
or engage in specified sexual activities.
(b) It shall be prohibited in a sexually oriented business for a person to appear in a semi-nude
condition, unless the person is an employee, who, while semi-nude, is at least five (5) feet from any
patron or customer and on a stage at least two (2) feet in height from the floor.
(c) It shall be prohibited for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, to
receive directly any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to
pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is semi-nude in a sexually
oriented business.
(d) It shall be prohibited in a sexually oriented business to serve, sell, use, provide or consume any
intoxicating liquor, cereal malt beverage or any other alcoholic beverage.
9.22.200 Prohibition Against Children in a Sexually Oriented Business.
It shall be prohibited for a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be on the premises of a
sexually oriented business.
9.22.210 Hours of Operation.
No sexually oriented business shall be open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday
through Saturday, or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.
9.22.220 Exclusions.
The provisions of this Ordinance do not apply to the following establishments: theaters, performing
arts centers, civic centers, and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic
performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis, and in which the predominant
business or attraction is not the offering of entertainment which is intended for sexual interests or
titillation of customers, and where the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on or the
advertising or promotion of nude or semi-nude performances. While expressive live nudity or seminudity
may occur within these establishments, this ordinance seeks only to minimize and prevent
the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses on the community. Negative secondary
effects have not been associated with the establishments referenced in this Section.
9.22.230 Enforcement.
The City of Port Washington Police Department and Building Inspector shall have the authority to
enter a sexually oriented business at any time the business is occupied or open for business and at
all reasonable times to inspect the premises and enforce this Ordinance.
9.22.240 Penalties and Prosecutions.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid
license or in violation of this Ordinance is subject to a suit for injunction as well as municipal
prosecution. Such violation shall be punishable by a forfeiture of $500.00 plus court costs and
assessments. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates shall be deemed a separate
offense or violation.
9.22.250 Severability.
Each section and provision of this Ordinance is hereby declared to be an independent division and
subdivision and, notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be
the controlling legislative intent that if any provision of said Ordinance, or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance, is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person
or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is
hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been enacted independently of such
section or provision found to be invalid.
9.22.260 Conflicting Ordinances Repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby
repealed.
9.23.000 HORSE AND CARRIAGE RIDES.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 62 9/16/14
9.23.010 Definitions. The following words, when used in Sections 9.23.000, et. seq., shall
have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) Carriage means a horse-drawn private passenger vehicle for hire with four wheels or
runners, two or four fixed seats installed by the vehicle manufacturer, used for short
pleasure trips, and operated by a driver who may be accompanied by an assistant.
“Carriage” shall include a buggy or sleigh, but shall not include a cart or wagon used
primarily for carrying goods or as a farm vehicle.
(2) Driver means the person in control of and in the actual operation of a carriage and shall
include any assistant driver operating a carriage.
(3) Fixed route means authorized trips on designated city streets from predetermined
passenger pick-up points to predetermined destinations.
(4) Owner means the title holder of any carriage, horse, license or equipment, or an owner’s
lessee, or an assignee of any license.
(5) Stands means street curb or other places which are designated by the Chief of Police, as
directed by the Common Council, for the stopping, standing or parking of a carriage and
the loading or unloading of passengers.
9.23.020 License required; exception. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person
owning or operating any horse and carriage for hire shall operate, or permit to be operated, any
such vehicle on any street, alley, sidewalk, park, field or other public way or public property in
the City of Port Washington without a license issued as provided in Sections 9.23.000, et seq.,
and in compliance with the regulations hereinafter set forth. No license shall be issued without
written proof of compliance with such regulations. No horse and carriage license shall be
required to operate a horse-drawn carriage, buggy, sleigh, cart or wagon carrying passengers
within the city as part of an annual celebration, festival, parade or special event.
9.23.030 Regulations.
(1) Routes. All proposed fixed routes must be in writing and receive prior written approval
of the Chief of Police. A copy of an approved fixed route must be submitted to the City
Clerk at the time of application for a license. New or temporary routes must be applied
for, approved by the Chief of Police, and filed with the City Clerk before a licensee may
use a new or temporary route. No licensee shall deviate from an approved route.
(2) Hours of Operation. No carriage may operate before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.
(3) Soliciting. Soliciting of prospective passengers by carriage drivers, owners, or their
agents shall be done in an orderly manner that will not create a public nuisance.
(4) Driver Age and License Status. No carriage shall be driven by any person under age 18.
Every driver shall hold a valid Wisconsin driver’s license whenever operating a carriage.
(5) Operation by Owner or Employee or Lessee Required. No carriage shall be operated
except by the owner thereof, or the owner’s employee or lessee, and it shall be unlawful
for any owner, employee or lessee to permit operation of a carriage by any other person.
(6) Attendance of Vehicle. No carriage shall be left unattended at any time when such
vehicle is hitched to one or more horses.
(7) Carriage Stands. Carriages shall occupy such stands as designated by the Chief of
Police, as directed by the Common Council, and shall at all times maintain orderly
alignment at the stands so as not to obstruct traffic or endanger the safety of pedestrians.
Carriages shall be loaded and unloaded in such a way as to provide safety to the public.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 63 9/16/14
(8) Conduct of Drivers. Carriage drivers shall at all times while on duty be clean and neat
in appearance, courteous to the public, and shall be free from the influence of any
alcohol beverages or controlled substances, and the odor of alcohol beverages on the
breath of any such driver shall be prima facie evidence of a violation hereof. No person
shall operate a carriage in violation of state or local traffic laws or regulations.
(9) Speed at which Vehicles to be Operated. No driver shall operate any carriage faster than
a slow trot, and shall reduce its speed and/or stop whenever appropriate due to road,
weather or traffic conditions, or when pedestrians, children or emergency vehicles are
present. At no time shall carriages be used for racing or be driven at imprudent speeds.
(10) Maximum Number of Passengers. No carriage shall carry more passengers than can be
seated comfortably on the seats without exceeding the seating capacity of the carriage
specified by the manufacturer and as posted pursuant to subsection (16) hereof, except
that children under seven (7) years of age may be carried on the laps or in the arms of
separate passengers who are each age 18 years or older.
(11) Alcohol Beverages Prohibited. No driver or passenger shall sell, serve, possess or
consume any alcohol beverage while in a carriage upon a street or other public way.
(12) Equipment; Signals. Each carriage shall be equipped with rubber tires, brakes, a “slow
moving vehicle” emblem as provided in sec. 347.245, Stats., and lighted lamps, lanterns
or reflectors as provided in sec. 347.24, Stats. No driver shall turn or stop a carriage
without giving hand and arm signals as provided in secs. 346.34 and 346.35, Stats.
(13) Maintenance. Every carriage shall be kept in good mechanical condition by its owner
for the protection of the public. Every carriage driver prior to the beginning of each shift
shall inspect each horse and carriage to ensure that all carriage equipment and each
horse are operable and in good working condition and that the carriage is maintained in
a reasonably clean condition. All carriages shall be washed at least once per week.
(14) Safety Inspection. All carriages shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Chief
of Police (or designee) to insure adequate safety measures. Any carriage found to be in
a defective condition shall be immediately withdrawn from service and shall not be used
for carrying passengers until such vehicle has been repaired, inspected and approved by
the Chief of Police (or designee). The Chief of Police (or designee) shall indicate on the
inspection report the seating capacity of the carriage specified by the manufacturer.
Written proof of inspection and approval by the Chief of Police (or designee) shall be
submitted to the City Clerk prior to issuance of a license.
(15) Sanitation. Each horse and carriage shall be equipped with adequate sanitation devices
to prevent excrement from falling on the street. Should excrement fall on the street, it
shall be the sole responsibility of the driver to remove the same as soon as practicable,
by shovel or like instrument, and dilute and flush the urine. No driver of a carriage shall
permit excrement to remain on any street, alley, gutter, sidewalk, lawn, field, park,
public way or private property. All excrement shall be promptly placed into a sealed
container, kept away from the public and transported to a site or facility authorized to
accept it for disposal. In this subsection, “excrement” includes fecal matter and urine.
(16) Posting of Signs. Each owner shall securely post and maintain a sign in the passenger
compartment of each carriage, in a conspicuous place plainly visible to all occupants
thereof, indicating the seating capacity of the carriage which has been specified by the
manufacturer and stating “NO STANDING WHILE VEHICLE IS IN MOTION.”
(17) Riding with Driver Prohibited. The driver of any carriage shall not permit any
passenger, except an assistant driver, to sit alongside the driver while the driver is
engaged in the operation of the carriage.
(18) Refusal to Carry Passengers Prohibited. No carriage owner, driver, licensee, nor any
owner’s employee or lessee, shall refuse to carry passengers unless a passenger or
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 64 9/16/14
prospective passenger engages in violent, abusive, loud, profane, vulgar, indecent or
otherwise disorderly conduct or refuses to pay the fare for such service.
(19) Certification of Animal Health. For each horse that will draw a carriage, a licensee shall
provide to the City Clerk a certificate issued by a veterinarian licensed in the state of
Wisconsin finding such animal to be free from infectious disease, in good health and fit
for carriage service under this section. Each horse shall thereafter be re-examined at
intervals of no more than six (6) months, and a new certificate shall be issued by such
veterinarian and filed with the City Clerk in order for each horse to remain in service.
(20) Animal Temperament, Care and Maintenance. Every horse used to draw a carriage shall
be mild-mannered and kept under the immediate supervision and control of a driver
having experience with horse management. Each licensee shall assure adequate rest
periods, feeding and watering schedules, health and related performance and well-being
for each horse under the licensee’s ownership, care or control. This responsibility shall
include carriage load limits, hours of operation and daily hours of animal usage, except
that no horse shall be required to work more than twelve (12) hours per day.
(21) Proof of Insurance. Each owner or lessee of a horse and carriage operated for hire
within the city shall procure and maintain public liability insurance in an amount of not
less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) in the aggregate insuring the owner, lessee
and the City from any claims or damages for bodily injuries or death, and in an amount
of not less than Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000) for property damage, arising
from the operation of horse-drawn vehicles carrying passengers for hire. Said insurance
shall name the City of Port Washington as an additional insured thereon, and a
certificate evidencing such insurance coverage shall be filed with the City Clerk at the
time a license application is submitted under this section.
(22) Indemnification. Notwithstanding the insurance requirements set forth in subsection
(21) hereof, each owner, licensee and lessee shall indemnify and hold the City of Port
Washington harmless from any claims, demands, damages and/or losses of any kind or
nature arising from the operation of horse-drawn vehicles within the city by the owner,
licensee, lessee, or their employees or agents. Such indemnification agreement shall be
filed with the City Clerk at the time a license application is submitted under this section.
(23) Accident Reporting. Every owner, driver, licensee and lessee shall report to the City
police department, within twelve (12) hours of its occurrence, any accident or incident
of any kind and nature resulting in injury to any horse, carriage or property of others, or
any personal injury to a passenger or other person that in any manner involves or relates
to the entry into, exit from, use or operation of a horse-drawn carriage within the city.
9.23.040 Licenses.
(1) Applications; Issuance Standards. License application forms shall be obtained from the
City Clerk and shall state the name, residence and telephone number of the applicant and
each driver who is proposed to operate a carriage, and shall include an exact copy of
each driver’s valid Wisconsin driver’s license and any other information the City Clerk
may require. Said applicant shall be the licensee. An applicant shall then request route
approval and equipment inspection by the police department. Completed applications
shall be submitted to the City Clerk, together with route approval, equipment inspection
approval and the certificate(s) of animal health. The City Clerk shall present the
application to the Common Council, which shall approve or reject the same based upon
its consideration of the following:
(a) The number of licenses available.
(b) The adequacy of the applicant’s financial resources for the establishment and
operation of a carriage business.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 65 9/16/14
(c) The adequacy of the physical facilities from which the carriage business would
be conducted.
(d) The knowledge and experience of the applicant in handling horses.
(e) The applicant’s prior service to the public in the carriage business.
(f) The ability of the applicant to maintain sanitary conditions in and around the
applicant’s trailer(s) and stand(s).
(g) The locations of the proposed stand(s) as it relates to convenience to the public
and the effect on local health and traffic conditions.
(h) The applicant’s compliance with the provisions of this section.
(i) The applicant’s compliance with applicable federal, state and local safety,
sanitation, traffic and health laws and ordinances.
(j) The effect of the issuance of licenses on the public health, safety and welfare.
(2) Requirements; Fees; Term of License. All licenses authorized by the Common Council
shall be issued by the City Clerk upon receipt from the applicant of a certificate of
liability insurance and a signed indemnification agreement which comply with the
provisions of this section and are in such form as approved by the City Clerk. A
description of the approved route(s) shall be attached to the license. The license fee
shall be $110.00 for each owner or lessee of a horse and carriage service operated for
hire within the city. Such fees shall be paid prior to issuance of a license. A license is
valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued.
(3) Form and Display of License. Upon approval of an application by the Common Council
and compliance with the requirements of this section, the City Clerk shall issue a license
which shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk. The license
shall be securely attached to, and displayed in plain view in the licensed carriage.
(4) Transferability. No license issued under this section shall be transferred or assigned to a
new owner without such license first being returned to the City Clerk for consideration
of re-issuance to a prospective licensee upon compliance with all of the terms of this
section, and any other regulations applicable to such carriage operation.
9.23.050 Police Authority; Suspension or Revocation; Common Council Action; Penalty
(1) Police Authority. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to review routes, manner
of operation and condition of equipment at any time and to modify or temporarily
suspend any license or restrict any route if he deems it necessary for the protection of the
public safety or interest. Any police officer shall have authority to inspect a carriage and
enforce this ordinance and the any laws or regulations relating to the operation thereof.
(2) Suspension or Revocation. Licenses issued under this section may be suspended or
revoked for cause by the Common Council after notice to the licensee and a hearing as
provided herein. Suspension or revocation proceedings for violations under this section
may be instituted by the Chief of Police upon written charges made and filed with the
City Clerk, or upon a sworn written complaint filed with the City Clerk by any person.
(3) Common Council Action. Upon receipt of an appeal of a modification or temporary
suspension, or upon receipt of written charges or a written complaint, the City Clerk
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 66 9/16/14
shall schedule a hearing before the Common Council and shall send, by first class mail, a
copy of the charges or complaint, together with a notice of hearing, to the licensee or the
person against whom the charges or complaint were made. Such notice shall be sent at
least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled hearing. At such hearing, the Chief of Police or
the complainant, and the licensee or person against whom the charges or complaint were
made, shall have an opportunity to present evidence and/or make a statement regarding
the grounds for the modification, suspension or revocation and the charges or complaint.
The Common Council shall, based upon the evidence and/or statements, take action to
affirm, reverse or modify such modification, dismiss the charges or complaint, uphold
the charges or complaint and suspend or revoke the license, or take such other action as
it deems appropriate. Such action is not a penalty and shall not prevent other
enforcement action for violations of this section, including, without limitation, court
action to enforce forfeitures or an injunction.
Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, where no other provisions
are expressly made for the enforcement of any forfeiture or penalties under this section or under
state law, be subject to a penalty under § 25.04.000 of this Code
9.24.000 LICENSING AND REGULATING OF BEEKEEPING
1. Definitions. As used in this section, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
a. “Apiary” is a physical location where one or more colonies of bees and their
hives are kept by humans for purposes of education, pollination, production
or observation.
b. “Bee” shall mean either a honeybee or bumblebee when kept by a human
beekeeper for purpose of education, pollination, production or observation.
In the case of honeybees, the species shall be Apis mellifera, known as the
common domestic honeybee.
c. “Colony” shall mean a settlement of bees consisting of queen, workers and
drones. A colony can be in a hive or as a swarm.
d. “Flyway barrier” is a natural or man-made obstacle causing the bees to go up
after exiting the hive. Barriers may be fences, walls or shrubs, typically 6 feet
or more in height.
e. “Frame” refers to the natural or man-made honeycomb divisions within a
beehive where the colony houses their family and food.
f. “Hive” or “Beehive” shall mean a structure that houses a bee colony. In
accordance with the Wisconsin Statutes, honeybees shall be kept in movable
frame hives.
g. “Swarm” is a natural behavior exhibited by insects or animals which
aggregate together, moving en masse to or from a location.
2. Hives. All beehives shall be well maintained according to good beekeeping
practices.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 67 9/16/14
3. Initial License. Any person desiring to keep beehives within the City must obtain a
license. Any person keeping existing beehives on their property within the City on the
effective date of this section shall have two (2) weeks from the effective date of this
section to apply for a City beekeeping license. Applications shall be submitted to the
City Clerk. At the time of application for a City beekeeping license, the applicant shall:
a. Be in compliance with the other requirements of this ordinance;
b. Pay a one-time nonrefundable application fee of $ 25.00; and
c. Neighborhood notification shall be required. Before a beekeeping license is
issued, the following process must be followed:
(i) When a license application is submitted, all owners of property,
including, but not limited to schools, businesses and rental properties,
lying within a radius of two hundred (200) feet, centered on the
premises for which the license has been requested, shall be notified
by the license applicant. Using a Neighborhood Notification Form
(NNF-1) provided by the City, the applicant shall contact each of said
property owners, informing them of the applicant’s intention to keep
bees on the applicant’s premises. Each of said property owners shall
be asked to sign the NNF-1 form so as to indicate their approval of
the applicant’s request.
(ii) In addition to any other information required by the City, the NNF-1
form shall require an applicant to provide the names and addresses
of all property owners described in subsection (i) hereof, together with
a map showing the proposed location of all hives on the premises in
relation to the specific set-back distances prescribed in Section 6
hereof.
(iii) The applicant shall return the completed NNF-1 form to the City
Clerk. Upon receipt of the form, the City Clerk shall send a follow-up
verification letter to each of the property owners described in
subsection (i) hereof via First Class mail. Said letter shall inform the
property owners that they have fourteen (14) days from the date of
mailing of such letter to file a written objection with the Clerk if they
object to the granting of the beekeeping license.
(iv) If more than thirty percent (30%) of the property owners described in
subsection (i) hereof object, or if a timely written objection is filed by
one of said property owners having a resident family member with a
demonstrable medical condition relating to bee stings, the Common
Council shall hold a hearing within thirty (30) days to review and act
on the license application, taking into consideration the standards set
forth in Sections 5 and 6 hereof.
(v) Within ten (10) days of completion of the hearing conducted pursuant
to subsection (iv) hereof, the City Clerk shall mail to the objector(s)
and license applicant the Common Council’s written determination on
the application.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 68 9/16/14
4. Renewal License. A City beekeeping license may be renewed annually by
submitting an updated NNF form, page one only, to the City Clerk within thirty (30) days
of January 1st, together with a license renewal fee in the sum of $ 20.00. At the time of
applying for a renewal license, an applicant shall comply with the same requirements set
forth in Sections 3 a. and c. (iii), (iv) and (v) hereof for an initial City beekeeping license.
5. Keeping of Hives. A license authorizes the keeping of an apiary, provided the
following:
a. No more than three (3) hives are allowed on a lot or double lot. For lots
greater than one (1) acre in size, up to five (5) hives may be permitted.
b. All bees shall be kept in hives which shall be maintained in good condition.
c. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of fresh water is
available at all times so that the bees are discouraged from congregating at
swimming pools, bibcock, pet water bowls, birdbaths, or other water sources
where they may interact with humans or domestic pets.
d. Beekeepers shall utilize local beekeeping associations and classes to obtain
and maintain needed skills and current practice in beekeeping. Proof of
training or tutelage shall be submitted with the NNF-1 form filed with the City
Clerk.
e. Hives shall be actively maintained. Hives not under active human
management and maintenance shall be dismantled or removed by the most
recent licensee.
f. In the event bees in a hive repeatedly exhibit aggressive characteristics, it
shall be the duty of the beekeeper to remove, destroy or re-queen the hive.
Since there are weather and other circumstances in which bees may exhibit
temporary defensive behavior, the Wisconsin State Bee Inspector can make
the determination whether to remove, destroy or re-queen a hive.
g. In addition to compliance with the requirements of this section, no beekeeper
shall keep a hive or hives that cause any unhealthy conditions or interfere
with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others, any
public property or property of others.
6. Location of Hives. All licensed beehives must be located in a manner which is safe
for bees and the community. The following location standards shall apply unless the
owner(s) of the adjoining property(ies) grant written permission for closer placement.
a. The natural flight path of the bees shall not be directly onto the adjoining
property. If the hives are kept within twenty (20) feet of the property lines, a
six (6) foot high closed fence, closed hedge, building or other solid flyway
barrier shall be located between the hives and the property lines.
b. All hives and related structures forming an apiary shall be located at least
twenty (20) feet from the front property line and ten (10) feet from all other
property lines.
City of Port Washington Chapter 9 – Page 69 9/16/14
c. Hives shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from dwellings, porches,
gazebos, decks, swimming pools, stationary play equipment and any other
habitable area on any adjoining lots.
7. Prohibited Conduct. The keeping of any apiary within the City which is not in
compliance with this section is prohibited. Any bee colony not residing in a hive
structure intended for beekeeping, or any swarm of bees, should be reported to city
police. Any colony residing in a standard or home-made hive which, by virtue of its
condition, has obviously been abandoned or improperly maintained by the beekeeper is
prohibited. The beekeeper shall have thirty (30) days following written notice from the
City to bring the hive(s) into compliance.
8. Inspections. In order to ensure that beehives are in compliance with this section
and that there are no hazards or other issues present, an annual inspection of the
licensed premises shall be required. Beekeepers shall utilize the apiary inspection
services of the Wisconsin State Bee Inspector or designated local beekeeping experts to
perform such inspections.
9. Penalties. Violations of this section are subject to penalties as provided in Section
25.04.000 of the Municipal Code, and any other enforcement action, including, but not
limited to legal remedies and injunctive relief.
9.25.000 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in 25.04.00 of this code.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 1 6/2/11
CHAPTER 10
Health & Sanitation
Table of Contents
10.01.000 HEALTH OFFICER: DUTIES AND POWERS
10.01.010 General Duties
10.01.020 Materials and Supplies
10.02.000 ABATEMENT OF HEALTH NUISANCES
10.03.000 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS
10.03.010 Milk Products Defined
10.03.020 License Required
10.03.030 Application
10.03.040 Unlawful to Sell
10.03.050 Grade A Products Only
10.04.000 COMPULSORY CONNECTION TO SEWERS
10.04.010 Giving Notice
10.04.020 Failure to Comply
10.04.030 After Compliance
10.05.000 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF CESSPOOLS
AND PRIVIES IN AREAS WHERE PUBLIC SEWERS ARE
NOT AVAILABLE
10.06.000 EMPTYING OF DRAINS AND SEWERS
10.07.000 DUMPING COMBUSTIBLE OR NOXIOUS LIQUIDS
PROHIBITED
10.08.000 SLAUGHTERHOUSES PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT
10.09.000 GARBAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL
10.09.010 Definitions
10.09.020 Collection; In general; Exceptions
10.09.030 Collection Supervised by Director of Public Works; Grant and
Limitation of Authority
10.09.040 Pre-Collection Practices
10.09.050 Placement at Pickup Location; In General; Exceptions
10.09.060 Special Refuse Matters
10.09.070 (Renumbered Above)
10.09.080 Director of Public Works (Repealed) 12/21/04
10.10.000 RECYCLING
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 2 6/2/11
10.11.000 KEEPING OF ANIMALS AND FOWL
10.15.000 SEWERS
10.15.010 Purpose
10.15.020 Definitions
10.15.030 Use of the Public Sewers
10.15.040 Control of Industrial Wastes Directed to Public Sewers
10.15.050 Basis for Sewer Service Charges
10.15.060 Amount of Sewer Service Charges
10.15.070 Billing Practice
10.15.080 Right of Entry, Safety, and Identification
10.15.090 Sewer Construction and Connections
10.15.100 Violations and Penalties
10.15.110 Appeals
10.15.120 Validity
10.15.130 Audit, Notification, and Records
10.25.000 PENALTY
10.30.000 WATER SUPPLY
10.30.010 Definitions
10.30.020 Connections Prohibited
10.30.030 Inspections
10.30.040 Entry to Inspect
10.30.050 Discontinuance of Service Upon Violation
10.30.060 Immediate Discontinuance
10.30.070 Adoption by Reference
10.30.080 Relationship of Ordinance to Other Laws and Regulations
10.30.090 Private Wells; Abandonment
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 3 6/2/11
CHAPTER 10
Health and Sanitation
10.01.000 HEALTH OFFICER: DUTIES AND POWERS.
10.01.010 General Duties. The City Health Officer under the supervision of the District
State Health Officer shall:
1. Make an annual sanitary survey and maintain continuous sanitary supervision
over his territory.
2. Make a periodic sanitary inspection at least every 4 months of all school
buildings, restaurants, dairies, grocery stores, meat markets and places of public
assemblage and report thereon to those responsible for the maintenance thereof.
3. Promote the spread of information as to the causes, nature and prevention of
prevalent diseases and the preservation and improvement of health.
4. Enforce the health laws, rules and regulations of the State Board of Health, the
State and the City, including the laws relating to contagious diseases contained in
Chapter 143, Wisconsin Statutes, and Chapters Health 45 through 49, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, which are by reference made a part of this chapter.
5. Take steps necessary to secure prompt and full reports by physicians of
communicable diseases and prompt and full registration of births and deaths.
6. Keep and deliver to his successor a record of all his official acts.
7. Make an annual report to the State Board of Health and to the Common
Council and such other report as they may request.
10.01.020 Materials and Supplies. The Health Officer shall have the authority to
procure at the expense of the City all record books, quarantine cards and other materials
needed by the Board of Health, except such as are furnished by the State Board of Health.
10.02.000 ABATEMENT OF HEALTH NUISANCES. The Health Officer shall have
the power to abate health nuisances in accordance with Section 146.14, Wisconsin
Statutes, which is by reference made a part of this Chapter.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 4 6/2/11
10.03.000 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS.
10.03.010 Milk Products Defined. The term “Milk Product” shall mean and include
cream, homogenized milk, buttermilk, skim milk, milk beverages, skim milk beverages,
milk or skim milk which have been fortified by the addition of vitamins or minerals and
any other product made by the addition of any substance to milk or any of these named
products and used for the same purposes, which may be designated by the Common
Council as a milk product.
10.03.020 License Required. No person shall sell or distribute milk, or any milk
product, as hereinafter defined, for direct human consumption or to any hotel, restaurant,
store, vendor or other retailer for resale for human consumption unless such person
possesses a valid license therefore granted by the City. No license shall be required for
hotels, restaurants, stores, vendors and other retailers who sell the milk and milk products
furnished by licensees in compliance with this section.
10.03.030 Application. Each application for a license shall state the name and address of
the person applying for a license and the location of each premise where any item
regulated by this section is bottled, pasteurized or otherwise prepared for distribution.
The license shall be issued by the clerk upon payment of an annual fee of $25.00 for each
calendar year or portion thereof. Every license shall cease to be valid on December 31 of
the year issued.
10.03.040 Unlawful to Sell. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer or expose for sale any milk
or milk product which is adulterated or misbranded as those terms are defined in the
Wisconsin Statutes.
10.03.050 Grade A Products Only. No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale any
milk or milk product other than Grade A pasteurized milk or milk products as those terms
are defined in the Wisconsin Administrative Code, Chapter Agriculture 80, issued by the
State Department of Agriculture, a certified copy of which is filed in the office of the
City Clerk.
10.04.000 COMPULSORY CONNECTION TO SEWERS.
10.04.010 Giving Notice. A. Whenever public sewers and water mains are laid along and
within any public street, alley or place in the City and ready for use, the Health Officer of
the person appointed for that purpose shall notify, in writing, all owners of their agents
and occupants of all houses, tenements, or other buildings situated on lots or parcels of
land abutting upon such street, alley or place and accessible to such sewer and water
main, to connect all water closets, bath tubs, cesspools, lavatories, sinks, urinals, and
outside frost-proof closets, upon their respective lots or parcels of land with said sewer in
a sanitary manner in accordance with the provisions of the Plumbing Code of the City
and the State Plumbing Code within 10 days after service of such notice, provided such
notice shall be given between March 1 and October 1.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 5 6/2/11
B. Giving Notice. Sewer Connection Fees. The owner shall pay a sewer connection
fee pursuant to the following schedule. No plumbing permits shall be issued by the City
of Port Washington before payment of said connection fee (or minimum connection fee,
in the case of industrial or commercial connection units).
The fees shall be as follows:
Fee per connection unit: $400.00 if paid on or prior to December 31, 1992;
$500.00 if paid on or after January 1, 1993, but on or prior to December 31, 1993;
$600.00 if paid on or after January 1, 1994, but on or prior to December 31, 1994;
$700.00 if paid on or after January 1, 1995, but on or prior to December 31, 1995;
$800.00 if paid on or after January 1, 1996.
C. Giving Notice. Definitions.
1. Connection unit, residential. One connection unit is equal to one dwelling unit
except that a single bedroom or efficiency apartment shall be considered 0.75
units.
2. Connection unit, industrial or commercial. Minimum fee equal to fee for one
connection unit, with an additional connection fee for the use of each 1,000 cubic
feet, or portion thereof, over one 1,500 cubic feet per month, based on the average
usage calculated one year after occupancy.
D. Giving Notice. Deposit of Fees. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be
credited to the appropriate account to provide funds for emergency replacement of
sanitary sewer and for planning, including protective maintenance, to prevent the need for
emergency repairs. In the event that funds contained in said account exceeded
$50,000.00 at the close of any calendar year, any such excess funds shall be allocated for
debt reduction or future plant expansion for the sewer system, or such other related
purpose as the Common Council shall determine.
10.04.020 Failure to Comply. If any person so notified shall fail, refuse or neglect to
comply with such notice, the Common Council shall proceed under Section 144.06,
Wisconsin Statutes, to cause such connection to be made and the cost thereof assessed as
a special tax against the said lots or parcels of land and the amount thereof levied and
collected as are other taxes.
10.04.030 After Compliance. Whenever connection has been made as provided herein,
all privy vaults, privies, cesspools and surface closets on such lots or parcels of land shall
be removed and abated and the use thereof discontinued. If this subsection is not
complied with, the Health Officer or officer charged with the duty thereof may cause
such to be abated and the cost assessed as a special tax against the property and levied
and collected as are other taxes.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 6 6/2/11
10.05.000 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF CESSPOOLS AND
PRIVIES IN AREAS WHERE PUBLIC SEWERS ARE NOT AVAILABLE. No
person shall construct any cesspool, or other receptacle for filthy water, or convert any
well into a cesspool, or erect any privy, within the City without having first obtained a
written permit from the Board of Health. All persons shall keep and maintain all privy
vaults, water closets, cesspools, sinks, drains and like receptacles upon premises owned
or occupied by them, at all times in a cleanly and inoffensive condition, and shall obey
any general or special rules and regulations or orders relative thereto, that may be duly
made and published, or which may be served upon them by the Board of Health. No
person shall open or empty and privy vault, cesspool, water closet or other receptacle for
excrementitious, or filthy, or refuse matter, except under such conditions as the Board of
Health may prescribe and with the permission of the Board.
10.06.000 EMPTYING OF DRAINS AND SEWERS. No person shall permit any drain
or sewer from his dwelling house, barn, stable, shop or other building to empty or run
into any open sewer or gutter, or into any of the streets or public alleys, or upon or over
any sidewalk.
10.07.000 DUMPING COMBUSTIBLE OR NOXIOUS LIQUIDS PROHIBITED.
No waste, oil, waste cleaning fluid, waste gasoline or other combustible or noxious liquid
shall be dumped in any public or private property within the City or in any part of the
public sewer system, except that such wastes may be dumped or discarded in a dumping
ground provided by the City.
10.08.000 SLAUGHTERHOUSES PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT. No person
shall operate a slaughterhouse or conduct slaughtering or rendering operations within the
City except upon permit issued by the Board of Health.
10.09.000 GARBAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL.
10.09.010 Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
1. Garbage: putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
2. Newsprint: a common and inexpensive machine-finished paper made chiefly
from wood pulp and used mostly for newspapers.
3. Pickup Location: unless a different meaning is clearly manifest or as otherwise
required by the Director of Public Works, pickup location shall mean for each
eligible building, complex, dwelling unit, facility or residence a point at the curb
line or roadside of the public street whereon the building, complex, dwelling
unit, facility or residence from which collection is being made fronts.
4. Recyclable Materials: those materials defined in sec. 10.10.000 B. (21)of this
chapter.
5. Refuse: all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except bodily wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, dead animals and solid commercial and industrial
wastes. Refuse as defined herein shall include recyclable materials, provided
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 7 6/2/11
that such materials are separated, cleaned, stored, managed, prepared, collected
and disposed of in accordance with sec. 10.10.000 of this chapter.
6. Rubbish: nonputrescible solid wastes, consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard waste, wood,
glad, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
7. Yard Waste: those wastes defined in sec. 10.10.000 B. (26) of this chapter.
10.09.020 Collection; In General; Exceptions.
A. Except as provided herein, the City shall provide weekly refuse
collection, and bi-weekly collection of recyclable materials, to:
(1) the owners and occupants of each single-family and two-family
residence within the City, provided that the owners and
occupants thereof comply with the terms and conditions set forth
in this chapter and any refuse collection regulations made by the
Director of Public Works.
(2) the owners and occupants of each commercial, retail, industrial,
governmental and institutional facility within the City, provided
that such refuse is contained in not more than one (1) two (2)
cubic yard dumpster, and provided that the owners and
occupants thereof comply with the terms and conditions set forth
in this chapter and any refuse collection regulations made by the
Director of Public Works.
B. Collection of refuse and recyclable materials shall be provided by the City
through contract(s) with such contractor(s) as the Common Council may
determine.
C. All buildings or complexes containing three or more residential dwelling
units, and all commercial, retail, industrial, governmental and institutional
facilities producing refuse which is not contained in one (1) two (2) cubic
yard dumpster shall provide for at least weekly collection and disposal of
refuse at the expense of the owner, occupant or entity producing such
refuse. The Director of Public Works shall determine if the frequency of
collection and method of disposal used by such buildings, complexes,
dwelling units or facilities are adequate. The Director of Public Works is
authorized to require more frequent collection and/or other methods of
disposal if, in his or her opinion following inspection, accumulated refuse
is creating or contributing to a public nuisance.
D. All buildings or complexes containing three or more residential dwelling
units, and all commercial, retail, industrial, governmental and institutional
facilities producing refuse which is not contained in one (1) two (2) cubic
yard dumpster, shall provide for at least weekly collection and disposal of
refuse at the expense of the owner, occupant or entity producing such
refuse. The Director of Public Works shall determine if the frequency of
collection and method of disposal used by such buildings, complexes,
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 8 6/2/11
dwelling units or facilities are adequate. The Director of Public Works is
authorized to require more frequent collection and/or other methods of
disposal if, in his or her opinion following inspection, accumulated refuse
is creating or contributing to a public nuisance.
E. Refuse originating from sources outside the City of Port Washington shall
not be collected.
F. Exceptions: This ordinance shall not prohibit:
(1) the actual producers of refuse, or the owners or occupants of
premises upon which refuse has accumulated, from personally
collecting, conveying and disposing of such refuse, provided
that such producers, owners or occupants comply with the
provisions of this ordinance and with any other governing laws,
ordinances or regulations.
(2) collectors of refuse from outside of the City of Port Washington
from hauling such refuse over City streets, provided that such
collectors comply with the provisions of this ordinance and with
any other governing laws, ordinances or regulations.
Authorization for such outside collectors to collect or haul such
refuse shall first be obtained from the Director of Public Works.
10.09.030 Collection Supervised by Director of Public Works; Grant and Limitation
of Authority.
All refuse accumulated in the City shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of under the
supervision of the Director of Public Works. The Director shall have authority to modify
existing rules and regulations, or make additional reasonable rules and regulations, for the
administration of refuse collection services of all types performed in the City of Port
Washington, including, but not limited to: the frequency and days of collection, type and
location of refuse containers, manner and routes of collection, and such other matters
pertaining to the collection, conveying and disposal of refuse as he or she shall determine
necessary; provided, however, that such rules and regulations are not contrary to the
provisions hereof or inconsistent with the established policies of the Board of Public
Works, and provided further that no change in the day(s) of collection shall be made
except upon publication of a Class 1 notice in the official newspaper of the City.
10.09.040 Pre-Collection Practices.
1. Separation of Refuse. Garbage and other rubbish may be combined in
containers with the following exceptions:
Yard waste shall be separated from other refuse.
Recyclable materials, non-combustible items and any other materials
prohibited by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources from
disposal in a licensed sanitary landfill shall be separated from other refuse.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 9 6/2/11
2. Preparation of Refuse.
Garbage shall be thoroughly drained and securely wrapped.
Tree trimmings and similar material shall be cut to a length not to exceed
five (5) feet. Such material exceeding five (5) feet in length or six (6)
inches in diameter shall be considered non-combustible refuse.
Recyclable materials shall be prepared in accordance with sec. 10.10.000
of this chapter.
3. Containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the
premises. Only plastic disposable bag containers of a maximum size of thirty
(30) gallons and a maximum weight of fifty-five (55) pounds per bag shall be
authorized for collection purposes. Metal or plastic trashcans, household
wastebaskets, cardboard boxes and plastic shopping bags are not approved
collection containers. Collection containers shall be placed at the pickup
location not earlier than 6:00 p.m. the evening immediately preceding the day
of collection. The Director of Public Works may refuse collection services for
failure to comply with the refuse separation, preparation, storage,
management, collection and/or disposal requirements of this chapter.
4. Storage of Refuse. No person shall place any refuse in any street or other
public place, or upon any private property, whether or not owned by such
person, within the City, unless such refuse is in proper containers for
collection or with the express approval of the Director of Public Works. Any
unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises within the City shall be
deemed a public nuisance.
10.09.050 Placement at Pickup Location; In General; Exceptions.
A. Except as provided in subsection B. hereof, refuse containers, bundles
or objects, whether combustible or non-combustible, and newsprint,
shall be placed at the pickup location, between the sidewalk and the
curb. If no sidewalk exists, the containers, bundles, objects and
newsprint shall be placed no closer than one (1) foot nor farther than
five (5) feet from the traveled portion of the public street.
B. Exceptions: Notwithstanding subsection A. hereof:
(1) In downtown, high density commercial districts, and in
industrial plant site areas, the pickup location for refuse
containers shall be as approved by the Director of Public
Works or his or her designee.
(2) In residential districts, if the occupant is unable to meet the
requirements of this ordinance due to physical or mental
disability or impairment, the pickup location or refuse
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 10 6/2/11
containers shall be as approved by the Director of Public
Works or his or her designee.
(3) Any request for an exception from the regular pickup
location shall be submitted in writing to the Director of
Public Works. If the request for an exception is denied, the
person or entity requesting such exception may, within ten
(10) days of the date of the decision, appeal the decision to
the Board of Public Works which shall determine the matter
by simple majority vote, provided a quorum is present.
Upon appeal, the Board of Public Works may authorize in
specific cases an exception from the terms of this section as
will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to
special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of
this section will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship, so that the spirit of this section shall be observed,
public health, safety and welfare secured, and substantial
justice done. In making its determination, the Board of
Public Works shall consider whether the proposed exception
would result in a pickup location being hazardous, harmful,
noxious, offensive or a nuisance to the surrounding
neighborhood by reason of physical, social or economic
effects, and may impose such requirements and conditions
with respect to pickup location, in addition to any which may
be provided for in this section, as the Board of Public Works
may deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties
and the public interest, health, safety and welfare. The
grounds of every such appeal determination shall be stated.
10.09.060 Special Refuse Matters.
1. Highly inflammable or explosive materials shall be disposed of by the owner or
possessor thereof upon notice from the Director of Public Works.
2. Large appliances shall have all doors and latches removed during storage for
collection.
3. Refuse from temporary construction or similar processshall be contained and
disposed of by the contractor, or, upon failure of the contractor to remove the
same, by the property owner.
10.09.070 Special Refuse Matters: (Renumbered 10.09.060)
10.09.080 Director of Public Works. (Repealed)
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 11 6/2/11
10.10.000 RECYCLING.
A. Administration. The provision of this ordinance shall be administered by the City of
Port Washington Recycling Committee.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance:
(1) “Bi-Metal container” means a container for carbonated or malt beverages
that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
(2) “Container board” means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
(3) “Foam Polystyrene packaging” means packaging made primarily from
foam polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
(i) is designed for serving food or beverages;
(ii) consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container;
(iii) consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
(4) “HDPE” means high-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2.
(5) “LDPE” means low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4.
(6) “Local Authorized Dealer” means a business or individual that is authorized
to accept for recycling or other processing any recyclable materials.
(7) “Magazines” means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
(8) “Major appliance” means a residential or commercial air conditioner,
clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven,
refrigerator or stove.
(9) “Multiple-family dwelling” means a property containing five (5) or more
residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
(10) “Newspaper” means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
(11) “Non-residential facilities and properties” means commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and properties. This term does
not include multiple family dwellings.
(12) “Office paper” means high-grade printing and writing papers from offices
in non-residential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This term
does not include industrial process waste.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 12 6/2/11
(13) “Other resins or multiple resins” means plastic resins labeled by the SPI
code #7.
(14) “Person” includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
local governmental unit, as defined in s. 66.299 (1) (a), Wis. Stats., state agency
or authority or federal agency.
(15) “PETE” means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1.
(16) “Plastic container” means an individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can,
jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product
that is the subject of a retail sale.
(17) “Postconsumer waste” means solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in s. 144.61 (5), Wis.
Stats., waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles, or
high-volume industrial waste, as defined in s. 144.44 (7) (a) 1., Wis. Stats.
(18) “PP” means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5.
(19) “PS” means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code #6.
(20) “PVC” means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3.
(21) “Recyclable materials” includes lead acid batteries; major appliances;
waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container
board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper;
office paper, rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC,
LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple resins; steel containers; waste tires;
and bi-metal containers.
(22) “Solid waste” has the meaning specified in s. 289.01 (33), 287.00, Wis.
Stats.
(23) “Solid waste facility” has the meaning specified in s. 144.43 (5), Wis. Stats.
(24) “Solid waste treatment” means any method, technique or process which is
designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition
of solid waste. “Treatment” includes incineration.
(25) Waste tire” means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
(26) “Yard waste” means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and
brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater than 6 inches in
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root
balls.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 13 6/2/11
C. Separation of Recyclable Materials. Occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit
residences, multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties shall
separate the following materials from postconsumer waste:
(1) Lead acid batteries
(2) Major appliances
(3) Waste oil
(4) Yard waste
(5) Aluminum containers
(6) Bi-metal containers
(7) Corrugated paper or other container board
(8) Foam polystyrene packaging
(9) Glass containers
(10) Magazines
(11) Newspaper
(12) Office paper
(13) Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other
resins or multiple resins
(14) Steel containers
(15) Waste tires
D. Separation Requirements Exempted. The separation requirements of Subd. C. do
not apply to the following:
(1) Occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and
non-residential facilities and properties that send their post consumer waste to a
processing facility licensed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources that
recovers the materials specified in Subd. C. from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible.
(2) Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less than 30% of
the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste burned as supplemental fuel.
(3) A recyclable material specified in Subd. C.5. through Subd. C.15. for which a
variance has been granted by the Department of Natural Resources under s. 159.11 (2m),
Wis. Stats., or s. NR 544.14, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
E. Care of Separated Recyclable Materials. To the greatest extent practicable, the
recyclable materials separated in accordance with Subd. C. shall be clean and free of
contaminants such as food or produce residue, oil or grease, or other non-recyclable
materials, including, but not limited to, household hazardous waste and agricultural
chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a manner which protects
them from wind, rain and other inclement weather conditions.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 14 6/2/11
F. Management of Lead Acid Batteries, Major Appliances, Waste Oil and Yard
Waste. Occupants or single family and 2 to 4 unit residences, multiple-family dwellings
and non-residential facilities and properties shall manage lead acid batteries, major
appliances, waste oil, and yard waste as follows:
(1) Lead acid batteries shall be taken to a local authorized dealer accepting this product.
(2) Major appliances shall be taken to a local authorized dealer accepting this product.
(3) Waste oil shall be taken to a local authorized dealer accepting this product.
(4) Yard waste shall be taken to the City Garage yard for disposal.
G. Preparation and Collection of Recyclable Materials. Except as otherwise directed
by the City Council, occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit residences shall do the
following for the preparation and collection of the separated materials specified in Subd.
C.5. through Subd. C.15:
(1) Aluminum containers shall be mixed together with other recyclables in blue recycling
bags and placed at curb on the designated collection day.
(2) Bi-metal containers shall be mixed together with other recyclables in blue recycling
bags and placed at curb on the designated collection day.
(3) Corrugated paper or other container board shall be bundled (no larger than 8 inches
high) and placed at the curb on the designated collection day.
(4) Foam polystyrene packaging shall be mixed together with other recyclables in blue
recycling bags and placed at curb on the designated collection day.
(5) Glass containers shall be mixed together with other recyclables in a blue recycling
bag and placed at the curb on the designated day of collection.
(6) Magazines shall be bundled or put in a brown grocery bag and placed at the curb on
the designated day of collection.
(7) Newspaper shall be bundled or put in a brown grocery bag and placed at the curb on
the designated day of collection.
(8) Office paper shall be disposed at designated local authorized dealer accepting this
product.
(9) Rigid plastic containers shall be prepared and collected as follows:
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 15 6/2/11
(i) Plastic containers made of PETE (#1) shall be mixed together with other
recyclables in a blue recycling bag and placed at the curb on the
designated day of collection.
(ii) Plastic containers made of HDPE (#2) shall be mixed together with other
recyclables in a blue recycling bag and placed at the curb on the
designated day of collection.
(iii) Plastic containers made of PVC shall be collected as #1 & #2 plastics
unless excluded by the DNR.
(iv) Plastic containers made of LDPE shall be collected as #2 plastics unless
excluded by the DNR.
(v) Plastic containers made of PP shall be collected as #1 & #2 plastics unless
excluded by the DNR.
(vi) Plastic containers made of PS shall be collected as #1 & #2 plastics unless
excluded by the DNR.
(vii) Plastic containers made of other resins or multiple resins shall be collected
as #1 and #2 plastics unless excluded by the DNR.
(10) Steel containers shall be mixed together with other recyclables in a blue recycling
bag and placed at the curb on the designated day of collection.
(11) Waste tires shall be disposed at designated local authorized dealer accepting this
product.
H. Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of Multiple-Family Dwellings.
(1) Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of the
following to recycle the materials specified in Subd. C.5. through Subd. C.15:
(i) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(ii) Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling and
at least semi-annually thereafter about the established recycling program.
(iii) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste
by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 16 6/2/11
(iv) Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which
materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the
processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and hours
of operation, and contact person or company, including a name, address
and telephone number.
(2) The requirements specified in (1) do not apply to the owners or designated agents of
multiple-family dwellings if the post consumer waste generated within the dwelling is
treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that
recovers for recycling the materials specified in Sub. C.5. through Subd. C.15 from solid
waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
I. Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of Non-Residential Facilities and
Properties. (1) Owners or designated agents of non-residential facilities and properties
shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in Subd. C.5. through Subd.
C.15:
(i) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(ii) Notify in writing, at least semi-annually, all users, tenants and occupants
of the properties about the established recycling program.
(iii) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste
by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the materials to a
recycling facility.
(iv) Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle,
which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in order to meet
the processing requirements, collection methods of sites, locations and
hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name,
address and telephone number.
(2) The requirements specified in (1) do not apply to the owners or designated agents of
non-residential facilities and properties if the post consumer waste generated within the
facility or property is treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of
Natural Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in Sub. C.5. through
Subd. C.15 from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 17 6/2/11
J. Prohibitions on Disposal of Recyclable Materials Separated for Recycling. No
person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid waste treatment
facility any of the materials specified in Subd. C.5 through C.15 which have been
separated for recycling, except waste tires may be burned with energy recovery in a solid
waste treatment facility.
K. Enforcement. (1) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of
this ordinance, the Director of Public Works or his or her designee may inspect
recyclable materials separated for recycling, post consumer waste intended for disposal,
recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiplefamily
dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties, and any records relating to
recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect
proprietary information. No person may refuse access to the Director of Public Works or
his or her designee, who requests access for purposes of inspection, and who presents
appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such an
inspection.
(2) Any person who violates a provision of this ordinance may be issued a citation by the
City of Port Washington Police Department to collect forfeitures. The issuance of a
citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the
same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the
same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this
paragraph.
(3) Penalties for violating this ordinance may be assessed as follows:
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 18 6/2/11
(i) Any person who violates Subd. J. may be required to forfeit $50.00 for a
first violation, $200.00 for a second violation, and not more than
$2,000.00 for a third or subsequent violation.
(ii) Any person who violates a provision of this ordinance except Subd. J.,
may be required to forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00
for each violation.
L. Removal of Recyclables. All recyclable materials placed at the curb for pickup shall
become the property of the City of Port Washington and its recycling contractor (s). The
removal of any recyclable materials by any unauthorized person shall be deemed a
violation of this ordinance and subject to penalties as set forth herein.
10.11.000 KEEPING OF ANIMALS AND FOWL. No person shall keep animals or
fowl, other than domesticated pets, within the City except upon permit granted by the
Board of Health.
10.15.000 SEWERS.
10.15.010 Purpose. An ordinance regulating the use of public sewers and drains, the
installation and connection of building sewers, the discharge of waters and wastes into
the public sewer system, and providing penalties for violations thereof; and levying and
collection of sewer service charges, in the City of Port Washington, County of Ozaukee,
State of Wisconsin.
10.15.020 Definitions.
1. APPROVING AUTHORITY shall mean the City Administrator or his duly
authorized representatives.
2. BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five (5) days at
20 degrees Celsius, expressed as milligrams per liter (mg/1). Quantitative
determination of BOD shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in
“Standard Methods”.
3. BUILDING DRAIN shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 19 6/2/11
4. BULDING SEWER shall mean a sanitary sewer which begins immediately
outside of the foundation wall of any building or structure being served, and ends
at its connection to the public sewer.
5. BUSINESS OPERATOR shall mean the natural or legal person who owns,
leases, or operates as franchisee of, an enterprise or organization and is
responsible for ensuring that the requirements of law are met within the business
under their control, whether such business is for profit or not, whether public or
private, commercial, industrial or institutional, retail or wholesale, and whether
such business relates to any activities or stage of preparation, production,
processing, handling, distribution, storage or sale of goods, or services.
6. CATEGORY “A” shall be those sanitary sewer users who discharge normal
domestic strength wastewater with concentrations of BOD, suspended solids and
phosphorus no greater than those listed in Section 10.15.060 C. CATEGORY B.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE.
7. CATEGORY “B” shall be those sanitary sewer users who discharge
wastewater with concentrations of BOD, suspended solids and phosphorus in
excess of those listed in Section 10.15.60 C. CATEGORY B. SEWER SERVICE
CHARGE. Users whose wastewater exceeds the concentrations for any one of
these parameters shall be in CATEGORY “B”.
8. CATEGORY “C” shall be those discharges of septic and holding tanks wastes
with concentrations of BOD, suspended solids and phosphorus in excess of those
listed in Section 10.15.060 C. CATEGORY B. SEWER SERVICE CHARGE.
Discharges of septic and holding tank wastes that exceed the concentrations for
any one of these parameters shall be in CATEGORY “C”.
9. CHLORINE REQUIREMENT shall mean the amount of chlorine, in mg/1
which must be added to sewage to produce a residual chlorine as specified in the
Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit.
10. CITY shall mean the City of Port Washington.
11. COMBINED SEWER shall mean a sewer intended to receive both
wastewater and storm water, clear water or surface water.
12. COMMERCIAL WASTE shall have the same meaning as INDUSTRIAL
WASTE as defined in this section.
13. COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS shall mean BOD, suspended solids,
phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen and nitrogen compounds, pH,
or fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the
Municipality’s WPDES permit for its wastewater treatment facility; provided that
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 20 6/2/11
such facility is designed to treat such additional pollutants, and, in fact, does
remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
14. EASEMENT shall mean an acquired legal right for the specified use of land
owned by others.
15. EXCESSIVE shall mean in such magnitude that, in the judgment of the
Superintendent, it will cause damage to any facility, will be harmful to the
wastewater treatment plant to the degree required to meet the requirements of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, can otherwise endanger life, limb or public
property, and/or which can constitute a public nuisance.
16. FAT shall mean a solid or liquid water-soluble substance that belongs to a
group of chemicals, i.e., esters of glycerol and fatty acids, which are main
constituents of food derived from animals or plants.
17. FLOATABLE OIL is oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly
pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
18. GARBAGE shall mean the putrescible organic solid wastes from the
domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from
the handling, storage and sale of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables, and
condemned food.
19. GROUND GARBAGE shall mean the residue from the preparation, cooking
dispensing, handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce that has been
shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension
under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle
greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
20. INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS shall mean any pollutants that are not
defined as “Compatible Pollutants” in this section.
21. INDUSTRIAL WASTE shall mean any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance
discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing or
commercial establishment. Such term includes any wastewater that is not sanitary
sewage.
22. INTERCEPTOR (also referred to as a trap) shall mean a device designed
and installed so as to separate and retain deleterious, hazardous or undesirable
matter from wastes flowing through it to prevent such matter from reaching a
public sewer. It includes, but is not limited to, “oil interceptors,” “sand
interceptors” and “grease interceptors” as defined in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 21 6/2/11
23. MAJOR INDUSTRIAL USER shall mean any sanitary sewer discharger
who uses more than 10,000 gallons of metered water usage on any given day.
24. MUNICIPALITY shall mean the City of Port Washington.
25. NATURAL OUTLET shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers and
combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface water or groundwater.
26. NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER shall mean
wastewater with concentrations of BOD, suspended solids and phosphorus no
greater than those listed in Section 10.15.060 C. CATEGORY B. SEWER
SERVICE CHARGE.
27. OIL & GREASE shall include fats, wax, grease, petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable
cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin, whether emulsified or
not.
28. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS shall include all costs
associated with the operation and maintenance of the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities, including administration and replacement costs all as
determined from time to time by the Municipality.
29. PERSON shall mean any and all persons, including any individual, firm,
company, municipal or Private Corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.
30. pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed in grams per liter of solution.
31. PHOSPHORUS shall mean total phosphorus, which is all of the chemical
element phosphorus present in a sample, regardless of form, expressed in mg/1 of
P phosphorus. Quantitative determination of phosphorus shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods.”
32. PLUMBING SYSTEM shall include the water supply system, the drain
system, the vent system, plumbing fixtures, plumbing appliances and plumbing
appurtenances that serve a building, structure or premises.
33. PUBLIC SEWER shall mean any publicly owned sewer, storm drain,
sanitary sewer or combined sewer.
34. RECEIVING WATERS shall mean any water course, river, pond, ditch,
lake, aquifer or other body of surface or sub-surface water receiving discharge of
sewage.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 22 6/2/11
35. REPLACEMENT COSTS shall mean expenditures for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances, which are necessary during
the useful life of the wastewater treatment facility to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such facilities were designed and constructed. Operation
and maintenance costs include replacement costs.
36. SAND shall mean a sedimentary material consisting of fine loose grains of
rock or minerals, e.g., quartz fragments, usually found on beaches, deserts and in
soil, sometimes used as building material or for industrial or other purposes.
37. SANITARY SEWAGE shall mean a combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes discharged from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities, together with
such ground, surface, and storm waters as may have inadvertently entered the
sewage system.
38. SANITARY SEWER shall mean a sewer that carries sewage or industrial
wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and groundwaters
or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
39. SEPTAGE shall mean scrum, liquid, sludge or other waste from septic tank,
soil absorption field, holding tank, vault toilet or privy. This does not include
waste from a grease trap.
40. SEWAGE (also referred to as a wastewater) shall mean a combination of the
water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and
industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as
may be present.
41. SEWER shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries sewage or any other waste
liquids, including storm, surface, and ground water drainage.
42. SEWER SERVICE CHARGE is a charge levied on users of the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities for payment of operation and maintenance
expenses, debt service costs, and other expenses or obligations of said facilities.
43. SEWERAGE shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the
collection, transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial wastes.
44. “SHALL” is mandatory; “MAY” is permissible.
45. SLUG shall mean any discharge of sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent exceeds more than five (5) times the
average twenty-four (24) hour concentration during normal operation, or the
discharge of any volume of liquid waste which exceeds in quantity of flow for a
period of fifteen (15) minutes or more, the normal 24 hour average discharge. It
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 23 6/2/11
shall also include discharges that adversely affect the wastewater collection
system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment facility.
46. STANDARD METHODS shall mean the examination and analytical
procedures set forth in the most recent edition of “Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater” published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water
Environment Federation.
47. STORM SEWER OR DRAIN shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying
storm water, groundwater, surface water, clear water or any unpolluted water
from any source, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.
48. STORM LATERAL shall be the connection to provide or convey storm
groundwater, surface water or unpolluted water from a structure or lot to a storm
sewer.
49. SUSPENDED SOLIDS shall mean solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in, water sewage, or industrial waste, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in “Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater”, and referred to as non-filterable residue.
Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in “Standard Methods.”
50. TRAP (also referred to as an interceptor) shall mean a device designed and
installed so as to separate and retain deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter
from wastes flowing through it to prevent such matter from reaching a public
sewer. It includes, but is not limited to, “oil interceptors,” “sand interceptors” and
“grease interceptors” as defined in the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
51. UNPOLLUTED WATER is water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent of the wastewater treatment facilities or water that would not cause
violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
52. WASTEWATER shall be synonymous with sewage and shall mean a
combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater,
surface water, and storm water that may be present.
53. WASTEWATER COLLECTION FACILITIES (or wastewater collection
system) shall mean the structures and equipment required to collect and carry
wastewater.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 24 6/2/11
54. WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY shall mean an arrangement
of devices and structures for treating wastewater and sludge. Also referred to as
wastewater treatment plant.
55. WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(WPDES) PERMIT is a document issued by the Wisconsin State Department of
Natural Resources, which establishes effluent limitations and monitoring
requirements for the municipal wastewater treatment facility. WPDES Permit No.
WI-0020460-5 and modifications thereof certain to the municipal wastewater
treatment facility.
10.15.030 Use of Public Sewers.
A. STORM SEWERS. Storm water, groundwater, surface water, clear water and all
other unpolluted water (including, but not limited to, unpolluted industrial
cooling water or process waters), shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the Approving Authority, City Engineer and other regulatory
agencies, per the following regulations:
1.
a. When a service lateral to a storm or combined sewer is provided
to a lot the sump pump or ground water handling system shall
be discharged to the lateral. Other sources of clear water
including down spouts and surface drains may be discharged to
the lateral with the permission of the city engineer only after it
has been determined that the public sewer system has available
capacity, and only when it is determined by the city engineer
that such discharges cause damage or a potential hazard if
discharged to grade on the lot.
b. When storm or combined sewer is not adjacent to the property
all unpolluted water shall be discharged to the surface of the lot
in a location or manner which allows for the best possible
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 25 6/2/11
drainage of the water minimizing any public nuisance or
damage to neighboring properties.
c. When a service lateral to a storm or combined sewer is not
provided to a lot but storm or combined sewer is adjacent to the
property and discharge of unpolluted water to the lot surface has
created a public nuisance and potentially hazardous condition,
the city engineer shall, at the expense of the property owner,
require that the appropriate lateral be installed and connected to
the source of the problem within sixty (60) days of the
installation.
2. When a storm lateral is installed which services a lot or structure, then that
person shall connect their foundation drain tile and/or sump pump to such
storm sewer or storm lateral within sixty (60) days after the passage and
publication of this ordinance amendment.
3. No property shall be sold unless it has been determined by inspection or other
means that all unpolluted water is being properly discharged and that no
connection to the sanitary sewer is possible. Improper discharges of unpolluted
water shall be determined to be in violation of this ordinance.
4. The building inspector shall have the authority to inspect for violations of this
ordinance section. All corrections shall be made so as to conform to this
ordinance unless a variance and an alternative plan for the handling of
unpolluted water is approved by the Common Council after receiving a
recommendation from the Board of Public Works. Upon inspection, if the
building inspector is unable to determine if unpolluted water is being properly
discharged and a licensed plumber is required to inspect the property, the clear
water inspection fee charged by the building inspector shall be waived. The
waiver of the inspection fee in such cases shall be retroactive to January 1,
2008.
B. SANITARY SEWERS. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
unpolluted waters such as storm water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or
cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
1. PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS. Except as hereinafter provided, no
person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described
waters or wastes to any public sewer:
a. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
b. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or
gasses in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, that could injure or interfere with any waste treatment or
sludge disposal process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
create a public nuisance in the receiving waters of the wastewater
treatment facility.
c. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or in excess of 10.0,
or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater collection
and treatment facilities.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 26 6/2/11
d. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in public sewers or other interference
with the proper operation of the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
un-ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings,
entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
2. The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be
limited in discharges to sanitary sewer systems to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either the sanitary sewers, wastewater
treatment process, or equipment; will not have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream; or will not otherwise endanger lives, limbs, public
property, or constitute a nuisance. The Approving Authority may set
limitations more stringent than those established below if such more
stringent limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. The
Approving Authority will give consideration to the quantity of subject
waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sanitary sewers, the wastewater treatment facility and
other pertinent factors. Wastes or wastewater discharged to the sanitary
sewers shall not exceed the following limitations.
a. Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees
Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius).
b. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, petroleum oil,
non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/L or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees
and 65 degrees Centigrade).
c. Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat
or grease.
d. Any substances, which will cause the wastewater disposal
system to violate its WPDES permit or the receiving water
quality standards.
e. Any un-ground garbage. Garbage grinders may be connected to
sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants,
hospitals catering establishments, or similar places where
garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchen’s for
the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by
caterers.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 27 6/2/11
f. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc,
and other toxic and unconventional pollutants to such degree
that the concentration exceeds levels specified by federal, state,
and local authorities.
g. Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by the Approving
Authority or limits established by any federal or state statute,
rule, or regulation.
h. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Approving Authority in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations.
i. Any waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment
processes employed, or are amenable treatment only to such
degree that the wastewater treatment facility effluent cannot
meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
j. Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the sanitary sewer system, release obnoxious gasses,
form suspended solids which interfere with the collection
system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
k. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or
chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the wastewater
treatment facility.
(2) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting “slugs” as defined herein.
(3) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, fuller’s earth, lime
slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium sulfate).
(4) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to,
dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
(5) Incompatible pollutants in excess of the allowed
limits as determined by city, state, and federal laws
and regulations in reference to pretreatment
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 28 6/2/11
standards developed by the Environmental
Protection Agency, and as contained in 40 CFR
403, as amended from time to time.
(6) Unpolluted Water as defined by this ordinance shall
not be discharged to the sanitary sewer system.
C. WPDES PERMIT. No person shall cause or permit a discharge into the sanitary
sewers that would cause a violation of the Municipality’s WPDES permit and
any modifications thereof.
D. SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS. No statement contained in this Ordinance shall
be construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the Approving
Authority and any person whereby a waste of unusual strength or character may
be admitted to the wastewater collection and treatment facilities, either before or
after pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities by reason of the admission of such
wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the Municipality without recompense
by the person; and further provided that all rates and provisions set forth in this
Ordinance are recognized and adhered to.
E. NEW CONNECTIONS. New connections to the Municipality’s sanitary sewer
system will be allowed only if there is available capacity in all of the downstream
wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
F. SEPTAGE ACCEPTANCE LOCATION. Septage shall only be discharged to the
City’s sewerage system by City approved and State of Wisconsin licensed
disposers and at locations, times and conditions specified by the Approving
Authority.
10.15.040 Control of Industrial Wastes Directed to Public Sewers.
A. SUBMISSION OF BASIS DATA. Within six (6) months after passage of this
ordinance and each twelve (12) months thereafter, each person who discharges
industrial wastes (Categorical and Non-categorical) to a public sewer, and is
considered a major industrial user, shall prepare and file with the Approving
Authority a report that shall include pertinent data relating to the quantity and
characteristics of the wastes (Characterization of Wastes – see Section
10.15.040H) discharged to the wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
This report (“Intent to Discharge Form” – see Section 10.15.040H) is required by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the municipality shall
furnish such forms necessary to be completed.
Similarly, each person desiring to make a new connection to a public sewer for
the purpose of discharging industrial wastes shall prepare and file with the
Approving Authority a report that shall include actual or predicted data relating to
the quantity and characteristics of the waste to be discharged, prior to making the
connection to the public sewers.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 29 6/2/11
B. INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES. If any waters, wastes or septage discharged or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Article II, and which in
the judgment of the Approving Authority have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life, health, or constitute a public
nuisance, the Approving Authority may:
1. Reject the wastes,
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers,
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
4. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of this Ordinance.
C. HAULED WASTES. All sewer users having wastes hauled in to the wastewater
treatment facility for treatment need to be in conformance with the “Manual on
Hauled-Waste Acceptance” published by the Water Environment Federation
(WEF), as well as the “Hauled-waste manual” published jointly by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) and the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).
1. Septic tank waste may be introduced into the Wastewater Treatment
Facility only at locations designated by the Superintendent, and at such
times as are established by the Superintendent. Such waste shall not
violate the general sewer use requirements stated in this ordinance or any
other requirements established by the City. The Superintendent may
require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
2. The Superintendent may require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The Superintendent also may prohibit the
disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial
waste is subject to all other requirements of this ordinance.
3. Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated
by the Superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior consent
of the Superintendent. The Superintendent may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The
Superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste
analysis of any load prior to discharge.
4. Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste.
The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 30 6/2/11
D. CONTROL MANHOLES. Each person discharging industrial wastes into a
public sewer shall, at the discretion of the Approving Authority, construct and
maintain one or more control manholes or access points to facilitate observation,
measurement, and sampling of wastes, including sanitary sewage.
Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a manner
acceptable to the Approving Authority. If measuring and/or sampling devices are
to be permanently installed, they shall be of a type acceptable to the Approving
Authority.
Control manholes, access facilities, and related equipment shall be installed by the
person discharging the waste, at the person’s expense, and shall be maintained by
the person so as to be in safe condition, accessible, and in proper operating
condition at all times. Plans for installation of the control manholes or access
facilities and related equipment shall be approved by the Approving Authority
prior to the beginning of construction.
E. MEASUREMENT OF FLOW. The volume of flow used for computing sewer
service charges shall be the metered water consumption of the person as shown in
the records of meter readings maintained by the Water Department or Utility
except as notes in Section 305.
F. METERING OF WASTE. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged
may be required by the Approving Authority if this volume cannot otherwise be
determined from the metered water consumption records. Metering devices for
determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned, and maintained by the
person discharging the wastewater. Following approval and installation, such
meters may not be removed without the consent of the Approving Authority.
G. WASTE SAMPLING. Industrial wastes and septage discharged into the public
sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a determination of character and
concentration of said wastes. The determination shall be made by the industry as
often as may be deemed necessary by the Approving Authority, in addition to the
designated periods specified in Section 10.15.040A.
Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the
composition of the wastes. The sampling may be accomplished either manually
or by the use of mechanical equipment acceptable to the Approving Authority.
Installation, operation, and maintenance of the sampling facilities shall be the
responsibility of the person discharging the waste and shall be subject to the
approval of the Approving Authority. Access to sampling locations shall be
granted to the Approving Authority or its duly authorized representative at all
times. Every care shall be exercised to the collection of samples to ensure their
preservation in a state comparable at the time the sample was taken.
H. CHARACTERIZATION OF WASTES. Industrial wastes (from both Categorical
and Non-categorical Industries) and septage discharged into the public sewers
requires characterization. The wastes shall be characterized to include, but not
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 31 6/2/11
limited to, nature of process, rates of flow, mass discharge rate, raw material and
production quantities. The characterization shall be made by the industry
according to the schedule specified in Section 10.15.040A, or as often as deemed
necessary by the Approving Authority.
The results of the waste characterization are to be filled in on the “Intent to
Discharge Form” and be submitted to the Approving Authority prior to the waste
being discharged. The “Intent to Discharge Form” may include, but not limited
to, nature of process, rates of flow, mass discharge rate, raw material and
production quantities, hours of operation, number and classification of employees,
or other information which relates to the generation of waste, including
wastewater constituents and characteristics in the wastewater discharge.
A new “Intent to Discharge Form” has to be submitted if the characteristics of the
discharge waste change significantly, which includes, but not limited to flow
increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported
pollutants. In addition to the parameters specified on the “Intent to Discharge
Form” provided by the Approving Authority, the Approving Authority has the
right to request the Industries to monitor and sample additional parameters not
specified on the “Intent to Discharge Form.” The Approving Authority also has
the rights to impose limits on various parameters on any of the industries
(Categorical and Non-Categorical) discharging wastes to the system, as it deemed
appropriate.
Costs incurred by the characterization of the discharged waste are to be borne by
the responsible industry.
I. MONITORING. Periodic Monitoring is required from Industries (Categorical &
Non-Categorical, for the characterization of wastes being discharged. The
frequency of monitoring should be at least as frequent as the submission of the
“Intent to Discharge Form.”
J. PRETREATMENT. Persons discharging industrial wastes into any public sewer
may be required to pre-treat such wastes, if the Approving Authority determines
pretreatment is necessary to protect the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities or prevent the discharge of incompatible pollutants.
In that event, such person shall provide at his expense such pretreatment or
processing facilities as may be determined necessary to render wastes acceptable
for admission to the sanitary sewers.
Categorical, as well as Non-Categorical, industrial waste dischargers shall all
meet the pretreatment standards as set forth in the NR 211, 221 to 297. This
includes waste dischargers with wastes of varying strengths.
K. INTERCEPTORS OR TRAPS FOR FAT, OIL, GREASE, SAND AND OTHER
SUBSTANCES. Interceptors or traps shall be required and installed at all
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 32 6/2/11
permitted food service, commercial, industrial and institutional buildings and
facilities for the proper handling of wastewater containing fat, oil, grease,
flammable wastes, sand and other harmful substances.
1. Prohibitions; Exemptions; Construction Standards; Inspection;
Compliance. Pursuant to Section 10.15.030 of this Municipal Code, the
discharge of any of the following substances to any public sewer from an
existing, new, altered or remodeled building or facility requiring
interceptors or traps is prohibited:
a. Any water or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, petroleum oil,
non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/L or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 to 65
degrees Celsius).
b. Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat
or grease.
c. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in public sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, un-ground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, etc., whether whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
Interceptors or traps shall not be required for private living quarters
or dwelling units. Individual exemptions from the interceptor or trap
requirements of this subsection may be granted upon review by the
Approving Authority. New, altered, or remodeled plumbing systems
requiring interceptors or traps shall be constructed in accordance
with the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, and shall
be constructed and located as to be readily accessible for easy
cleaning and inspection. If an inspection reveals that a greaseproducing
building or facility lacks a grease trap, an approved grease
trap shall be installed in such building or facility within one (1) year
of the date of inspection. Exterior interceptors and traps shall be
constructed so as to be protected from storm water runoff.
2. Implementation. The business operator of a new food service building or
facility shall obtain approval of the grease trap sizing from the Approving
Authority prior to submitting an application for a building permit. The
business operator of an existing or to-be-reopened food service building
or facility in which the plumbing system will be modified shall provide
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 33 6/2/11
plans showing compliance with the grease trap requirements and obtain
approval of the grease trap sizing from the Approving Authority prior to
submitting an application for a building permit. In all cases, a written
description of the interceptor or trap system, its location, manufacturer,
dimensions, flow design, and loading rate shall be submitted to the
Approving Authority. Following such submission, the Approving
Authority shall inspect the building or facility to confirm compliance with
all laws and regulations governing such interceptors and traps.
3. Existing Buildings and Facilities; Corrective Actions; Reports. The
Approving Authority may require the business operator to install properly
sized interior or exterior grease traps or modify plumbing of an existing
building or facility where the waterway of a sewer system is restricted or
blocked by congealed fat, oil or grease, sand, or other substances. The
Approving Authority also may also require the business operator to
increase cleaning frequency of grease traps and to maintain and submit
written reports detailing and verifying cleaning events in buildings,
facilities or areas in which sewer blockages or other sewer problems have
occurred or are occurring.
4. Maintenance; Records; Disposal; Use of Additives. All required
interceptors and traps shall be maintained by the building or facility
owner in good repair and in an efficient operating condition at all times,
at the owner’s expense. The business operator shall keep a written record
of cleaning events, which shall include the cleaning dates and quantity of
fat, oil, grease, sand, and other substances removed at each cleaning.
Disposal of interceptor or trap contents shall be done in accordance with
regulations established by the Department of Natural Resources. The
business operator shall keep such written records on file for a period of
three (3) years, and shall provide access to and/or copies of the same to
the Approving Authority upon request. The recommended cleaning
frequency shall be every two (2) weeks for interior grease traps, and every
ninety (90) days for exterior grease interceptors. At no time shall grease
traps be more than one-half (1/2) full with any deposits of fat, oil, grease,
sand, or other substances before cleaning occurs. The use of biological or
other additives as a fat, oil or grease dissolving or conditioning agent is
permissible only upon prior written approval from the Approving
Authority.
5. Downstream Blockages Caused by Fat, Oil, Grease, Sand or Other
Substance-Producing Buildings or Facilities; Reimbursement for Costs of
Correction. If upon investigation it is determined that an upstream
building or facility producing fat, oil, grease, sand or other substances has
caused or is causing interference with and/or blockage in the sanitary
sewer system, the business operator of such building or facility shall
reimburse the Wastewater Utility for all labor, equipment, supplies and
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 34 6/2/11
disposal costs incurred by the Wastewater Utility to correct such
interference and/or blockage, in addition to any other penalties or
remedies provided by law.
6. Notice and Order for Correction of Violation. If an inspection discloses
any non-compliance with the provisions of subsecs. 2 through 4 hereof,
the Approving Authority shall notify the business operator of the building
or facility in writing of the violation, and order that such violation(s) be
corrected within thirty (30) days of the date of such written notice and
order.
7. Penalties for Failure to Correct Violation; Refusal to Renew License. If a
violation is not corrected within the time provided in subsec. 6 hereof, the
business operator of the building or facility shall be subject to forfeitures
as provided in Section 10.15.100 (D) of this Municipal Code, in addition
to any other penalties or remedies provided by law. Continues or
reoccurring violations or delays in taking corrective action may also result
in a refusal to renew an operator’s license and/or other municipal licenses
or permits for such food service, commercial, industrial or institutional
building or facility.
L. ANALYSES. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters;
wastes and septage to which reference is made in this Ordinance shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods” and with the Federal
Regulations 40 CFR 136, “Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of
Pollutants,” as amended from time to time. Sampling methods, location, time, durations,
and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the
Approving Authority.
M. SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION. Plans, Specifications, and any other Pertinent
information relating to proposed flow equalization, pretreatment or grease and/or sand
interceptor facilities shall be submitted for review and approval of the Approving
Authority prior to the start of their construction if the effluent from such facilities is to be
discharged into the public sewers. No construction of such facilities shall commence
until said approval has been granted.
N. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Information and data on an industrial user obtained
from the “Intent to Discharge Forms” shall be available to the public or other
governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the user.
When requested by the person furnishing the “Intent to Discharge Form,” the portions of
the form which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to
governmental agencies for uses related to this Ordinance, the WPDES Permit, and/or the
pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of the form shall be
available for use by the State or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 35 6/2/11
Information accepted by the Superintendent as confidential shall not be transmitted to any
governmental agency or to the general public by the Superintendent until and unless a
ten-day notification is given to the user.
10.15.050 Basis for Sewer Service Charges.
A. SEWER USERS SERVICED BY WATER UTILITY WATER METERS. There
is hereby levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building, or premises
having a connection with the wastewater collection system and being served with
water solely by the Water Utility, a sewer service charged based, in part, on the
quantity of water used, as measured by the Water Utility water meter used upon
the premises. Sewer service charges shall be determined in accordance with the
following:
1. Except as provided in subsecs. A.2., A.3. and A.4., sewer service charges
shall be based on actual usage.
2. A summer sewer service credit shall be given for the four (4) month
period from May 1 to September 1 each year. The credit shall apply to the
bi-monthly bills sent on August 1 and October 1. The credit shall be
calculated based upon the customer’s prior usage history at the same
premises for the four (4) month period from November 1 of the preceding
year to March 1 of the current year, which shall be determined by adding
the two water readings taken on January 1 and March 1 of the current year
and dividing the total by two. If the resulting quotient is not a whole unit,
it shall be rounded up to the nearest whole unit. If the customer did not
occupy the same premises for the entire period from November 1 to March
1, the average resident usage charge of 7 cu. ft. per bi-monthly billing
period shall be used to determine the summer sewer service credit. The
summer sewer service credit shall apply to all single-family residential and
duplex customers.
3. Any customer other than a single-family residential or duplex customer
may apply to the Board of Public Works to install a deduct meter in order
to determine the amount of water not discharged or released into the sewer
system. However, the Board of Public Works shall determine whether it is
appropriate to install such deduct meter. If a deduct meter is installed, the
volume of water measured by such meter shall be deducted from the actual
usage in determining the sewer service charges for the premises.
4. For a premises not previously occupied, and which is first occupied (or for
which an occupancy permit is first issued) at any time between May 1 and
August 31, the bi-monthly bill for wastewater, other than industrial waste,
due during the months of August (for metered water used during the
months of May and June) and October (for metered water used during July
and August) of that year shall include a minimum Volume Rate charge
based on an average residential usage charge of 7 cu. ft. per bi-monthly
billing period. Such minimum Volume Rate charge shall be prorated to
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 36 6/2/11
reflect the date on which the property was first occupied (or on which an
occupancy permit was first issued) during the aforementioned billing
periods.
B. SEWER USERS SERVED BY PRIVATE WELLS. If a person discharging wastewater
into the sanitary sewers procures any part or all of his water from sources other than the
Water Utility, all or part of which is discharged into the sanitary sewers, the person shall
have water meters installed by the Water Utility at the person’s expense for the purpose
of determining the volume of water obtained from these sources. Where sewer meters
are already installed, water meters will not be required. The water meters shall be
furnished by the Water Utility and installed under its supervision, all costs being at the
expense of the person requiring the meter.
The Water Utility will charge for each meter rental charge set by the Water Utility to
compensate for the cost of furnishing and servicing the meter. The rental charge shall be
billed at the time the sewer service charge is billed.
C. DEDUCT METERS. If a person feels that a significant amount of metered water does not
reach the sanitary sewer, he can at his own expense, with approval of the Approving
Authority, install such additional meters or metered services as are necessary to calculate
the volume of water not discharged to the sanitary sewer. Metered water not discharged
to the sanitary sewers shall not be subject to sewer service charges. Requests to install
additional meters must be made in writing to the Approving Authority.
10.15.060 Amount of Sewer Service Charges.
Section 10.15.060 A. SEWER SERVICE CHARGE UNIT COSTS. The unit costs for
the sewer service charge are as follows:
Operation & Maintenance
Volume charge $3.93/1000 gal.
(equal to $2.94/100 cu. ft.)
Flow Charge $0.79/1,000 Gallons
BOD unit cost $0.52/lb
Suspended Solids unit cost $0.30/lb
Phosphorus unit cost $5.94/lb
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 37 6/2/11
10.15.060 B. CATEGORY A. SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The sewer charge for
Category A. sewer users is as follows:
Fixed Bi-Monthly Charge = $30.46
Volume Charge = $3.93/1,000 gal.
(equal to $2.94/100 cu. ft.)
10.15.060 C. CATEGORY B. SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The sewer service
charge for Category B. sewer users is as follows:
Fixed Bi-Monthly Charge = $30.46
Volume Charge = $3.93/1,000 gal.
(equal to $2.94/100 cu. ft.)
Surcharge for BOD greater than 274 mg/1 = $.52 lb
Surcharge for SS greater than 233 mg/1 = .30/lb
Surcharge for Phosphorus greater than 7.1 mg/1 = $5.94/lb
Surcharge for Volume $0.79/1,000 Gallons
Categories A or B – Industrial/Mfg. Discharges shall be computed in accordance with the
formula presented below:
Volume Charge = (V x Cv) + .00834 V [(B x Cb) + (S x Cs) + (P x Cp)]
Where:
T = Total Sewer Service Charge
FQ = Fixed Monthly Charge
B = Concentration of BOD in mg/1 in the wastewater minus 274 mg/1
S = Concentration of suspended solids in mg/1 in the wastewater minus 233 mg/1
P = Concentration of phosphorus in mg/1 in the wastewater minus 7.1 mg/1
V = Wastewater Volume in 1,000 gallons
Cv = Volume charge per 1,000 gallons
Cb = Surcharge per pound of BOD
Cs = Surcharge per pound of suspended solids
Cp = Surcharge per pound of phosphorus
.00834 = Conversion factor
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 38 6/2/11
D. REASSIGNMENT OF SEWER USERS. The Approving Authority will reassign
sewer users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if wastewater flow
monitoring and sampling programs or other related information indicate a change
of categories is necessary.
E. OPERATION, MAINTENANCE, AND REPLACEMENT FUND ACCOUNTS.
All sewer service charge revenues collected for replacement costs shall be
deposited in a separate and distinct fund to be used solely for replacement costs as
defined in Article I. All sewer service charge revenues collected for other
operation and maintenance expenses shall also be deposited in a separate and
distinct fund.
All revenues for the replacement fund and for operation and maintenance of the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities must be used solely for the
replacement fund and operation and maintenance of the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities.
F. CHARGE FOR TOXIC POLLUTANTS. Any person discharging toxic pollutants
which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge from the
Municipality’s wastewater treatment facility shall pay for such increased costs, as
may be determined by the Approving Authority.
G. CATEGORY C. SEPTIC AND HOLDING TANK SERVICE CHARGE.
Category C Septic and Holding Tank service charge. The service charge for Category C
discharges is as follows:
BOD unit cost = $0.52/lb.
Suspended Solids unit cost = $0.30/lb.
Phosphorus unit cost = $5.94/lb.
Flow Cost = $0.79/1,000 Gallons
Category C Septic and holding tank service charge shall be computed in accordance with
the formula presented below:
SC = (V x CV) + (CB x BOD) + (CS x SS) + (CP x P) + Collection System Fee
($1.50 per 1,000 Gallons)
Where:
SC = Service Charge
CB = BOD unit price
CS = SS unit price
CP = P unit price
BOD = mg/1 x 8.34 x MGD
SS = mg/1 x 8.34 x MGD
P = mg/1 x 8.34 x MGD
MGD = # of millions of gallons per day
V = Wastewater Volume in 1,000 Gallons
CV = Volume Charge per 1,000 Gallons
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 39 6/2/11
Holding tank and septic tank effluent accepted by the wastewater collection and treatment
facility shall be sampled by the Approving Authority on an annual basis, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 10.15.0040 I. A sample shall be taken from six (6) holding tank
and six (6) septic tank effluent discharges so accepted, or such equal lesser number of
such discharges as may represent the total number of such discharges received during the
annual sampling period. The results shall be averaged to determine the average waste
strength of holding tank and septic tank effluents.
All waste streams described in sec. 10.15.060 G. of the Municipal Code which require
laboratory analysis by the wastewater collection and treatment facility for possible
acceptance by such facility, shall be charged the following fees:
Biochemical Oxygen Demand $37.50/test
Ammonia Nitrogen $37.50/test
Total Phosphorus $37.50/test
Total Suspended Solids $28.00/test
pH $ 9.00/test
The annual permit fees for all outside waste streams discharged at the wastewater treatment
facility or in the collection system shall be $50.00, provided, however, that such permit fees shall
be reviewed and, if necessary, adjusted annually.
H. Category “D” shall be those discharges, other than septic and holding tank wastes,
with concentrations of BOD, suspended solids and phosphorous in excess of those
listed in Section 10.15.060 C. CATEGORY B. SEWER SERVICE CHARGE.
Adequate treatment of such waste will be possible only by direct discharge, and
benefit to, the anaerobic digestion process of the Wastewater Treatment Facility
or result in a violation of the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Permit. Any discharge or treatment of Category “D” discharges in violation of
this section shall not be permitted. Category “D” WASTE, OTHER THAN
SEPTIC AND HOLDING TANK WASTE. The service charge for Category “D”
discharges shall be based on sludge disposal costs incurred by the City of Port
Washington, and computed by doubling (2x) those same costs.
I. Annual Permit Required: Fee. No person may discharge Category C or D waste
to the Wastewater Treatment Facility without first having obtained a permit from
the Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent (hereinafter Superintendent).
Application for the permit shall be made upon blank forms to be furnished by the
Superintendent and available at the Department of Public Works. Said
application shall be made by the person who holds the appropriate DNR permit,
and shall contain name, address, DNR permit number, and such other information
determined by the Superintendent. A permit shall be required for each contractor
who discharges Category C or D waste to the Wastewater Treatment Plant. The
Superintendent, or his designee, shall issue a permit to the applicant upon
compliance with this section and upon payment of the proper fee. A permit
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 40 6/2/11
issued thereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. The fee for a permit
shall be $50.00 per year, or a fraction thereof, for each contractor.
10.15.070 Billing Practice.
A. CALCULATION OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES. Sewer service charges
shall be computed according to the rates and formula presented in this Ordinance.
B. SEWER SERVICE CHARGE BILLING PERIOD. Sewer service charges shall be
billed by the City to the sewer users on a bi-monthly basis.
C. PAYMENT OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES. Those persons billed by the City
for sewer service charges shall pay charges within thirty (30) days after the billing
date at City Hall.
D. PENALTIES.
1. Such sewer service charges levied by the City against the sewer users in
accordance with this Ordinance shall be a debt due the City and collected
in the same manner as water rates are taxed and collected.
2. On October 15 in each year notice shall be given to the owner or occupant
of all lots or parcels of real estate to which sewer service has been
furnished prior to October 1 and payment for which is in arrears at the
time of the notice. Unless the amount in arrears is paid by November 1 a
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of such arrears shall be added
and becomes payable by November 15. Any arrears remaining after
November 13 shall be placed on the tax roll as a tax against such lot or
parcel.
Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall not
be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties.
10.15.080 Right of Entry, Safety, and Identification.
A. RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Approving Authority or other duly authorized
employees of the Municipality, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall
be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, or
testing, all in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. SAFETY. While performing the necessary work on private premises, the duly
authorized Municipal employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the person.
C. IDENTIFICATION. RIGHT TO ENTER EASEMENTS. The Approving
Authority or other duly authorized employees of the Municipality, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties
through which the Municipality holds an easement for the purpose of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 41 6/2/11
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement, all
subject to the terms, if any, of such easement.
10.15.090 Sewer Construction and Connections.
A. WORK AUTHORIZED. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb the public sewers or
appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Approving Authority.
B. COST OF SEWER CONNECTION. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the person
making the connection.
C. USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and
test by the Approving Authority, to meet all requirements for this Ordinance.
D. MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION. The size, slope,
alignment, materials of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall
conform to the requirements of the Municipality’s building and plumbing code
or other applicable rules and regulations of the Municipality. In the absence of
code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice
No. 9 shall apply.
E. BUILDING SEWER GRADE. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings
in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.
F. STORM AND GROUNDWATER DRAINS. No persons shall make connection
of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources
of surface runoff or groundwater including but not limited to sump pumps to a
building sewer or building drain that is connected directly or indirectly to a
sanitary sewer.
All existing downspouts, groundwater drains, or sump pumps etc., connected
directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer must be disconnected within 60 days of
the date of an official written notice from the Approving Authority.
G. CONFORMANCE TO PLUMBING CODES. The connection of the building
sewer into the sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building
and plumbing code, or other applicable rules and regulations of the Municipality
of the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF
Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gas tight and
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 42 6/2/11
watertight. The Approving Authority before installation must approve any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials.
H. INSPECTION OF CONNECTION. The person making a connection to a public
sewer shall notify the Approving Authority when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be
inspected and approved by the Approving Authority.
I. BARRICADES: RESTORATION. All excavations for the building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Approving Authority.
10.15.100 Violations and Penalties.
A. WRITTEN NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS. Any person found to be violating any
provision of this Ordinance shall be declared a public nuisance and shall be
served by the Municipality with a written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease
all violations or shall be penalized per section 25.04 of the Municipal Code of the
City of Port Washington.
B. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE WITHOUT NOTICE. If the Approving
Authority determines that a public nuisance exists within the Municipality and
that there is great and immediate danger to the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities or the public health, safety, peace, morals, or decency, the
Approving Authority may cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof
to the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the
nuisance, as the case may be.
C. ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. Any person found to be responsible for
accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewer system which causes
damage to the wastewater collection and treatment facility and/or receiving body
of water shall in addition to a fine, pay an amount to cover any damages, both
values to be established by the Approving Authority.
D. CONTINUED AND REOCURRING VIOLATIONS. Any person, partnership, or
corporation, or any officer, agent, or employee thereof, who shall continue any
violation beyond the aforesaid notice time limit provided or shall cause any
violation to reoccur, shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than $500.00
together with the costs of prosecution. In default of payment of such forfeiture
and costs, said violator shall be imprisoned in the County Jail for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day in which a violation is continued beyond the aforesaid
notice time limit shall be deemed a separate offense.
CONTINUED VIOLATIONS THAT INVOLVE THE DISCHARGE OF
UNPOLLUTED WATER TO THE SANITARY SEWER SHALL REQUIRE
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 43 6/2/11
THE CONNECTION TO A STORM SEWER OR STORM SEWER FACILITY
AT THE PROPERTY OWNER’S EXPENSE.
E. LIABILITY TO MUNICIPALITY FOR LOSSES. Any person violating any
provisions of this Ordinance shall become liable to the Municipality for any
expense, loss, or damage occasioned by reason of such violation which the
Municipality may suffer as a result thereof.
10.15.110 Appeals.
A. PROCEDURES. Any user, permit applicant, or permit holder affected by any
decision, action, or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the
Approving Authority interpreting or implementing the provision of this
Ordinance or in any permit issued herein, may file with the Approving Authority
a written request for reconsideration within ten (10) days of the date of such
decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the
user’s request for reconsideration. The Approving Authority shall render a
decision on the request for reconsideration to the user, permit applicant, or permit
holder in writing within fifteen (15) days of receipt of request. If the ruling on
the request for reconsideration made by the Approving Authority is
unsatisfactory, the person requesting reconsideration may, within ten (10) days
after notification of the action, file a written appeal with the Common Council of
the City of Port Washington,
A fee of $15.00 shall accompany any appeal to the Common Council for their
ruling. This fee may be refunded if the appeal is sustained in favor of the
appellant.
The Common Council shall hear the written appeal, within 30 days from the date
of filing. The Common Council shall make a final ruling on the appeal within 10
days from the date of filing.
10.15.120 Validity.
A. SUPERSEDING PREVIOUS ORDINANCES. This ordinance governing sewer
use, industrial wastewater discharges, sewer service charges, and sewer
connections and construction shall supersede all previous ordinances of the
Municipality.
B. INVALIDATION CLAUSE. Invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or
provision in the Ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other section,
clause, sentence, or provision of this Ordinance which can be given effect without
such invalid part or parts.
C. AMENDMENT. The Municipality, through its duly authorized officers, reserves
the right to amend this Ordinance in part or in whole whenever it may deem
necessary.
10.15.130 Audit, Notification, and Records.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 44 6/2/11
A. BIENNIAL AUDIT. The Municipality shall review, at least every two years, the
wastewater contribution of its sewer users, the operation and maintenance
expenses of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities, and the sewer
service charge system. Based on this review, the Municipality shall revise the
sewer service charge system, if necessary, to accomplish the following:
1. Maintain a proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance
expenses among sewer users based on the wastewater volume and
pollutant loadings discharged by the users;
2. Generate sufficient revenues to pay the operation and maintenance
expenses of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities; and
3. Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the operation and
maintenance expenses attributable to that class of users for the next year
and adjust the sewer service charge rates accordingly.
B. ANNUAL NOTIFICATION. The Municipality shall notify its sewer users
annually about the sewer service charge rates. The notification shall show what
portion of the rates are attributable to the operation and maintenance expenses,
and debt service costs of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities. The
notification shall occur in conjunction with a regular bill.
C. RECORDS. The Municipality shall maintain records regarding wastewater flows
and loadings, costs of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities, sampling
programs, and other information which is necessary to document compliance with
40 CFR 35, Subpart E of the Clean Water Act.
10.25.000 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any
rule, regulation or order issued thereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Section 25.04.000 of the Municipal Code of the City of Port Washington.
10.30.000 WATER SUPPLY.
10.30.010 Definitions. A cross connection shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable
water from the City of Port Washington water system, and the other, water from a private
source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby
there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the
pressure differential between the two systems.
10.30.020 Connections Prohibited. No person, firm or corporation shall establish or
permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross-connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private auxiliary or
emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the City of Port
Washington may enter the supply or distribution systems of said municipality, unless
such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 45 6/2/11
of such supply shall have been approved by the Port Washington Water Utility and by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in accordance with Section NR 111.25 (3),
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
10.20.030 Inspections. It shall be the duty of the Port Washington Water Utility to cause
inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system where crossconnections
with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of
inspections and re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as
established by the Port Washington Water Utility and as approved by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
10.30.040 Entry to Inspect. Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the
Port Washington Water Utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time
to examine any property served by a connection to the public water system of the City of
Port Washington for cross-connections. If entry is refused, such representative shall
obtain a special inspection warrant under Section 66.122, Wisconsin Statutes. On request
of the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection
agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such
property.
10.30.050 Discontinuance of Service Upon Violation. The Port Washington Water
Utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service to any property
wherein any connection in violation of this ordinance exists, and to take such other
precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of
the public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice
and opportunity for hearing under Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes, except as provided in
Section 6. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross-connection
(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
10.30.060 Immediate Discontinuance. That if it is determined by the Port Washington
Water Utility that a cross-connection or an emergency endangers public health, safety or
welfare and requires immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the
Clerk of the City of Port Washington and delivered to the customer’s premises, service
may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing
under Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes, within 10 days of such emergency discontinuance.
10.30.070 Adoption by Reference. The City of Port Washington adopts by reference the
State Plumbing Code of Wisconsin being Chapter H 62, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
10.30.080 Relationship of Ordinance to Other Laws and Regulations. This ordinance
does not supercede the State Plumbing Code or the City of Port Washington plumbing
ordinance Ch. 177, but is supplementary to them.
10.30.090 Private Wells; Abandonment.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 46 6/2/11
A. Unsafe Wells. All unused, unsafe or other private wells not in compliance with
Chapter NR 812, Wisconsin Administrative Code, shall be abandoned pursuant
to Wisconsin Administrative Code, NR 812, within 12 months of notification.
1. Prior to plugging the well, pump, liner piping and obstructions shall be
removed.
2. Filling of the well shall be observed and approved by the City Plumbing
Inspector.
3. A well abandonment report shall be submitted by the well owner to the
Department of Natural Resources and the City’s Plumbing Inspector on
forms furnished by the Director of Public Works.
B. Other Private Wells; Permit Required. Other private wells shall be permitted
upon application for and approval of a private well operation permit.
1. Application shall be on forms supplied by the Director of Public Works
and shall be filed with the City Administrator. Such application shall be
accompanied by a non-refundable permit fee of $25.00. The Common
Council upon the recommendation of the Board of Public Works shall
grant said permit.
2. Said permit shall be for five years and in compliance with the following
conditions:
d. The well and pump installation meet the requirements of
Chapter NR 812, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and a well
constructor’s report on file with the Department of Natural
Resources, or certification of the acceptability of the well has
been granted by the Private Water Supply Section of the
Department of Natural Resources.
e. The well has a history of producing safe water and presently
produces bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by a safe
water sample. Samples are to be analyzed by a certified lab.
f. No physical connection exists between the piping of the public
water system and the private well.
g. FEES FOR THE TREATMENT OF WATER FROM A WELL
THAT IS LIKELY TO BE DISCHARGED TO A PUBLIC
SEWER SHALL BE DETERMINED BASED UPON THE
FEES ESTABLISHED BY THIS ORDINANCE.
City of Port Washington Chapter 10 – Page 47 6/2/11
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 1 6/9/14
CHAPTER 11
Orderly Conduct
Table of Contents
11.01.000 OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC SAFETY
11.01.010 Discharge of Weapons Prohibited; Exceptions
11.01.020 Firearms and Other Weapons in Public Buildings Prohibited;
Exceptions
11.01.030 Sale and Discharge of Fireworks
11.01.040 Burning of Grass and Trash
11.01.050 Skateboards and Other Play Vehicles Regulated
11.02.000 OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
11.02.010 Disorderly Conduct Prohibited
11.02.020 Drunkenness
11.02.030 Assault and Battery
11.02.040 Loud and Unnecessary Noise Prohibited
11.02.050 False Fire Alarms Prohibited
11.02.060 Obedience to Officers
11.02.070 Unlawful Assemblies
11.02.080 Curfew in Public Places
11.02.090 Bowling Alleys & Pool & Billiard Halls; Closing Hours
11.02.100 Distribution of Handbills
11.02.110 Second Hand Dealers
11.02.120 Regulation of Dogs and Cats
11.02.130 Animals Running at Large
11.02.140 Cruelty to Animals
11.02.150 Animals Prohibited at Public Festivals; Exceptions; Penalties
11.02.160 Misuse of Emergency Services Number (911) Prohibited
11.02.170 Feeding of Waterfowl and Migratory Birds on Public Property
Prohibited
11.03.000 OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC MORALS AND DECENCY
11.03.010 Gambling, Lotteries, Fraudulent Devices and Practices Prohibited
11.03.020 Prostitution Prohibited
11.03.030 Vagrancy and Loitering Prohibited
11.03.040 Indecent Conduct and Language Prohibited
11.03.050 Obscene Literature
11.03.060 Obscene Shows
11.03.070 Window Peeping
11.04.000 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
11.04.010 Destruction of Property
11.04.020 Littering Prohibited
11.04.030 Littering From Vehicles
11.04.040 Spitting on Public Places
11.04.050 Parkour and Similar Activities
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 2 6/9/14
11.05.000 ISSUANCE OF WORTHLESS CHECKS
11.05.010 Issuance of Worthless Checks Prohibited
11.06.000 CURFEW PROVISIONS
11.07.000 POSSESSION OR DRINKING OF MALT BEVERAGES OR
INTOXICATING LIQUOR ON PUBLIC WAYS
11.08.000 LOITERING
11.09.000 HOUSE OF ILL FAME
11.10.000 UNAUTHORIZED PRESENCE ON SCHOOL PROPERTY
11.11.000 TRUANCY
11.12.000 REGULATION OF SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE
11.13.000 MARIJUANA, POSSESSION AND USE PROHIBITED
11.13.010 Definition
11.13.020 Possession, Delivery and Use Prohibited
11.13.030 Exception
11.13.040 Penalties
11.135.000 Synthetic Chemical Cannabinoid Prohibited
11.14.000 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA, POSSESSION AND USE PROHIBITED
11.14.010 Drug Paraphernalia Defined
11.14.020 Determination of Drug Paraphernalia
11.14.030 Prohibited Activities
11.15.000 RETURNING LIBRARY MATERIALS
11.25.000 PENALTY
11.26.000 ATTEMPT
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 3 6/9/14
CHAPTER 11
Orderly Conduct
11.01.000 OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC SAFETY.
11.01.010 Discharge of Weapons Prohibited; Exceptions.
A. Definitions. In this Section and in § 11.01.020 of the Municipal Code:
1. “Airgun” means a weapon which expels a projectile by the expansion of
compressed air or other gas, including, but not limited to air pistols, air rifles,
BB guns and pellet guns.
2. “Firearm” means a weapon that acts by force of gunpowder to fire a
projectile.
3. "Handgun” means any weapon designed or redesigned, or made or remade,
and intended to be fired while held in one hand and to use the energy of an
explosive to expel a projectile through a smooth or rifled bore.
4. “Spring gun” means a weapon which expels a projectile by means of a spring
mechanism that is manually cocked for each shot fired by the gun.
B. Discharge Prohibited. Except as provided in subsection C., no person shall
discharge any firearm, airgun, spring gun, bow and arrow, slingshot, or other
dangerous weapon as defined in § 939.22(10), Wis. Stats., within the City.
C. Exceptions.
(1) The prohibitions in Subsection B. hereof shall not apply to a sheriff,
constable, law enforcement officer or their deputies while performing
their official duties, nor to those areas within the City which may be
designated by the Parks and Recreation Board and the Police Department
for the discharge of weapons as part of a specific supervised sport or
activity, nor to the discharge of a weapon in circumstances where the
person’s conduct was justified or, had it been subject to a criminal
penalty, would have been subject to a defense of privilege as described in
§ 939.45, Wis. Stats.
(2) A person may hunt with a bow and arrow or crossbow within the City,
subject to the following restrictions:
a. No such hunting is permitted on public property.
b. No such hunting is permitted within 100 yards of any building
used for human occupancy located on another person’s land
unless the person who owns the land on which the building is
located allows the hunter to hunt within 100 yards of the
building.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 4 6/9/14
c. No such hunting is permitted unless the arrow or bolt is
discharged toward the ground.
11.01.20 Firearms and Other Weapons in Public Buildings Prohibited; Exceptions.
A. Weapons Prohibited. Pursuant to § 943.13(1m)(c) 4., Wis. Stats., it shall be
unlawful for any person to carry a firearm or other weapon, including but not
limited to a handgun, electric weapon, knife or billy club, into any buildings
owned, leased, occupied, managed or controlled by the State or a local
governmental unit, or any of its or their agencies, or to enter or remain in any
part of such public buildings while carrying a firearm or other weapon, if the
State or local governmental unit has notified the person not to enter or remain
in the building while carrying a firearm or other weapon.
B. Posting of Signs. The City Administrator shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted at all entrances to all buildings or portions of a building owned,
leased, occupied, managed or controlled by the City providing notice that no
person is to enter or remain in any such public building while carrying a
firearm or other weapon. Such signs shall be five inches by seven inches or
larger. Signs prohibiting the carrying of firearms and other weapons shall be
posted in a prominent place so as to be visible prior to entering the building.
The City Administrator shall exercise discretion in determining the necessity
and appropriate location for other signs posted on the interior of the building.
C. Exceptions. This Section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer, peace
officer, armed forces or military personnel armed in the line of duty, or any
person duly authorized by the Chief of Police to possess a firearm in any
public building, provided that such authorization is in writing.
Notwithstanding § 939.22(22), Wis. Stats., for purposes of this subsection
“peace officer” does not include a commission warden who is not a statecertified
commission warden.
D. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to authorize the carrying of any
firearm or dangerous weapon contrary to §§ 941.23 or 941.235, Wis. Stats.
E. Security Review. A security review of city buildings shall be conducted by
the City Administrator and Chief of Police annually, and a written report
thereof shall be provided to the Common Council.
11.01.030 Sale and Discharge of Fireworks. Except that as provided in §167.10 (2)
Wisconsin Statutes, it shall be unlawful within the limits of the City for any person to
sell, expose or offer for sale, use, keep or discharge, or to explode any firecracker, bottle
rocket, cherry bomb, colored smoke bomb, toy cap, blank cartridge, toy pistol or cannon
in which explosives are used, contrivances using explosive caps or cartridges, sparklers,
display wheels, the type of balloon which requires fire underneath to propel the same,
firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, aerial salutes, American or Chinese
bombs or other fireworks of like construction, or any other fireworks containing any
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 5 6/9/14
explosives of flammable compound, or any tablets or other device commonly used and
sold as fireworks containing nitrates, chlorates, oxylates, sulphides of lead, barium
antimony, arsenic, mercury, nitroglycerine, phosphorous, or any compound containing
any of the same or other explosives.
11.01.040 Burning of Grass and Trash. A. No person shall kindle any grass fire within
the City without first securing a written permit from the Fire Department.
B. No person shall kindle or cause to be kindled any fire in or upon any street, alley,
public way, park, or any public or private ground within the City unless the same be
confined in a waste burner approved by the Fire Department, and for which a permit has
been issued by the Fire Department. The waste burner shall not be located within 15 feet
of any building or structure and shall be so positioned that there is no direct exposure
from sparks to buildings, wood fences and combustible materials. The burners shall be
located so as not to create a nuisance by reason of their smoke.
11.01.050 Skateboards and Other Play Vehicles Regulated. A. Except for law
enforcement officers engaged in the performance of their duties, no person shall ride,
operate, push or travel on a bicycle, in-line skates, skate board, roller skates, roller skis or
other play vehicle, as defined in sec. 340.01, Stats., in any of the following areas:
1. On any sidewalk within the downtown business district described as follows: an
area bounded on the south by Chestnut Street as though extended east to Lake
Michigan; on the north by Jackson Street; on the west by Milwaukee Street; and
on the east by Lake Michigan. The boundaries shall include the sidewalk on both
sides of said streets.
2. On any wooden boardwalk leading to, adjacent to or within the Port Washington
Marina or harbor facility described as follows: an area bounded on the south by
Chestnut Street as though extended east to Lake Michigan; on the north by
Jackson Street; on the west by Harborview Lane; and on the east by Lake
Michigan. The Boundaries shall include both sides of all wharves, piers, slips and
docks within said area.
B. No person shall ride, operate, push or travel on in-line skates, a skate board, roller
skates, roller skis or other play vehicle, as defined in sec. 340.01, Stats., in any public
parking lot.
11.02.000 OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER.
11.02.010 Disorderly Conduct Prohibited. No person shall within the City:
1. In any public or private place engage in violent, abusive, indecent, profane,
boisterous, unreasonable loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which tends to
cause or provoke an immediate disturbance of public order or tends to disturb any
other person or persons.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 6 6/9/14
2. Intentionally cause, provoke, or engage in any fight, brawl, riot or noisy
altercation other than a bona fide athletic contest.
11.02.020 Drunkenness. No person shall within the City be habitually drunk or
intoxicated so as to disturb the good order and quiet of the City or be found in any place
within the City in such a state of intoxication that he is unable to care for his own safety
or for the safety of others.
11.02.030 Assault and Battery. No person shall within the City commit an assault or
battery, or both, upon another person.
11.02.040 Loud and Unnecessary Noise Prohibited. No person shall make or cause to
be made any loud, disturbing or unnecessary sounds or noises such as may tend to annoy
or disturb another in or about any public street, alley or park or any private residence.
11.02.050 False Fire Alarms Prohibited. No person shall give or send or cause to be
given or send in any manner any alarm of fire which he knows to be false.
11.02.060 Resisting or Obstructing Officer. (1) No person shall knowingly resist or
obstruct an officer while such officer is doing any act in his or her official capacity and
with lawful authority. (2) In this section: (a) “Obstructs” includes, without limitation,
knowingly giving false information to the officer or knowingly placing phywical
evidence with intent to mislead the officer in the performance of his or her duty during
the service of any summons or civil process. (b) “Officer” means police officer or other
public officer or public employee having the authority to by virtue of the officer’s or
employee’s office or employment to take another into custody.
11.02.70 Unlawful Assemblies. A. (Repealed 9/19/95)
B. Obstruction of Traffic by Loitering. No person shall loaf or loiter in a group or a
crowd upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street crossings or bridges or in any
other public place within the City in such manner as to prevent, interfere with or obstruct
the ordinary free use of such public street, sidewalks, alleys, street crossings and bridges
or other public places by persons passing along and over the same.
11.02.080 Curfew in Public Areas. No person shall loiter in or about any park, parkway,
school ground or other public ground or place between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except
in Rotary Park located at the east end of East Grand Avenue, which no person shall loiter
in or about between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
11.02.090 Bowling Alleys and Pool and Billiard Halls; Closing Hours. No owner or
operator of a bowling alley or pool or billiard hall shall permit the same to remain open
between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
11.02.100 Distribution of Handbills.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 7 6/9/14
A. Handbill Defined: “Handbill” includes any printed or written advertising matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, paper, booklet, or any
other printed matter of literature.
B. Restrictions: No person shall:
1. Place any handbill in or on any public street, alley, park, ground or other public
place, provided this provision shall not prohibit the distributing of a handbill to
any person willing to accept the same.
2. Place any handbill in or on any vehicle unless the owner or occupant is present
and accepts such handbill.
3. Distribute any handbill upon private property without the consent of the owner or
occupant thereof.
4. Distribute any handbill upon property wherein it is indicated by posting that
handbills are not to be distributed.
5. Distribute any handbill between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
6. Distribute handbills in such a manner as to impede the free flow of traffic upon a
street or sidewalk.
7. In distributing handbills, molest or annoy any individual, group or gathering.
C. Exception. This section shall not apply to messenger service or to the distribution of
United States mail or telegram or to the delivery of a handbill to any person requesting
the same.
11.02.110 Second Hand Dealers. Every dealer in used or second hand guns, watches and
electric motors shall keep a record of each such purchase, with the name and address of
the seller, the kind and quantity purchased, the serial number of the item purchased and
the date of the transaction, which record shall be open to inspection by a police officer at
any time. No such items shall be purchased from a person under the age of 16 years
without the written consent of his parent or guardian.
11.02.120 Regulation of Dogs and Cats. A. Running at large prohibited. No owner or
other person who keeps, harbors or feeds any dog shall permit such dog to be on any
public property in the City or on any private property in the City without the owner’s
permission when such dog is not secured by a leash, chain or rope in control of any
person, or confined within a fenced enclosure. No owner or other person who keeps,
harbors or feeds any cat shall permit such cat to be off the premises of the cat’s owner or
other person who keeps, harbors or feeds a cat and not under the control of some person,
either by leash, or otherwise. Any licensed dog or cat running at large contrary to this
section may be apprehended by a police officer and the police officer shall confine such
dog or cat. The owner of any dog or cat, or any person who harbors, keeps or feeds any
dog or cat, so confined may reclaim the same upon payment of all costs and charges
incurred by the City in apprehending and keeping said dog or cat. Every dog or cat so
apprehended shall be kept for up to three (3) days, and if not reclaimed within that time
by the owner, such dog or cat may be disposed of in a humane manner.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 8 6/9/14
B. Unlicensed dogs and cats. Members of the police force or any other person appointed
for that purpose, may humanely dispose of in a summary manner, all licensed dogs or
cats running at large, provided, however, that any such disposals shall be done in a proper
place and manner.
C. Vicious Dogs. No person shall knowingly keep or harbor a vicious dog within the
City. “Vicious Dog”, as used in this section means a dog that may suddenly assault a
person or his property while he is peacefully walking or riding on the public streets or
while lawfully on the premises of the owner or keeper of such dog.
D. Barking Dogs. No person shall harbor any dogs or any other animals within his care or
custody which shall continuously bark or create a continuous or intermittent noise or
disturbance, or allow such animals to make any unusual or unnecessary noise to the
disturbance of the neighborhood, or to people passing upon the streets or sidewalks.
E. Mayor May Order Dogs Confined. Whenever the safety of the public shall require, the
Mayor by notice published in the official paper of the City, shall order that for a period of
20 days from and after the date of the notice, no dogs shall be permitted to go abroad any
of the streets, lanes, alleys, or public places in the City without being properly muzzled
with a secure muzzle or being led by a chain or other secure fastening.
F. Dogs or Cats Infected with Rabies: 1. Any police officer, health officer or other person
authorized, may kill or impound any dog or cat which is believed, from the appearance or
conduct of such dog or cat, to be infected with a disease known as rabies.
2. Any person who shall suspect that any dog or cat is infected with rabies shall report
such suspicion to the police or health authorities, describing the dog or cat and giving the
name of the owner, if known. Any such dog or cat, shall, upon the demand of any police
or health officer, or other authorized person, be delivered to such police officer or
authorized person. If upon examination by the health authorities, the dog or cat shall
prove in fact to be infected with such disease, the dog or cat may be killed by any
authorized person.
3. No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any dog or cat infected with rabies or any
dog or cat known to have been bitten by an animal known to have been infected with
rabies, or shall fail to report to the police or health authorities, the existence of a dog or
cat which such person knows to be infected with rabies.
G. Dog Which Bites Persons. Every owner or keeper of a dog and every other person
who knows that a dog has bitten any person shall immediately in writing report such fact
to a police officer or the Health Officer, and such owner or keeper shall immediately
confine said dog for a period of at least 14 days thereafter and shall not release such dog
except with the written approval of the Health Officer. Any such dog shall be
surrendered to the police or Health Officer upon demand.
H. No person shall keep, maintain, or harbor more than two dogs and two cats in any
apartment, residence, household, yard or place of business, except where allowed by the
Zoning Ordinances.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 9 6/9/14
I. Fecal matter. No person shall walk or allow a dog or cat, or other permitted animal, on
any public or private property other than the premises of the animal owner or said person
in control of the animal, without carrying or having in his or her possession a scoop, bag,
or other items designed to pick up and remove animal fecal material; and such person
shall remove any deposited fecal material immediately after it has been deposited by said
animal; and said person shall not dispose of any such fecal material on any property other
than his or her own property.
J. Rabies Vaccination Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a dog or a cat
in the City which is over five (5) months of age and which has not received a rabies
vaccination, as defined by §95.21 (2), Wis. Stats. A dog shall be vaccinated as set forth in
$95.21 (2), Wis. Stats. A cat shall be vaccinated every 24 months, and all other animals
kept as pets and susceptible to rabies shall be vaccinated periodically as certified by a
licensed veterinarian. No dog or cat license shall be issued until a certificate of rabies
vaccination, issued by a veterinarian, has been presented. A rabies vaccination tag shall
be attached to the collar of all licensed dogs and cats, at all times, except as set forth in
§95.21 (2) (f), Wis. Stats.
Maintenance in keeping of dogs and cats contrary to this Section shall be deemed a
public nuisance and subject to enforcement under Chapter 12 of the Code of Ordinances,
in addition to such other penalties as are set forth herein.
A time limit of three (3) months is allowed for litters.
11.02.130 Animals Running at Large. No person shall permit any animal owned by him
or under his control or in his possession to run at large. Paragraph (11.02.120 A) shall
govern in determining whether an animal is at large.
11.02.140 Cruelty to Animals. No person shall treat animals cruelly or injure or destroy
birds, bird nests or animals except birds and animals not protected by Chapter 29, Wis.
Stats.
11.02.150 Animals Prohibited at Public Festivals; Exceptions; Penalties.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect and promote the public
comfort, health, safety and welfare. The Common Council determines that the
presence of animals upon public grounds or public ways during public festivals
may result in animals approaching, chasing or startling people in a menacing
manner or apparent attitude of attack without provocation, and may result in
provoked or unprovoked animal bites or other bodily harm to persons, and may
result in damage to property, which actions are deemed harmful to the comfort,
health, safety or welfare of citizens and the community, and, therefore, must be
regulated.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 10 6/9/14
B. Definitions. When used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following specific meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
1. Animal - Any amphibian, bird, mammal or reptile, whether male or
female, sexed or neutered, domesticated or wild, but excluding
humans.
2. Owner - Any person keeping, harboring or permitting any animal to
habitually be or remain on, or be lodged or fed within, such person’s
house, yard or premises. This term shall not apply to veterinarians or
kennel operators who temporarily maintain on their premises animals
owned by others.
3. Farmer’s market – A market, usually out-of-doors, held on public
grounds or a public way, where farmers and vendors sell fresh
produce, flowers, handmade goods, prepared foods, and other products
directly to the public.
4. Police dog - Any dog owned by a federal, state or municipal
government, or an agency, department or unit thereof and used by law
enforcement officers for law enforcement functions, while such dog is
actively involved in law enforcement activities.
5. Public festival - Any planned, temporary celebration, entertainment or
program held on any public grounds or public way within the City, the
boundaries of which are specifically designated and posted by order of
the Common Council, including parades, processions and festivals
conducted by any association, group, organization or person, permitted
by the City as a special event, and open to the public generally. A
farmer’s market is not deemed a public festival for purposes of this
ordinance.
6. Public grounds - Any premises within the City owned or controlled by
the City, county or state, or any agency, board, department or
instrumentality thereof, and dedicated or reserved for use by the public
generally, including, but not limited to parks, public buildings and the
premises appurtenant thereto.
7. Public way - Any public alley, highway, parking lot, parkway,
sidewalk, street or right-of-way within the City, acquired, condemned,
created, dedicated, or reserved for use by the public generally for
vehicular or pedestrian purposes.
8. Service animal - Any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal which is a
“service animal” as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations for the
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 11 6/9/14
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (28 C.F.R. §36.104),
individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an
individual with a disability, while such animal is accompanied by the
person with a disability, and provided the presence of such animal
does not pose a direct threat to the health or safety of others.
C. Prohibition. Except as provided in subsection D hereof, no animal shall be
allowed upon any public grounds or public way designated for use as part of a
public festival held within the City, and no owner, or person having care, custody
or control of an animal shall cause or permit the animal to enter or remain upon
such public festival grounds or public way.
D. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: police dogs or service animals;
animals which are assembled for purposes of or while actively participating in a
parade; or animals which are within such areas of public festival grounds or
public ways as have been specifically designated by the Common Council for
demonstrations by or the showing of animals.
E. Penalties. Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this section
shall be subject to penalty as provided in sec. 25.04.010, Municipal Code. Such
penalty shall be in addition to any other relief or remedies to which the City may
be entitled.
11.02.160 Misuse of Emergency Services Number (911) Prohibited.
A. Misuse Prohibited. No person shall utilize the E911 emergency telephone number
system for any purpose other than to report an emergency.
B. It shall be unlawful to report an alleged emergency knowing that the fact situation
which he or she reports does not exist.
C. An “emergency” under this section exists when the person reasonably believes
that the immediate response by public safety personnel is essential due to the risk
or actual occupancy of:
1. Death or great bodily harm.
2. Property damage.
3. Any other situation which mandates the immediate response of public
safety personnel.
D. Penalty. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
forfeiture of not more than $200.00, together with the costs of prosecution.
11.02.170 Feeding of Waterfowl and Migratory Birds on Public Property
Prohibited.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 12 6/9/14
Feed - to offer, place, scatter or distribute in a location accessible to
waterfowl or migratory birds any type of food, whether by hand or by
use of any device or means, including but not limited to grains, bread,
scraps or any substance likely to be eaten by the waterfowl or
migratory birds.
Migratory Bird - a bird that travels from one place to another at
periodic seasonal times often over long distances, typically coinciding
with available food supplies or breeding seasons.
Waterfowl - a bird that frequents water, including but not limited to a
swimming game bird such as a duck or goose.
B. Prohibition. No person shall feed or provide food for the feeding of
any duck, goose, swan or other waterfowl, or any migratory birds, on
public property within the City.
C. Violations; Penalties. Any person who is convicted of violating this
section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more
than $500.00, together with the costs, fees and assessments of prosecution
for each offense, and in the event of nonpayment of any of said amounts,
shall be imprisoned in the county jail until said amounts are paid in full,
except that the amount owed shall be reduced by $50.00 for each day of
imprisonment and the maximum period of imprisonment shall be 30 days.
In addition to the imposition of forfeitures, the City may seek injunctive
relief for violation of this section. Each violation and each day a violation
occurs or exists constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such.
11.03.000 OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC MORALS AND DECENCY.
11.03.010 Gambling, Lotteries, Fraudulent Devices and Practices Prohibited.
A. Definitions Under State Law Adopted. All definitions contained in sec. 945.01 of
the Wisconsin Statutes defining “bet,” “bookmaking,” “gambling machine,”
“gambling place,” “lottery,” “consideration” and “wire communication facility”
are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this ordinance as if fully set
forth herein.
B. Provisions of State Law Adopted. All forms of gambling, lotteries and fraudulent
devices and practices are prohibited within the City. Without limitation, the
following provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes (1999-2000) for which the penalty
is a forfeiture and/or the seizure of anything of value or anything devised solely
for or found in actual use for gambling are hereby adopted and by reference made
a part of this ordinance as if fully set forth herein, and as such statutes may be
altered, amended, renumbered or recreated in any manner whatsoever after the
effective date of this ordinance:
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 13 6/9/14
945.02 (Gambling)
945.03 (Commercial gambling)
945.035 (Certain slot machines on licensed premises)
945.04 (Permitting premises to be used for commercial gambling)
945.05 (Dealing in gambling devices)
945.07 (Gambling by participants in contest)
945.08 (Bribery of participant in contest)
945.12 (Endless sales chains)
C. Procedure. The procedure for citation, pleading, initial appearance, stipulation of
guilt, deposit, substitution of municipal judge, discovery, prosecution, trail
judgment, relief from judgment, enforcement of judgment and appeal for cases
arising under this ordinance shall be as provided in ch. 800 of the Wisconsin
Statutes (1999-2000), and as such statutes may be altered, amended, renumbered
or recreated in any manner whatsoever after the effective date of this ordinance.
11.03.020 Prostitution Prohibited. No person shall operate or be an inmate of a house
of prostitution or engage in prostitution within the City.
11.03.030 Vagrancy and Loitering Prohibited. No person shall within the City loiter or
loaf about any public building, place or premises or wander about the streets, alleys,
parks or other public places either by day or night, whose actions give rise to a suspicion
of wrongdoing and who is unable to give a satisfactory account of himself, or who,
having the physical ability to work, is without any visible means of support and does not
seem employment or who derives part of his support from begging, prostitution,
pandering, fortune telling or as a similar impostor.
11.03.040 Indecent Conduct and Language Prohibited. No person shall use any
indecent, vile, profane or obscene language or conduct himself in any indecent, lewd,
lascivious or obscene manner within the City.
11.03.050 Obscene Literature. No person shall within the City sell, offer for sale, or
give away or exhibit any obscene book, pamphlet, paper, card, picture, toy or device.
11.03.060 Obscene Shows. No person shall within the City exhibit or advertise any
obscene or immoral performance, show or exhibition.
11.03.070 Window Peeping. No person shall enter upon the lands of another for the
purpose of window peeping, prowling, or trespassing.
11.04.000 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
11.04.010 A. Destruction or Damage of Property Prohibited.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 14 6/9/14
1. No person shall willfully cause damage, injure or intentionally deface, destroy or
meddle with any property of any kind of nature belonging to the City or its
departments.
2. No person shall willfully cause damage, injure or intentionally deface, destroy or
meddle with any property of any kind or nature belonging to another without that
person’s consent.
3. A reward of $50.00 shall be paid by the City to any person who shall furnish
information leading to the arrest of any person for an act of vandalism or
depredation on City or public property.
11.04.010 B. Theft.
The provisions of Section 943.20, Wis. Stats., defining and prohibiting theft of moveable
property, including provisions relating to the penalty to be imposed or the punishment for
violation of such statutes, as they may be amended from time to time, or adopted and
made a part of this section by reference, to the extent that such statutes prohibit theft of
property which does not exceed $500.00. A violation of any of such provisions shall
constitute a violation of this section.
11.04.010 C. Retail Theft/Shoplifting.
1. The provisions of Section 943.50, Wis. Stats., defining and prohibiting retail theft or
shoplifting, including provisions relating to the penalty to be imposed or the punishment
for violation of such statutes, as they may be amended from time to time, are adopted and
made a part of this section by reference. A violation of any such provisions shall
constitute a violation of this section.
11.04.020 Littering Prohibited. No person shall throw any glass, rubbish, waste or filth
upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks, or other property of the City or upon any
private property not owned by him or upon the surface of any body of water within the
City.
11.04.030 Littering From Vehicles. Any person engaged in hauling any loose material
likely to fall or be blown from a vehicle shall take all necessary precautions to prevent
such material from falling therefrom, and if such material does fall or is blown therefrom
shall cause such material to be picked up and removed. No person shall load a vehicle so
that the contents thereof are likely to fall or be scattered therefrom.
11.04.040 Spitting on Public Places. No person shall spit or expectorate on any street,
sidewalk or public place, public building or public conveyance.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 15 6/9/14
11.04.050 Parkour and Similar Activities.
A. Activities Prohibited. No person shall run, climb, swing, vault, jump, roll, leap,
or engage in quadrupedal or other types of movement, in the manner often
referred to as the practice of Parkour, freerunning, and/or l’art du déplacement,
on, from or upon any personal property owned or controlled by the City. As
used in this section, “personal property” includes, but is not limited to,
benches, bicycle racks, fences, monuments, planters, play equipment, poles,
posts, railings, statues, and tables.
B. Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, forfeit an amount not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each
offense.
11.05.000 ISSUANCE OF WORTHLESS CHECKS.
11.05.010 A. Issuance of Worthless Checks Prohibited. No person shall issue any check or
other order for payment or money which, at the time of issuance, he or she intends shall not be
paid.
11.05.010 B. Evidence of Issuance. Any of the following shall be prima facie evidence that the
person at the time he or she issued the check or other order for payment intended it should not be
paid:
1. Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have an account with the drawee; or
2. Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have sufficient funds or credit with
the drawee and the person failed within five (5) days after receiving notice of nonpayment
or dishonor to pay the check or other order; or
3. Proof that, when presentment was made within a reasonable time, the person did not have
sufficient funds or credit with the drawee and the person failed within five (5) days after
receiving notice of non-payment or dishonor to pay the check or other order.
11.05.010 C. Exemptions.
This section shall not apply to a post-dated check.
11.05.010 D. Penalty. Any person violating any provisions of this section shall forfeit the
following:
1. The amount of $50.00, if the worthless check or order is for an amount equal to or
less than $150.00.
2. The amount of $100.00, if the worthless check or order is in an amount greater than
$150.00 and less than $500.00.
3. The cost of prosecution in any event.
4. In default of payment, the defendant may be imprisoned in the County Jail until
forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed sixty (60) days.
11.06.000 CURFEW PROVISIONS.
A. No minor under the age of 17 years shall loiter, idle, wonder, stroll, or be either on
foot or in a vehicle of any nature in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys,
parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of
amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places in the City of Port
Washington between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, official
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 16 6/9/14
City time; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and
custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate
business directed by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and
custody of the minor or pursuing his employment, or returning from an authorized public
or parochial school or other organizational function which such function shall have been
duly registered with the Police Department by a responsible officer of the school or
organization, or to any such minor performing any legitimate function authorized by his
parent or other adult having legal custody or control of the minor.
Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
B. No parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor
under the age of 17 years shall knowingly permit such minor to violate the provisions
of Section 1. above.
C. Any minor violating the provisions of Section 11.06 (1) shall be handled in
accordance with the juvenile court laws or procedure.
D. Any parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor
violating Section 11.06(2) shall forfeit no less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00
and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the County Jail of Ozaukee
County until such forfeiture and the costs of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding
30 days.
11.07.000 POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF MALT BEVERAGES OR
INTOXICATING LIQUORS ON PUBLIC WAYS.
A. Generally Prohibited; Exceptions. Except as provided in subsections 11.07.000 B. and
14.02.030, no person shall purchase a fermented malt beverage, intoxicating liquor or
wine by glass or in open containers except for consumption on the licensed premises, and
no person shall carry or be in possession of any open can, cup, glass, bottle or similar
drinking vessel or container containing fermented malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or
wine, or any such receptacle on which the seal has been broken, or drink from the same
on any public way, public street, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, safety zone, alley or
public parking lot or on and/or in any motor vehicle parked on a public way, public
street, alley or public parking lot.
B. Allowed; Restrictions. The possession or consumption of fermented malt beverages,
intoxicating liquors or wine by persons who have attained the legal drinking age is
allowed upon the following public ways:
1. On the wooden boardwalk abutting the North Slip, between May 1 and October
1.
2. Within the marina area lying east of the east curb line of the Marina parking lot,
but excluding the municipal boat launch ramp, between May 1 and October 1.
3. Any public street, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, alley or parking lot for which a
permit has been issued under subsection 11.07.000 C. for the purpose of holding
an annual celebration, special event or block party.
4. Any public sidewalk area for which a right of way use license has been issued
under Section 7.11.010 as a part of the operation of a restaurant business serving
food and alcohol beverages prepared on private property adjacent thereto, subject
to the terms and conditions of the right of way use license, the alcohol beverage
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 17 6/9/14
license, and any other licenses, permits or approvals required for the use or
operation of such premises (e.g., building permit, health permit, zoning permit).
C. Permits for Annual Celebrations, Special Events or Block Parties, which include the
Possession or Consumption of Alcohol Beverages. Upon written application, the Chief
of Police or his designee may grant a permit to persons, groups or organizations allowing
a public street, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, alley or parking lot to be used for the
purpose of holding annual celebrations, special events, or block parties which include the
possession or consumption of fermented malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or wine
thereon. Such permits shall be applied for in accordance with, and if issued shall be
subject to the provisions of, Sections 7.17.020 B. and C. The fee for such permit shall be
established by the Common Council.
11.08.000 Loitering Prohibited.
1. Loitering or Prowling Prohibited. No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a
time, or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances
that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is
warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon the appearance of a policy or
peace officer, refuses to identify himself under the circumstances which leads the
officer to believe a crime has been or will be committed, or manifestly endeavors
to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances
makes it impracticable, a police or peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an
offense under this section, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm
which would otherwise be warranted by requesting him to identify himself and
explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense
under this section if the police or peace officer did not comply with the preceding
sentence or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the actor was true,
and if believed by the police or peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the
alarm.
2. Obstruction of Traffic by Loitering. No person shall loaf or loiter in a group or a
crowd upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street crossings or bridges or in
any other public place within the City in such manner as to prevent, interfere with
or obstruct the ordinary free use of such public street, sidewalks, alleys, street
crossings and bridges or other public places by persons passing along and over the
same.
3. Loitering After Being Requested to Move.
A. Obstructing Highways. No person shall obstruct any street, bridge,
sidewalk or crossing by lounging or loitering in or upon the same after
being requested to move on by any police officer.
B. In places of Public Assembly or Use. No person shall loiter, lounge or loaf
in or about any depot, theater, dance hall, restaurant, store, parking lot, or
other private place of assembly or public use after being requested to
move on by any police officer or by the owner or other person in charge of
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 18 6/9/14
such place. Upon being requested to move, a person shall comply
immediately with such request by leaving the premises or the area.
C. When Signs Posted. No person shall loiter, lounge or loaf on private
property posted by means of a sign or signs prohibiting such conduct,
without the express consent of the owner or other person in charge thereof.
The presence of a person on such property for a period of ten (10) minutes
or longer without such consent in writing and without transacting or
causing to be transacted business with the owner, person in charge of
his/her/its agent shall be presumptive evidence of a violation of this
paragraph.
11.09.000 HOUSE OF ILL FAME. No person shall keep or maintain or in any way be
connected with or contribute to the support of any disorderly house, house of ill fame or
place for the practice of information or who shall knowingly own or be interested therein
as proprietor or landlord.
11.10.000 UNAUTHORIZED PRESENCE ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.
A. It shall be unlawful for any student who is under suspension, expulsion, or other
discipline excluding him from attending any school as defined below, or for any
person not a student presently enrolled to attend such schools, or not an employee
of such schools, or not a parent or guardian of a student so enrolled, or not an
otherwise “authorized person” as defined below, to be present within any school
building or upon any school grounds under the jurisdiction of such school,
without having first secured authorization to be there from the principal or other
person in charge of the school building or school grounds, except while in direct
route to secure such authorization.
B. Any person shall, upon request of the principal or other person in charge of any
school building or upon any school grounds under the jurisdiction of the school
district referred to below, or upon request of any police officer, display any
written authorization to be present which he may have in his possession, or
otherwise explain his presence or his status as a student, employee, parent or
guardian, or authorized person as defined below.
C. All entrances to such school buildings shall be posted with a notice stating “entry
into school building by unauthorized persons prohibited”.
D. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person to be present on any elementary or middle
school playground after 10:00 p.m.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to be present on any high school playground
after 12:00 midnight.
E. Unauthorized presence shall include any vehicle on school property whose
owners or occupants have not received permission to be there or whose owners or
occupants are not on school property for some legitimate business or activity; or
which is parked in an area reserved for parking to certain authorized vehicles, not
including the vehicle in question. Such vehicle may be issued a City of Port
Washington Summons that regulates parking or may be towed away at the
direction of the school principal or person in charge. The Police Department may
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 19 6/9/14
also have any vehicle towed away which, because of its location, creates a hazard
to life or property.
F. “School” shall mean any property within the City of Port Washington under the
jurisdiction of the Port Washington-Saukville School District.
G. “Authorized Person” shall include any person who is present at any school
building or school grounds for any purpose previously authorized by the schools
or their designees.
H. “Penalty”. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than Ten ($10.00)
Dollars, nor more than Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for each offense.
11.11.000 TRUANCY. Truancy Prohibited. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be
a truant or a habitual truant as defined in Section 118.163, Wis. Stats. If a person is found to have
violated this section, all of the dispositions set forth in that statute are available to the court.
11.12.000 REGULATION OF SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE.
11.12.010 School Buildings and Grounds.
A. Definitions.
1. “Smoking” means carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other lighted
smoking equipment.
2. “Tobacco Products” means cigarettes; cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques;
granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff;
snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing
tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco and
other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for
chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise; or both for chewing and smoking.
B. Regulation of smoking and use of tobacco products. No person may smoke or use any
tobacco products, either indoors or outdoors, at any school building or on any school
grounds which are owned by, rented by, or under the control of the Port Washington-
Saukville School District, including those portions of the street right-of-way (including
street pavement, curb, parkway and sidewalk) of all streets abutting on school grounds.
C. Injunction. Local officials or any affected party may institute an action in any court with
jurisdiction to enjoin repeated violations of this ordinance.
11.12.020 Use of Cigarette and Tobacco Products Prohibited.
1. In this section:
(a) “Cigarette” has the meaning given in s. 139.30 (1),
Wis. Stats.
(b) “Law enforcement officer” has the meaning given in
s.30.50 (4s), Wis. Stats.
(c) “Tobacco products” has the meaning given in s. 139.75
(12), Wis. Stats.
2. Except as provided in sub. (3), no child may do any of the following:
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 20 6/9/14
(a) Buy or attempt to buy any cigarette or tobacco product.
(b) Falsely represent his or her age for the purpose of
receiving any cigarette or tobacco product.
(c) Possess any cigarette or tobacco product.
3. A child may purchase or possess cigarettes or tobacco products for the sole
purpose of resale in the course of employment during his or her working hours if
employed by a retailer licensed under s. 134.65 (1), Wis. Stats.
4. A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette or tobacco product involved
in any violation of sub. (2) committed in his or her presence.
11.12.030 Restrictions on Sale or Gift of Cigarettes or Tobacco Products.
1. DEFINITIONS. In this section:
(a) “Cigarette” has the meaning given in sec. 139.30 (1).
(b) “Distributor” means any of the following:
1. A person specified under s. 139.30 (3).
2. A person specified under s. 139.75 (4).
(c) “Identification card” means any of the following:
1. A license containing a photograph issued under ch. 343.
2. An identification card issued under s. 343.50
3. An identification card issued under s. 125.08, 1987 stats.
(d) Jobber” has the meaning given in s. 139.30 (6).
(e) “Manufacturer” means any of the following:
1. A person specified under s. 139.30(7).
2. A person specified under s. 139.75(5).
(f) “Retailer” means any person licensed under s. 134.65 (1).
(g) “School” has the meaning given in s. 118.257 (1) (c).
(h) “Subjobber” has the meaning given in s. 139.75 (11).
(i) “Tobacco Products” has the meaning given in s.139.75 (12).
(j) “Vending machine” has the meaning given in s. 139.30 (14).
(k) “Vending machine operator” has the meaning given in s.139.30 (15).
2. RESTRICTIONS.
a. No retailer may sell or give cigarettes or tobacco products to any person
under the age of 18, except as provided in s. 48.983 (3). A vending
machine operator is not liable under this paragraph for the purchase of
cigarettes or tobacco products from his or her vending machine by a
person under the age of 18 if the vending machine operator was unaware
of the purchase.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 21 6/9/14
b. 1. A retailer shall post a sign in areas within his or her premises where
cigarettes or tobacco products are sold to consumers stating that the sale of
any cigarette or tobacco product to a person under the age of 18 is
unlawful under this section and s. 48.983 and 134.66, Wis. Stats.
2. A vending machine operator shall attach a notice in a conspicuous
place on the front of his or her vending machines stating that the purchase
of any cigarette or tobacco product by a person under the age of 18 is
unlawful under s. 48.983 and that the purchaser is subject to a forfeiture of
not to exceed $25.00.
c. 1. Except as provided in par. (cm), no retailer may keep a vending
machine in any public place that is open to persons under the age of 18
unless all of the following apply:
a. The vending machine is in a place where it is ordinarily in the
immediate vicinity, plain view and control of an employee.
b. The vending machine is in a place where it is inaccessible to the
public when the premises are closed.
2. The person who ultimately controls, governs or directs the activities
within the premises where the vending machine is located shall ensure that
an employee of the retailer remains in the immediate vicinity, plain view
and control of the vending machine whenever the premises are open.
3. Except as provided in subd. 4, a vending machine operator shall
remove all of his or her vending machines that are located in any place
prohibited by this paragraph by June 1, 1992.
4. Notwithstanding subd. 3, if a written agreement binding on a vending
machine operator governs his or her vending machine that is located in
any place prohibited by this paragraph, the vending machine operator shall
remove the vending machine on the date that the written agreement
expires or would be extended or renewed or on May 1, 1993, whichever
occurs first.
(cm) 1. Notwithstanding par. (c), no retailer may place a vending
machine within 500 feet of a school.
2. Except as provided in subd. 3, a vending machine
operator shall remove all of his or her vending machines
which are located within 500 feet of a school by September
1, 1989.
3. Notwithstanding subd. 2, if a written agreement binding
on a vending machine operator governs the location of his or
her vending machine which is located within 500 feet of a
school, the vending machine operator shall remove the
vending machine on the date that the written agreement
expires or would be extended or renewed or on May 1, 1993,
whichever occurs first.
d. No manufacturer, distributor, jobber, subjobber or retailer, or their
employees or agents, may provide cigarettes or tobacco products for
nominal or no consideration to any person under the age of 18.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 22 6/9/14
3. DEFENSE OF RETAILER. Proof of all of the following facts by a retailer who
sells cigarettes or tobacco products to a person under the age of 18 is a defense to
any prosecution for a violation of sub. (2) (a):
a. That the purchaser falsely represented that he or she had attained the age
of 18 and presented an identification card.
b. That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and
prudent person would believe that the purchaser had attained the age of
18.
c. That the sale was made in good faith, in reasonable reliance on the
identification card and appearance of the purchaser and in the belief that
the purchaser had attained the age of 18.
4. PENALTIES.
(a) 1. In this paragraph, “violation” means a violation of sub. (2 (a) (c),(cm)
or (d) or a local ordinance which strictly conforms to sub. (2)(a)(c)(cm) or (d).
2. A person who commits a violation is subject to a forfeiture of:
a. Not more than $500.00 if the person has not committed a
previous violation within 12 months of the violation; or
b. Not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 if the person has
committed a previous violation within 12 months of the violation.
3. A court shall suspend any license or permit issued under s. 134.65,
139.34, or 139.79 to a person for:
a. Not more than 3 days, if the court finds that the person committed
a violation within 12 months after committing one previous
violation;
b. Not less than 3 days nor more than 10 days, if the court finds that
the person committed a violation within 12 months after
committing 2 other violations; or
c. Not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days, if the court finds that
the person committed the violation within 12 months after
committing 3 or more other violations.
4. The court shall promptly mail notice of a suspension under subd. 3 to
the department of revenue and to the clerk of each municipality which has
issued a license or permit to the person.
(b) Whoever violates sub. (2)(b) shall forfeit not more than $25.00.
11.13.000 MARIJUANA, POSSESSION AND USE PROHIBITED.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 23 6/9/14
11.13.010 Definition. “Marijuana” means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa L.,
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant;
and every compound, manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant,
its seeds or resin.
11.13.020 Possession, Delivery and Use Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
to possess, deliver, sell or use marijuana or a marijuana derivative. This section shall
include, but not be limited to, those persons who possess, deliver, sell or use marijuana or
a marijuana derivative in any amount and include those persons who are charged under
this section for a first offense.
11.13.030 Exception. This section shall not apply to a person who has obtained or
possesses marijuana directly from or pursuant to a valid prescription or order of a
practitioner licensed to administer a controlled substance and while acting in the course
of his professional practice. However, the burden of proof to prove such exception shall
be on the person claiming it.
11.13.040 Penalties. Any person who violates any subsection of Section 11.13.000 shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than One Hundred ($100.00)
Dollars nor more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars, together with costs of
prosecution, and upon default of payment be imprisoned in the county jail or house of
correction until the total forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed thirty (30) days.
11.135.000 SYNTHETIC CHEMICAL CANNABINOID PROHIBITED.
(1) DEFINITIONS.
(a) “Deliver” has the same meaning given in Section 961.01 (6), Wis. Stats. (as amended
from time to time) with respect to a controlled substance or controlled substance
analog.
(b) “Distribute” has the same meaning given in Section 961.09 (9), Wis. Stats. (as
amended from time to time) with respect to a controlled substance or controlled
substance analog.
(2) PROHIBITED SALES, USE AND POSSESSION.
It shall be illegal for any person to possess, use, purchase or attempt to purchase, sell,
publicly display for sale or attempt to sell, give, deliver, distribute, or barter any part of
the following plant or any one or more of the following chemicals whether under the
common street or trade names of “Spice”, “K2”, “Genie”, Yucatan Fire”, “Blaze”, “Red
X Dawn”, “Zohia”, “Spike Diamond”, “Route 69”, “Smoke XXXX”, “Citron”, “fake” or
“new” marijuana, or by another name, label or description:
(a) Salvia divinorum or Salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified
botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; any
extract from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salts
derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts;
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 24 6/9/14
(b) (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6dimethyl-3-(2methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10atetrahydrobenzo[
c]chromen-1-ol - some trade or other names: HU-210;
(c) 1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole - some trade or other names: JWH-018\spice;
(d) 1-Butyl-3-(1naphthoyl) indole-some trade or other names: JWH-073;
(e) 1-(3{trifluoromethylphenyl}) piperazine - some trade or other names: TFMPP;
(f) 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol - some trade or other names:
CP 47, 497;
(g) 1-(2-(4-(morpholinyl)ethyl))-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole - some trade or other names:
JWH-200;
(h) 1-hexyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole - some trade or other names: JWH-019;
(i) 1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole - some trade or other names: JWH-250;
(j) 1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole - some trade or other names: JWH-398;
(k) (2-methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1-naphthalenyl-methanone - or some trade or
other names: JWH-015;
(l) Dexanabinol, (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol - or some trade or other names: HU-
211;
(m) or any similar structural analogs.
(3) EXCEPTIONS; MEDICAL OR DENTAL USE ALLOWED.
Acts otherwise prohibited under this section shall not be unlawful if done by or under the
direction or prescription of a physician, dentist, or other medical health professional
licensed by the state of Wisconsin, authorized to direct or prescribe such acts, provided
that such use is permitted under Wisconsin and federal laws.
(4) PENALTIES.
(a) Any chemical used in violation of this section shall be seized and forfeited to the
City.
(b) Any person who shall sell, publicly display for sale or attempt to sell, give, deliver,
distribute, or barter any part of the plant or any one or more of the chemicals as
prohibited in subsec. (2) shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00, together with the costs of prosecution for
each violation, and upon default of payment be imprisoned in the county jail until
the costs are paid, but not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. The City may also seek equitable relief to
obtain compliance.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 25 6/9/14
(c) Any person who shall possess, purchase or attempt to purchase any part of the plant
or any one or more of the chemicals as prohibited in subsec. (2) shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 and not more than
$500.00, together with the costs of prosecution for each violation, and upon default
of payment be imprisoned in the county jail until the costs are paid, but not to
exceed 90 days.
11.14.000 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA, POSSESSION AND USE PROHIBITED.
11.14.010 Drug Paraphernalia Defined. 1. A. In this section, “drug paraphernalia”
means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used primarily
intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, selling, distributing, delivering, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introduced into the
human body, a controlled substance, as defined in Ch. 161, Wis. Stats., in violation of
this section. It includes, but is not limited to:
(1) Kits used primarily intended for use, or designed for use, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance from which a controlled substance can be derived;
(2) Kits used, primarily intended for use, or designed for use, in manufacturing,
selling, distributing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or
preparing controlled substances;
(3) Isomerization devices used, primarily intended for use, or designed for use, in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
(4) Testing equipment used, primarily intended for use, or designed for use, in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled
substances;
(5) Scales and balances used, primarily intended for use, or designed for use, in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
(6) Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite,
dextrose and lactose used, primarily intended for use, or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
(7) Separation gins and sifters used, primarily intended for use, or designed for
use, in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
(8) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, primarily
intended for use, or designed for use, in compounding controlled substances;
(9) Capsules, balloons, envelopes, or other containers used, primarily intended for
use, or designed for use, in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;
(10) Containers and other objects used, primarily intended for use, or designed for
use, in storing or concealing controlled substances;
(11) Hypodermic syringes, needles or other objects used, intended for use, or
designed for use, in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human
body;
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 26 6/9/14
(12) Objects used, primarily intended for use, or designed for use, in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil, into
the human body, including, but not limited to:
(a) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or
without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctures metal
bowls;
(b) Water pipes;
(c) Carburetion tubes and devices;
(d) Smoking and carburetion masks;
(e) Roach clips, defined as objects used to hold burning material, such as a
marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
(f) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
(g) Chamber pipes;
(h) Carburetor pipes;
(i) Electric pipes;
(j) Air-driven pipes;
(k) Chilams;
(l) Bongs;
(m) Ice pipes or chillers.
B. “Drug Paraphernalia” excludes:
(1) Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or primarily intended for
use in parenterally injecting substances into the human body.
(2) Any items, including pipes, papers and accessories, that are designed for use
or primarily intended for use with tobacco products.
2. “Primarily” means chiefly or mainly.
11.14.020 Determination of Drug Paraphernalia. In determining whether an object is
drug paraphernalia, the following shall be considered, without limitation of such other
consideration a court may deem relevant:
A. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;
B. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, under any
city, state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;
C. The proximity of the object in time and space to a direct violation of this section;
D. The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
E. The existence of any residue of controlled substance on the object;
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 27 6/9/14
F. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the primary intent of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom the person knows, or should
reasonably know, primary intent to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section.
The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of this object, as to a direct violation
of this section, shall not prevent a finding that the object is primarily intended for use, or
designed for use, as drug paraphernalia;
G. Oral or written instructions provided with the object concerning its use;
H. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;
I. National and local advertising concerning its use;
J. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
K Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or
related items to the community, such as a licensed dealer or distributor of tobacco
products.
L. The existence and a scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community;
M. Expert testimony concerning its use.
11.14.030 Prohibited Activities. A. Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. No person may
use, or possess with primarily intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section. Possession of
drug paraphernalia shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption of prohibited use.
B. Manufacture, Sale or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia. No person may sell, deliver,
possess with primary intent to deliver or manufacture with primary intent to deliver, drug
paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of this section.
C. Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to a Minor. Any person eighteen (18) years of age or
over, who violates subsection B. of this section by delivering drug paraphernalia to a
person under eighteen (18) years of age, is guilty of a special offense.
D. Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia. No person may place in any newspaper,
magazine, handbill or other publication, or upon any outdoor billboard or sign, any
advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to
promote the sale of objects designed or primarily intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 28 6/9/14
E. Exemption. This subsection does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners,
pharmacists, owners or pharmacies and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with Chapter 161, Wis. Stats. This section does not prohibit the possession, manufacture,
or use of hypodermics, in accordance with Chapter 161, Wis. Stats.
11.14.040 Penalties. A. Any drug paraphernalia used or possessed in violation of this
section shall be seized and forfeited to the City in accordance with the provisions of the
Port Washington Code of Ordinances as to property forfeiture.
B. Any person who violates subsection A, B or D of Section 11.14.030 shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars nor
more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars, together with costs of prosecution, and upon
default of payment be imprisoned in the county jail or house of corrections until the total
forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed thirty (30) days.
C. Any person who violates subsection C of Section 11.14.030 shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars nor more than One
Thousand ($1,000.00), together with costs of prosecution, and upon default of payment
be imprisoned in the county jail or house of correction until the total forfeiture and costs
are paid, but not to exceed sixty (60) days.
11.15.000 RETURNING LIBRARY MATERIALS.
1. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, certain words and terms are defined as
follows:
(a) “Library” means any public library, library of an educational or historical
organization or society, or museum, within the City of Port Washington.
(b) “Library Material” includes any book, plate, picture, photograph, engraving,
painting, drawing, map, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, broadside, sound
recording, audio-visual materials in any format, magnetic or other tapes,
electronic data processing records, or other tapes, artifacts or other documentary,
written or printed materials, regardless of physical form or characteristic,
belonging to, on loan to or otherwise in the custody of a library.
2. Concealment. The concealment of library material beyond the last station for
borrowing library material in a library is evidence of intent to deprive the library of
possession of the material. The discovery of library material which has not been
borrowed in accordance with the library’s procedures or taken with consent of a library
official, agent or employee and which is concealed upon the person or among the
belongings of another is evidence of intent to deprive the library of possession of the
material on the part of the person so concealing the material.
City of Port Washington Chapter 11 – Page 29 6/9/14
3. Failure to Return Materials. Any person who has charged out library material from a
library in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the library board and who
has failed to return said library material on or before the date that said library material
was to have been returned to the library and who has received a written notice to return
materials owned by or in charge of the library, or any person to whom the library has
attempted to send such a notice but is unable to do so because said person failed to
inform the library of a change of address, and who fails to return such material according
to the rules and regulations adopted by the library board, or any person who conceals
library material with intent to deprive the library of possession of such material shall
forfeit:
$20.00, together with the costs of prosecution, if the value of the library materials
does not exceed $20.00.
$50.00, together with the costs of prosecution, if the value of the library materials
does not exceed $50.00.
$100.00, together with the costs of prosecution, if the value of the library
materials exceeds $50.00.
In the event of a failure to pay such forfeiture, where no showing of indigency is made, a
person convicted of violating this Ordinance may be imprisoned for no more than three
(3) days, as the court deems fit, or until the judgment is sooner paid.
The failure to return, or concealment of, each item of library material belonging to or in
the charge of the library shall constitute a separate violation of this Ordinance.
11.25.000 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 25.04 of this Code.
11.26.000 ATTEMPT. Whoever attempts to commit an offense under this Chapter may
be subject to forfeiture not to exceed the maximum penalty for the completed offense.
CHAPTER 12
Public Nuisances
Table of Contents
12.01.000 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED
12.02.000 DEFINITIONS
12.02.010 Public Nuisance
12.02.020 Public Nuisances Affecting Health
12.02.030 Public Nuisances Offending Morals and Decency
12.02.040 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety
12.03.000 EMISSION OF SMOKE AND OTHER NOXIOUS FUMES
12.03.010 Definitions
12.03.020 Emission of Smoke and Fumes
12.03.030 Emission of Other Noxious Materials
12.03.040 Fire Chief to Enforce
12.03.050 Steam Boilers and Furnaces
12.04.000 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES
12.04.010 Enforcement
12.04.020 Summary Abatement
12.04.030 Abatement by Court Action
12.04.040 Other Methods Not Excluded
12.05.000 COST OF ABATEMENT
12.06.000 JUNKED VEHICLES, DISPOSAL OF
12.07.000 PENALTY
12.08.000 JUNKED VEHICLES
12.08.010 Definitions
12.08.020 Abandoned Vehicles
12.08.030 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
12.08.040 Inventory Required
12.08.050 Owner Liability
CHAPTER 12
Public Nuisances
12.01.000 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED. No person shall erect, contrive,
cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the City of Port
Washington.
12.02.000 DEFINITIONS.
12.02.010 Public Nuisance. A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or
use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to:
1. Substantially annoy, injure, or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of
the public;
2. In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property;
3. Greatly offend the public morals or decency;
4. Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render
dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or
other public way or the use of public property.
12.02.020 Public Nuisances Affecting Health. The following acts, omissions, places,
conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances
coming within the definition of 12.02.010:
1. All decayed, harmfully adultered or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered
for sale to the public.
2. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human consumption or food
which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24
hours after death.
3. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting
lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material whatsoever in
which files, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed.
4. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply.
5. Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not fly-tight.
6. All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetables.
7. All animals running at large.
8. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body of
water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances.
9. Any use of property, substances, or things within the City emitting or causing
any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious, or disagreeable odors, gases,
effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary
persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any
appreciable number of persons within the City.
10. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome liquid or
substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place
within the City.
12.02.030 Public Nuisance Offending Morals and Decency. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public
nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be
construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within
the definitions of subsection (1) of this section:
1. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling houses and
buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution,
promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling.
2. All gambling devices and slot machines.
3. All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold,
possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or
license as provided for by the ordinances of the City.
4. Any place or premises within the City where City ordinances or State laws
relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly,
continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.
5. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws of the State of Wisconsin
or ordinances of the City.
12.02.040 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances
affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other
nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the provisions of subsection (1)
of this section:
1. All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near
streets, sidewalk, public grounds, or places frequented by the public, so situated
or constructed as to endanger the public safety.
2. All buildings erected, repaired or altered within the City in violation of the
provisions of the ordinances of the City, relating to materials and manner of
construction of buildings and structures within said district.
3. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or maintained upon
or in view of any public highway or railway crossing which purport to be or may
be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which
because of its color, location, brillance or manner of operation interferes with the
effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
4. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving
vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of
traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
5. All limbs of trees which project over and less than 10 feet above the surface of a
public sidewalk or street or other public place.
6. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the State of
Wisconsin and ordinances of the City.
7. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous,
unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
8. All wires over streets, alleys, or public grounds which are strung less than 18 feet
above the surface thereof.
9. All loud, discordant and unnecessary noises or vibrations of any kind.
10. All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in
or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the City or which,
although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an
unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been
accomplished.
11. All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements freely
accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
12. All abandoned refrigerators, iceboxes or other containers which have airtight
doors from which the doors and other covers have not been removed or which
are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside.
13. Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or
sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of
people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets and sidewalks.
14. Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the City or laws of the
State of Wisconsin relating to the storage of flammable liquids.
12.03.000 EMISSION OF SMOKE AND OTHER NOXIOUS FUMES.
12.03.010 Definitions. The following definitions cover the intended use of these words
in this section:
1. Person. Any individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company, firm,
trust, corporation, government corporation, department, bureau, agency, or any
other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
2. Chart. The Ringelman Chart with instructions for use as published by the U. S.
Bureau of Mines.
3. Dust. Gas-borne or other particles larger than one micron in mean diameter.
4. Fumes. Gases or vapors that are of such character as to create an uncleanly,
destructive, offensive or unhealthy condition.
5. Open Fire. Any fire wherein the products of combustion are emitted into the
open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or chimney.
6. Smoke. Small gas-borne particles consisting essentially of carbonaceious
material in sufficient number to be observable.
7. Soot. Agglomerated particles consisting essentially of carbonaceious material.
8. Stack or Chimney. Flue, conduit, or opening arranged for emitting gases into
the open air.
12.03.020 Emission of Smoke and Fumes. No person shall cause, permit or allow the
escape from any smoke stack, chimney, building or open fire, locomotive, steamship or
tug within the corporate limits of the City, or within one mile therefrom, into the open air
of such quantities of smoke, ash, dust, soot, cinders, acid, or other fumes, dirt or other
material or noxious gases in such place or manner as to cause injury detriment or
nuisance to any person or to the public, or to endanger the health or safety of any person
or the public, or in such manner as to cause injury or damage to business or property, and
such is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The emission of smoke of 40% or greater
density, as determined by the “Ringleman” chart, (40% density corresponding to number
2 on said chart), shall be considered prima facie evidence of such a nuisance except for a
period not exceeding 6 minutes in any one hour during which time the fire box is cleaned
out or a new fire box is being built therein.
12.03.030 Emission of Other Noxious Materials. No person shall cause, suffer, or
allow to be produced or emitted into the open air, from any premises, within the City, of
dust, fly ash, soot, cinders, sawdust, or waste particles from any manufacturing process,
such as mineral wool, lint, saw dust, coal dust, grease or paint.
12.03.040 Fire Chief to Enforce. The Fire Chief shall enforce the provisions of
subsections (1) through (3).
12.03.050 Steam Boilers and Furnaces. A. Construction and Alteration. No person
shall construct, alter or repair any steam stationary plant boiler or furnace within the City
without obtaining from the Building Inspector a permit for that purpose. He shall furnish
to the Building Inspector a written statement giving the style and dimensions of such
steam plant, boiler or furnace, together with the height and size of any stack or chimney
and the method or device to be used for the prevention of the emission of dense smoke
therefrom, and if the matter mentioned in said application and statement be approved by
the Building Inspector he shall issue a permit for the construction of such steam plant,
boiler, or furnace upon payment of the following fees:
1. For permits for the erection, repair or alteration of, or addition to any furnace or
other fuel burning equipment, the furnace volume of which does not exceed 100
cubic feet or equivalent, or any refuse burning device, for each unit $1.00;
2. For permits for the erection, installation, reconstruction, repair or alteration of, or
addition to, any furnace or other fuel burning equipment, the furnace volume of
which is greater than 100 cubic feet, for each unit $1.00 per thousand dollars of
estimated cost up to $20,000, thereafter 50¢ per thousand dollars of cost.
B. Report of Accidents Required. All accidents to stationary steam boilers, furnaces and
smoke preventing devices, shall be reported to the Building Inspector in writing, giving
the nature of the accident and the time required the same.
12.04.000 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
12.04.010 Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Building
Inspector and Health Officer to enforce those provisions of this chapter that come within
the jurisdiction of their offices and they shall make periodic inspections and inspections
upon complaint to insure that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken
under this section to abate a public nuisance unless the officer shall have inspected or
caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and have
satisfied himself that a nuisance does in fact exist.
12.04.020 Summary Abatement. A. Notice to Owner. If the inspecting officer shall
determine that a public nuisance exists within the City and that there is great and
immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Mayor may
direct the Chief of Police to serve notice on the person causing, permitting or maintaining
such nuisance or upon the owner or occupant of the premises where such nuisance is
caused, permitted or maintained and to post a copy of said notice on the premises. Such
notice shall direct the person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance or the
owner or occupant of the premises to abate or remove such nuisance within 24 hours and
shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the City will cause the same to be
abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
B. Abatement by City. If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided or if the
owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the officer having the
duty of enforcement shall cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance.
12.04.030 Abatement by Court Action. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a
public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such
as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or
decency, he shall file a written report of his findings with the Mayor who, upon direction
of the Common Council, shall cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in
the name of the City in the Circuit Court in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
280, Wisconsin Statutes.
12.04.040 Other Methods Not Excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the City of its officials in accordance
with the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
12.05.000 COST OF ABATEMENT. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this
chapter for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public
nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the City shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and
if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner such cost shall be assessed
against the real estate as a special charge.
12.06.000 JUNKED VEHICLE, DISPOSAL OF. A. No disassembled, or inoperable
and unlicensed, and no junked or wrecked motor vehicle shall be stored or allowed to
remain in the open upon public or private property within the City for a period in excess
of 2 days unless it is in connection with an automotive sales or repair business enterprise
located in a properly zoned area.
B. Whenever the Chief of Police shall find any such vehicle placed or stored in the open
upon public property within the City, he shall cause such vehicles to be removed by junk
or salvage yard and stored in such junk or salvage yard for a period of 30 days, at the end
of which time such junk or salvage yard shall dispose of such vehicle, unless previously
claimed by the owner.
C. Whenever the Chief of Police shall find such vehicles placed or stored in the open
upon private property within the City, he shall notify the owner of the property upon
which such vehicles are placed or stored of the intention of the City to remove such
vehicles immediately. If such vehicles are not removed within 3 days, the Chief of Police
shall cause vehicles to be removed, the cost of such removal to be charged to the property
from which they are removed, which charges shall be entered as a special charge on the
tax roll.
D. If such vehicles are claimed by the owner, the junk or salvage yard shall charge a
reasonable fee for handling and storage.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to auto salvage yards and/or junk yards
that are duly licensed under the ordinance provisions of the City of Port Washington
pertaining to such operation.
12.07.000 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 25.04 of this Code.
12.08.000 JUNKED VEHICLES.
12.08.010 Definition. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this ordinance.
1. “Vehicle” shall mean any motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or mobile home.
2. “Street or Highway” shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
3. “Property” shall mean any real property within the City which is not a street or
highway, as defined above.
12.08.020 A. Abandonment of Vehicles Prohibited. No person shall leave unattended
on any public highway or any public or private property in the City any motor vehicle,
trailer, semi-trailer or mobile home as defined in Sec. 340.01, Wis. Stats., whether or not
registered under Ch. 341, Wis. Stats., for such time and under such circumstances as to
cause it reasonable to appear abandoned.
B. Presumption of Abandonment.
1. Unattended Vehicles. Any such vehicle left unattended for more than 48 hours
on any public highway or property or on any private property where parking is
prohibited or restricted, without the permission of the authority or owner in
charge thereof, is deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance.
2. Inoperable and Unregistered Vehicles. Any such vehicle which is disassembled,
dismantled, inoperable, wrecked or unregistered and any parts thereof stored or
remaining in the open on any public highway or property, or on any private
property not utilized as a vehicle junk or salvage yard permitted under this Code
may be determined by the Police Department to be abandoned and to constitute
a public nuisance.
3. Enclosed and Covered Vehicles. This subsection does not apply to such
vehicles located on private property, not in violation of this Code, if enclosed
completely in a building or other storage place or if covered completely by a car
cover or tarpaulin.
C. Exemption. Any owner or operator of a registered vehicle which becomes disabled
or inoperable for any reason, who is unable to remove it from a highway or public
property not a prohibited or restricted parking area, shall notify the Police Department
within 12 hours of such occurrence of the location of the vehicle and transfer and deliver
clear title to the vehicle to the City together with towing costs for junking the vehicle, and
thereupon shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. When so requested by the
owner or operator, the Chief of Police is authorized to remove and junk such vehicle
directly from its location.
D. Impoundment of Abandoned Vehicles. Any vehicle found abandoned in violation
of this section shall be impounded by the Police Department until reclaimed or disposed
of under Section 12.08.030 below, except if the Chief of Police determines that the
towing costs and storage charges for the impoundment would exceed the value of the
vehicle, it may be disposed of by private sale or junked by the Chief of Police directly
from its location and prior to the expiration of the impoundment period unless the vehicle
is stolen or otherwise needed for evidence or other reason. All substantially complete
vehicles in excess of 19 model years of age shall be disposed of in accordance with
Section 12.08.030 below.
12.08.030 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles.
A. Reclamation of Vehicles. Any vehicle abandoned in violation of this section and
impounded shall be retained in storage for a minimum of 10 days after notice by certified
mail has been sent to the owner as defined in Sec. 340.01, Wis. Stats., and to any secured
party of record of their right to reclaim it upon payment of the towing cost and accrued
storage charges. Such notice shall contain the information set forth in Sec. 342.40, Wis.
Stats.
B. Vehicles Not Reclaimed. Any vehicle not reclaimed by the owner of lien holder
under paragraph (1) above may be disposed of by sealed bid or auction sale in accordance
with Sec. 342.40, Wis. Stats., except if the Chief of Police determined that the value of
the vehicle is $500.00 or less, it may be disposed of by private sale or junked by the Chief
of Police. A list of vehicles to be sold shall be made available by the Chief of Police to
any interested person or organization upon request.
C. Removal of Vehicles; Forfeiture of Interest. The purchaser of any vehicle sold
under this subsection shall have 10 days after the sale date to remove it from storage and
shall pay a reasonable storage charge for each day it remains in storage after the second
business day subsequent to the sale date. The purchaser shall forfeit all interest in the
vehicle, and it shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be sold again, if it is not
removed within 10 days after the sale date.
D. Title to Vehicles. Upon sale of an abandoned vehicle under this subsection, the
Chief of Police shall furnish the purchaser with a completed form designed by the State
Department of Transportation enabling the purchaser to obtain a regular certificate of
title. Within 5 days after the sale or disposal of a vehicle under this subsection or Section
12.08.020 (D) above, the Chief of Police shall advise the department of its disposition on
a form supplied by the department.
E. Claims Barred; Exception. The sale of a vehicle under this subsection or Section
12.08.020 (D) above shall bar forever all prior claims thereto and interest therein except
that, at any time within 2 years after the sale, any person claiming ownership or another
financial interest in such vehicle may present a claim to the Council setting forth any
facts necessary to establish the ownership or interest and to demonstrate that failure to
reclaim the vehicle prior to sale was excusable neglect. The Council may allow such
claim only to the extent of the claimant’s interest in the vehicle and in an amount not to
exceed the proceeds of the sale.
12.08.040 Inventory Required. The Police Department shall maintain, for a period of
six (6) years from the date of the applicable disposition, an inventory of all vehicles
disposed of under this section, whether by sealed bid, auction sale, private sale or
junking, including the dates and methods of disposal, the consideration received for the
vehicles, if any, and the names and addresses of the persons taking possession of the
vehicles.
12.08.050 Owner Liability. The owner of any abandoned vehicle except a stolen vehicle
is responsible for the abandonment and is liable for the costs of any charges of its
impoundment and disposal. Costs and charges not recovered from its sale may be
recovered by the City in a civil action against the owner.
12.09.000 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
12.09.010 Hazard to Public Safety. Any vehicles parked, stopped or standing upon a
street or highway in the City of Port Washington in violation of any of the provisions of
Section 8.05, 12.06, 12.08, or this Section, 12.09 of this Code is declared to be a hazard
to traffic and public safety.
12.09.020 Removal by Operator. Such vehicle shall be removed by the operator in
charge, upon request of any traffic officer, to a position where parking is permitted or to a
private or public parking or storage premises.
12.09.030 Removal by Traffic Officer. Any traffic officer after issuing a ticket-citation
for illegal parking, stopping, or standing of an unattended vehicle in violation of this
code, is authorized to remove such vehicle to a position where parking is permitted.
12.09.040 Removal by Private Service. The officer may order a motor carrier holding a
permit to perform vehicle-towing services to remove and store such vehicle in any public
storage garage or rental parking grounds or any facility of the person providing the
towing services.
12.09.050 Towing and Storage Charges. In addition to other penalties provided in this
code, the owner or operator of a vehicle so removed shall pay reasonable cost of moving,
towing and storage. If the vehicle is towed and stored by a motor carrier, actual charges
regularly paid for such services shall be paid.
CHAPTER 13
Harbors and Waters
Table of Contents
13.01.000 BOARD OF HARBOR COMMISSIONERS
13.01.010 Creation, Appointment, Term
13.01.020 Organization
13.02.000 POWERS AND DUTIES OF HARBOR COMMISSION
13.02.010 Planning
13.02.020 Commercial Aspects
13.02.030 Fees and Charges
13.02.040 Budget
13.02.050 Annual Report
13.02.060 Health, Order and Safety
13.04.000 RULES FOR VESSELS IN THE HARBOR
13.04.010 Securely Fastened
13.04.020 Obstructing The Channel
13.05.000 RULES FOR VESSELS IN MOTION
13.06.000 LUMBER NOT TO PROJECT OVER DOCKLINE
13.07.000 REMOVAL OF SAND, ETC. PROHIBITED
13.08.000 PILING LOOSE MATERIAL AT WATER’S EDGE
PROHIBITED
13.09.000 INNER AND OUTER HARBORS DEFINED
13.10.000 PERMIT TO DOCK
13.11.000 REQUEST TO MOVE
13.12.000 NO SWIMMING
13.13.000 FISH CLEANING
13.14.000 OUTDOOR COOKING
13.15.000 CLOTHING
13.16.000 NO SMOKING
13.17.000 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF SECTION 30.77 AND 30.79,
WISCONSIN STATUTES
13.18.000 FISHING REGULATIONS
13.19.000 PROHIBITED USES OF MARINA PARKING PERMIT;
PENALTIES
13.25.000 PENALTY
13.01.000 BOARDS OF HARBOR COMMISSIONERS.
13.01.010 Creation; Appointment; Term. A Board of Harbor Commissioners shall be
created by a resolution of the Common Council. Such resolution shall state that the board
shall consist of seven (7) members. Such resolution shall state the length of the term of
each member so that the term of one or more will expire the first year; one or more in two
years; and one or more in three years. Appointments shall be made by the mayor subject
to confirmation by the council. No person shall be appointed unless he is a qualified
elector of the City and has been a resident for at least three years. One member shall be
an alderman. A person appointed shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualifies.
Members shall receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed for expenses actually
and necessarily incurred.
13.01.020 Organization. The board shall select a president and vice-president. The
board may employ a secretary. The board shall hold meetings at such times and places as
it determines.
13.02.000 POWERS AND DUTIES OF HARBOR COMMISSION.
13.02.010 Planning. The Board of Harbor Commissioners shall make such plans as it
deems necessary for the improvement of the harbor over which it has jurisdiction. The
board shall not carry out any such plans until approved by the Common Council.
13.02.020 Commercial Aspects. The Board of Harbor Commissioners shall have
exclusive control over the commercial aspects of the day-to-day operations of the harbor
and its facilities. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Common Council from
changing or restricting such control by resolution approved by a majority of the council.
13.02.030 Fees and Charges. The Board of Harbor Commissioners shall fix fees and
charges for the use of the harbor facilities, except such fees shall be subject to approval
by the Common Council.
13.02.040 Budgets. The Harbormaster shall submit an annual estimate of anticipated
revenues and expenses for review and approval by the Board of Harbor Commissioners.
The Board of Harbor Commissioners shall submit such budget to the City Administrator
at a time to be designated by the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall submit
the budget to the Finance Committee of the Common Council at a time to be established
by the Finance Committee. Final review of the budget shall be by the Common Council
for inclusion in the annual budget of the City. All monies derived from the operation of
the Harbor Facility shall be paid into the General Fund. No money may be expended by
the Board of Harbor Commissioners which has not been appropriated by the Council in
the adoption of its budget. The Common Council may from time to time authorize the
transfer of certain net income resulting from harbor operations from the General Fund
into the Harbor Reserve Fund, in amounts determined by the Council.
13.02.050 Annual Report. A Board of Harbor Commissioners shall report annually to
the Council giving an account of its activities and an account of its income and
expenditures.
13.02.060 Health, Order and Safety. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
remove, from the authority of the Common Council, or its designees, control of the
governmental aspects relating to the public health, order and safety.
13.04.000 RULES FOR VESSELS LYING IN THE HARBOR.
13.04.010 Securely Fastened. No vessel, craft or float shall be permitted to lie in the
harbor adrift or insecurely fastened.
13.04.020 Obstructing the Channel. No vessel, craft or float shall obstruct the channel
or be moored or anchored so as to prevent the passage of any other vessel, craft or float.
13.05.000 RULES FOR VESSELS IN MOTION. No person may operate a vessel at a
speed in excess of slow-no-wake speed in the harbor, within the boundaries of the inner
and outer harbor.
13.06.000 LUMBER NOT TO PROJECT OVER DOCK LINE. No person shall place
or maintain lumber or other material over the dock line of any dock within a City harbor.
13.07.000 REMOVAL OF SAND, ETC. PROHIBITED. No person shall remove any
stone, sand or earth from the beach or from within 300 feet of the high water mark, along
or near the shore line of Lake Michigan within the City.
13.08.000 PILING LOOSE MATERIAL AT WATER’S EDGE PROHIBITED. No
person shall place or maintain any crushed stone, coal, gravel, sand, ashes, dirt or other
loose material within 3 feet of the water’s edge along the beaches of harbors in the City.
13.09.000 INNER AND OUTER HARBORS DEFINED. The inner harbor shall
include all that part of the harbor lying west of a line drawn north and south from the east
limits of the navigation light on the stub of the old pier on the north side of the harbor
channel, south to the Electric Company Docks on the south side of the harbor channel.
The inner harbor shall include all slips as laid out and established heretofore. The outer
harbor shall include all waters of Lake Michigan east of and outside of the line drawn
from the navigation light on the stub of the old government pier as herein before
described and within the government breakwater.
13.10.000 PERMIT TO DOCK. No person shall dock a vessel at the Port Washington
Marina facilities or any other harbor facility without obtaining a permit therefore from
the Harbormaster of the City of Port Washington or his duly authorized agent.
13.11.000 REQUEST TO MOVE. No person shall refuse to move his vessel when
requested to do so by the Harbormaster when emergency conditions or safety precautions
require the removal of said vessel to a different location.
13.12.000 NO SWIMMING. There shall be no swimming, diving, skin diving or
bathing within the waters of the Port Washington Marina facility.
13.13.000 FISH CLEANING. Cleaning of fish shall take place only at authorized fish
cleaning stations.
13.14.000 OUTDOOR COOKING. Outdoor cooking on the piers of the Port
Washington Marina facility is prohibited.
13.15.000 CLOTHING. No one shall cause clothing or laundry to be hung upon the
piers or other municipal property at the Port Washington Marina facility.
13.16.000 NO SMOKING. There shall be no smoking within 30 feet of the gas fill
stations at the Port Washington Marina facility.
13.17.000 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF SECTION 30.77 AND 30.79,
WISCONSIN STATUTES. Except as otherwise specifically provided, all provisions of
the general body of law in Section 30.77 and 30.79, Wisconsin Statutes as may be
amended, created, or re-created describing and defining municipal regulations of boating
and water safety patrols, including penalties to be imposed are hereby adopted and by
reference made a part of this ordinance as if fully set forth herein. Any act required or
prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by
this ordinance.
13.18.000 FISHING REGULATIONS. Section 13.18.010. Fishing within that area of
the inner harbor known as the North Slip lying on the North side of the harbor channel
North of the Wisconsin Electric Company docks, shall be regulated as follows:
1. No person shall fish from the finger piers in the North harbor when boats are
present and moored at those finger piers.
2. Fishing shall be allowed from the North Slip boardwalk commencing at the stairs
leading from Main Street proceeding North and East along the boardwalk to a
point on the North side of the boardwalk, twenty (20’) feet from the end of the
northernmost pier.
3. All persons fishing on the boardwalk shall at all times conduct their fishing so
that all fishing rods, tackle and other equipment remain in an area four (4’) feet
from the slip side of said boardwalk. The area outside and to the landside of said
area shall remain free of all fishing rods, tackle and other equipment for purposes
of pedestrian access and use.
4. Fishing shall be permitted in the channel leading into and out of the North Slip
save that boats will also navigate in the channel as well.
5. No person shall climb on any railing on the boardwalk or attach equipment in
such a way as to damage the same. Any damage to the boardwalk or any railing
on the boardwalk shall be the responsibility of the person found to have caused
such damage and, in addition to the fines provided herein, shall be required as
additional restitution.
13.19.000 PROHIBITED USES OF MARINA PARKING PERMIT; PENALTIES.
No person shall falsely make or alter, or duplicate, reproduce or copy by any means, a
parking pass or permit issued by the Harbormaster or his designee authorizing parking
within the parking lots or areas adjacent to the Port Washington Marina facilities so that
such pass or permit purports to have been made by another, or at another time, or with
different provisions or by authority of one who did not give such authority, nor shall any
person possess, or use or display as original and genuine, a parking pass or permit that
has been so made, altered, duplicated, reproduced or copied. Any person who shall
violate any of the provisions of this section shall, for a first offense, be subject to a
penalty consisting of a forfeiture in the sum of $250.00 together with any applicable fees,
assessments and costs of prosecution, and, for a second and subsequent offenses, a
forfeiture in the sum of $500.00 together with any applicable fees, assessments and costs
of prosecution and the permanent revocation of the person’s Marina slip rental privileges
at the Port Washington Marina facility. In the case of default in payment of such
forfeiture(s), fees, assessments and costs, such person shall be imprisoned in the county
jail for a term not exceeding five (5) days.
13.25.000 PENALTY. Except as provided in sec. 13.19.000, any person who shall
violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section
25.04.000 of this Municipal Code.
City of Port Washington Chapter 14 – Page 1 2/5/14
CHAPER 14
Parks and Recreation
Table of Contents
14.01.000 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
14.01.010 Term of Office
14.01.020 Powers, Duties
14.02.000 PARK REGULATIONS
14.02.010 Time Restrictions; Hours of Operation
14.02.020 Unlawful Conduct
14.02.025 Prohibited Conduct within or from Coal Dock Park
14.02.030 Possession and Consumption of Alcohol Beverages
14.02.040 Park Police
14.03.000 DOGS
14.04.000 PENALTY
14.05.000 OZAUKEE INTERURBAN TRAIL
City of Port Washington Chapter 14 - 2 2/5/14
14.01.000 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD.
14.01.010 Term of Office. The Park and Recreation Board shall consist of nine
members, one of whom shall be an alderman, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the Common Council at the annual organizational meeting of the Common Council. The
term of office of the alderman member shall be one year. The term of office of the other
members shall be three years. When the Board is first appointed, three members shall be
appointed for the balance of the first year, three members for two years, and two
members for three years.
14.01.020 Powers, Duties. A. The Board shall be responsible for the supervision,
management, maintenance, planning and development of parks, green areas, recreational
facilities, playgrounds, and other similar facilities and such other responsibilities as may
be delegated to it by the Common Council.
B. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for facilities under its
supervision.
C. The Board shall appoint a Director of Parks and Recreation and such
supervisory personnel for which funds are not previously budgeted subject to
the approval of the Common Council and such other employees as may be
required.
D. Compensation of the Director of Parks and Recreation and other employees
shall be determined by the Common Council.
14.02.000 PARK REGULATIONS.
14.02.010 Time Restrictions; Hours of Operation.
A. Generally. City parks and public grounds are open to the public year-round, but
parking areas may be designated for winter use.
B. Hours of Operation. All city parks and public grounds shall be closed to all
persons between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. year-round, except as
provided below:
1. Rotary Park, Coal Dock Park and Fisherman’s Park shall be closed between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
City of Port Washington Chapter 14 - 3 2/5/14
2. Specific hours, as designated by written permit issued pursuant to Parks
and Recreation Board rules and regulations.
14.02.020 Unlawful Conduct. No person shall, within any city park or upon any public
grounds:
1. Park any motor vehicle, except within the limits of clearly marked
parking areas.
2. Operate any motor vehicle or ride horses, except upon clearly marked
public roadways.
3. Operate any motor vehicle upon any roadway at a speed in excess of 20
miles per hour.
4. Park any motor vehicle or loiter or lounge within or upon such park or
public grounds between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as allowed by
permit issued by authority of the Port Washington Parks and Recreation
Board or other duly authorized official of the City of Port Washington,
and except in Rotary Park located at the east end of East Grand Avenue,
in which no person shall park any motor vehicle or loiter or lounge
between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
5. Carry, keep or use any firearms, bow and arrow, slingshot, trap, gun or
other shooting device.
6. Disturb, molest, deface, remove or destroy any trees, shrubs, plants or
other natural growth; carve on any rocks, signs, walls or structures; drive
nails in trees; or injure or deface in any manner any park building, signs,
fences, tables, or other city property.
7. Dig or break up the ground surface.
8. Build any fires, except in fireplaces or grills provided for such purpose, or
dispose of live embers of any fire where they may start a grass or forest
fire.
9. Leave, throw or break any bottle, box, can, garbage or other object except
in clearly marked refuse receptacles.
10. Take, have or keep any dog or cat except upon a leash.
11. Be intoxicated, use vulgar, profane, violent, unreasonably loud or
boisterous language or engage in otherwise disorderly conduct.
12. Engage in any lewd or lascivious talk, act or behavior.
Prohibited Conduct within or from Coal Dock Park.
A. Swimming or Diving. No person shall swim, dive, skin dive, scuba dive or
bathe within Coal Dock Park, nor shall any person swim, dive, skin dive,
scuba dive or bathe in the waters of Lake Michigan or Sauk Creek from any
boardwalk, breakwater, bridge, dike, dock, pier, promenade, revetment,
seawall, sidewalk, stone barrier, or similar structure in or abutting Coal Dock
Park.
City of Port Washington Chapter 14 - 4 2/5/14
B. Skateboarding. No person shall ride, operate, push or travel on a skateboard
on any boardwalk, breakwater, bridge, dike, dock, path, pier, promenade,
revetment, seawall, sidewalk, stone barrier, trail or similar structure within or
abutting Coal Dock Park.
14.02.030 Possession and Consumption of Alcohol Beverages.
A. Generally Prohibited; Exceptions. Except as provided in subsections
14.02.030 B., C., D. and E., the possession or consumption of fermented malt
beverages, intoxicating liquors or wine is prohibited within and upon all city
parks and public grounds. Alcohol beverages are prohibited on all public
beaches and parking lots in the city.
B. Allowed; Restrictions. The possession or consumption of fermented malt
beverages and/or wine is allowed during park hours within and upon the
following city parks and public grounds at Common Council sanctioned or
sponsored events, at Parks and Recreation Board sponsored adult programs or
events, and by a gathering of between one (1) and ten (10) adults of legal
drinking age:
1. Gilson Park (also known as the Kiwanis shelter).
2. Municipal Softball Field adjacent to Grant Street, but only in conjunction
with adult programs or events sponsored by the Parks and Recreation
Board.
3. Rotary Park
4. Upper Lake Park.
5. Veteran’s Memorial Park (also known as Lower Lake Park).
6. Coal Dock Park
For gathering of more than ten (10) adults of legal drinking age, a permit must be
obtained in order to possess or consume fermented malt beverages and/or wine in
the city parks and public grounds listed hereinabove.
C. Application and Permit Forms; Issuance; Park Rules. A combination permit
for the reservation of the city parks or public grounds listed in subsection
14.02.030 B., or specific portions thereof, and for the possession or consumption
of fermented malt beverages and/or wine within and upon such parks or public
grounds shall be applied for at and issued by the Park and Recreation
Department. A separate permit for the possession or consumption of fermented
malt beverages and/or wine only within and upon the parks or public grounds
listed in subsection 14.02.030 B. shall be applied for at and issued at the Police
Department. All applications shall be made on forms prescribed by the Parks
and Recreation Board. All permits shall be issued subject to the terms and
conditions specified therein, and shall be further subject to all park rules and
regulations governing the use of city parks and public grounds generally.
Appropriate signs shall be erected at the entrances to the city parks or public
grounds indicating the need for such permit.
City of Port Washington Chapter 14 - 5 2/5/14
D. Allowed; Neighborhood Block Parties; Restrictions. The possession or
consumption of fermented malt beverages and/or wine may be allowed during
park hours within and upon city parks and public grounds other than those listed
in subsection 14.02.030 B. for the purpose of a neighborhood block party, except
in the following parks or public grounds:
1. All public beaches and parking lots.
2. Birchwood Hills Nature Area.
3. Fisherman’s Park.
4. Gatzke Nature Area.
5. Guenther Picnic Area.
6. Oakland Avenue Green.
7. Ozaukee Interurban Trail.
8. Pirate’s Hollow Community Water Park.
9. Westside Park.
A person seeking to hold a neighborhood block party shall submit a written
request to the Common Council for its consideration and approval prior to
such event.
E. Park Rules. The use of the above-described city parks or public grounds shall
be subject to all park rules and regulations governing the use of city parks and
public grounds generally.
14.02.040 Park Police. The Mayor may, upon the request of the Chief of Police, Park
Commission or Recreation Board, appoint a Park Policeman who shall have all of the
powers of a regular police officer for the enforcement of this section.
14.03.000 DOGS. No person shall permit any dog or cat, whether leashed or not, to
enter upon the Lower Lake Park from the access road to the North to East Jackson Street
to the South, unless such dog or cat shall be confined within a motor vehicle.
14.04.000 PENALTY. Except as provided in Sections 8.12.010 and 14.05.000, any
person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in Section 25.04 of this Code.
14.05.000 OZAUKEE INTERURBAN TRAIL.
(A) Rules and Regulations Governing the Ozaukee Interurban Trail.
(1) Intent or Purpose:
City of Port Washington Chapter 14 - 6 2/5/14
(a) The following rules and regulations shall apply exclusively to
that portion of the Ozaukee Interurban Trail lying within the
jurisdictional limits of the City of Port Washington, and are
established for the purpose of the operation and use of that
multi-use transportation/recreational trail in an orderly and
efficient manner. These rules and regulations are necessary to
protect and promote the general welfare, peace, safety, good
order and prosperity of the City, its inhabitants, visitors and all
persons using the trail, and to preserve and maintain the trail in
good condition. The Park and Recreation Board shall administer
said portion of the Ozaukee Interurban Trail as a designated
multi-use trail.
(B) Definitions.
(1) Ozaukee Interurban Trail – means that parcel of land owned, leased or
obtained by easement by the County of Ozaukee and participating
municipalities.
(2) Motor Vehicle – the term “motor vehicle” shall include all motorized
automobiles, truck, all-terrain vehicles, snowmobile, motorcycle, trailer,
wagon, moped, airplane or any other motorized mode of transportation not
listed.
(3) Persons – includes any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, limited
liability companies (LLCs), limited liability partnerships (LLPs) or other
association of persons; and the singular number includes the plural.
(4) Designated crossing areas – are areas on the Ozaukee Interurban Trail,
authorized by the County of Ozaukee, the City or participating
municipalities and designated by appropriate signage, where pedestrians,
motor vehicles, or other vehicles may enter and cross the Ozaukee
Interurban Trail.
(C) General Rules.
(1) Rules for Use:
(a) To insure the safety of persons using the Ozaukee Interurban
Trail, Sections 8.01.010 and 8.01.020 of the Municipal Code of
the City of Port Washington, adopting Wisconsin State Statutes,
Chs. 340-348, and Wisconsin Administrative Code Ch. TRANS
305, shall apply.
(b) All persons using the Ozaukee Interurban Trail must abide by
the posted signage on or for the use of the Ozaukee Interurban
Trail, including, but not limited to, those signs relating to the use
of protective helmets within the City as required by sec.
8.12.010 of the Municipal Code.
City of Port Washington Chapter 14 - 7 2/5/14
(2) Prohibited Uses:
(a) No motor vehicles are authorized for operation on the Ozaukee
Interurban Trail except for: police, emergency, rescue vehicles,
authorized maintenance vehicles and motorized wheelchairs.
(b) No horses or horseback riding is allowed on the Ozaukee
Interurban Trail.
(c) No pets shall be allowed on the Ozaukee Interurban Trail unless
restrained upon a leash, not more than ten feet in length. It is the
pet owner’s obligation to pick-up and remove all fecal matter
from their pets immediately after such animal has deposited it.
(d) No fires are permitted within the boundaries of the Ozaukee
Interurban Trail.
(e) The use of all fireworks, air guns, paintball guns, firearms,
projectile devices or archery equipment is prohibited within the
boundaries of the Ozaukee Interurban Trail.
(f) Hunting or trapping is not permitted within the boundaries of the
Ozaukee Interurban Trail.
(g) No soliciting or commercial enterprise is allowed within the
boundaries of the Ozaukee Interurban Trail.
(h) No unauthorized vehicle or piece of equipment may be parked
or be permitted to remain standing on any portion of the
Ozaukee Interurban Trail or access point, so as to obstruct or
limit passage along the trail or access point.
(i) No person may carry, have in his/her possession or have under
his/her control any firearms, air gun, paintball gun, projectile
devices or archery equipment, unless it is unloaded and within a
case, within the boundaries of the Ozaukee Interurban Trail.
(j) Any unauthorized vehicle or piece of equipment having a height
more than twelve feet above the original ground grade level is
not permitted on the Ozaukee Interurban Trail.
(k) The use of kites, model airplanes or similar objects is not
permitted on the Ozaukee Interurban Trail.
(l) It is prohibited to soil, deface, injure, damage, upset or remove
any building, fence, fountain, bench, table, vegetation or other
object situated, used or kept upon the Ozaukee Interurban Trail,
unless authorized by the County of Ozaukee, the City or
participating municipalities.
(m) It is prohibited to leave, dispose of, throw or break any bottle,
box, can or any other container or object on the Ozaukee
Interurban Trail, or at any other place adjacent to the Ozaukee
Interurban Trail, except in clearly marked refuse receptacles
provided for that purpose.
(n) It is prohibited to climb on any portion of any bridge on the
Ozaukee Interurban Trail.
City of Port Washington Chapter 14 - 8 2/5/14
(3) Group Use by Permit:
(a) Reserve use: Any group may request to reserve the use of a
designated area or portion of the Ozaukee Interurban Trail
within the City provided:
1. The Park and Recreation Board must receive the
submission of a formal written request no later than sixty
(60) days prior to the planned use;
2. Written approval must be obtained for any group use of
the Ozaukee Interurban Trail within the City;
3. A fee may be charged as part of the approval process; and
4. All group use requests are approved at the discretion of
the Park and Recreation Board.
(D) Penalties and Fees. Any person who violates any of the provision of the rules
and regulations governing the Ozaukee Interurban Trail shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each such violation in
addition to the costs of prosecution, and, in the case of default in payment of such
forfeiture and costs, such person shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a term
not exceeding five (5) days.
(E) Municipal Jurisdiction. The City of Port Washington shall maintain that portion
of the Ozaukee Interurban Trail lying within the City’s jurisdiction limits, and
shall protect the public safety thereon using the codes and standards set forth in
this ordinance.
(F) County Jurisdiction. Within the limits of towns or unincorporated areas, the
County of Ozaukee shall maintain the Ozaukee Interurban Trail and shall protect
the public safety thereon.
City of Port Washington Chapter 14 - 9 2/5/14
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 1 7/11/14
CHAPTER 15
Building Code
Table Of Contents
15.01.000 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS
15.01.010 Title
15.01.020 Purpose
15.02.000 STATE UNIFORM DWELLING CODE ADOPTED
15.03.000 WISCONSIN UNIFORM BUILDING CODE ADOPTED
15.04.000 DEFINTIONS
15.04.010 Addition
15.04.020 Alteration
15.04.030 Department
15.04.040 Dwelling
15.04.050 Minor Repair
15.04.060 One or Two Family Dwellings; Manufactured Home
15.04.070 Person
15.04.080 Uniform Dwelling Code
15.05.000 BUILDING INSPECTOR
15.05.010 Creation of Office
15.05.020 Subordinates
15.05.030 Duties
15.05.040 Powers
15.05.050 Records
15.06.000 PERMITS
15.06.010 Building Permits Required
15.06.020 Intent; Submission of Plans; Design Standards
15.06.030 Issuance of Permit
15.06.040 Waste and Material Disposal
15.06.050 Razing Permits
15.06.060 HVAC Permit Required
15.06.070 Change of Occupancy Permit Required
15.07.000 BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES MAINTENANCE
STANDARDS; GENERALLY
15.07.010 Buildings and Structures Maintenance Requirements
15.07.020 Exterior Property Areas
15.07.030 Penalty
15.07.040 CONTROL OF NUISANCE AND NOXIOUS WEEDS AND
OTHER RANK VEGETATION
15.07.050 REGULATION OF LAWNS, GRASSES AND WEEDS
15.07.060 REGULATION OF NATURAL LAWN AREAS
15.08.000 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES
15.08.010 Violation Fees
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
15.08.020 Corrections
15.08.030 Failure to Correct
15.08.040 Separate Offense Per Day
15.08.050 Double Fees Charged
15.09.000 APPEAL TO BOARD OF APPEALS
15.10.000 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES
15.11.000 SEVERABILITY
15.12.000 FEES FOR BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
15.13.000 EROSION CONTROL
15.13.010 Intent
15.13.020 Applicability
15.13.030 Standards and Criteria
15.13.040 Erosion Control Permit
15.13.050 Erosion Control Plan Required
15.13.060 Contents of the Erosion Control Plan
15.13.070 Review of Application and Erosion Control Plan
15.13.080 Permit Conditions
15.13.090 Permit Duration
15.13.100 Surety Bond
15.13.110 Inspection
15.13.120 Enforcement
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
CHAPTER 15
Building Code
15.01.000 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
15.01.010 Title. This ordinance shall be known as the building code of the City of Port
Washington.
15.01.020 Purpose. The purpose and intent of the ordinance is to:
1. Exercise jurisdiction over the construction and inspection of new buildings and
structures in addition to existing buildings and structures.
2. Provide plan review and on-site inspection of buildings and structures by
inspectors certified by the Department of Commerce.
3. Establish and collect fees to defray administrative and enforcement costs.
4. Establish remedies and penalties for violations.
5. Establish use of the Wisconsin Uniform Building Permit as described by the
Wisconsin Department of Commerce.
15.02.000 STATE UNIFORM CODES ADOPTED. The Administrative Code
provisions describing and setting forth regulations for Uniform Dwelling Code,
Commercial Building Code, Uniform Multifamily Dwelling Code, and Barrier Free
Design Code are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this Ordinance as if
fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by Administrative
Code provision incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this
Ordinance. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the Administrative
Code provisions incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this Ordinance to
secure uniform state-wide regulation. A copy of these Administrative Code provisions
and any future amendments shall be kept on file in the City Clerk’s office.
15.04.000 DEFINITIONS.
15.04.010 Addition. “Addition” means new construction performed on a building or
structure which increases the outside dimensions of a building or structure.
15.04.020 Alteration. “Alteration” means a substantial change or modification other
than an addition or minor repair to a dwelling or, to systems involved within a dwelling.
15.04.030 Department. “Department” means the department of industry, labor and
human relations.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
15.04.040 Dwelling. “Dwelling” means:
1. Any building, the initial construction of which is commenced on or after the
effective date of this ordinance, which contains one or two dwelling units, or
2. An existing structure, or that part of an existing structure, which is used or
intended to be used as a one or two family dwelling.
15.04.050 Minor Repair. “Minor Repair” means performed for maintenance or
replacement purposes on any existing one or two family dwelling which does not affect
room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or efficiency of any exit stairways or
exits, fire protection, or exterior aesthetic appearance, and which does not increase a
given occupancy and use. No building permit is required for work to be performed which
is deemed minor repair.
15.04.060 One or Two Family Dwelling. A. “A one or two family dwelling” means a
building structure which contains one or separate households intended to be used as a
home, residence or sleeping place by an individual or by two or more individuals
maintaining a common household, to the exclusion of all others, and shall include a
manufactured home as defined in subsec. B.
B. “Manufactured home” means that structure defined, in relevant part, under 24 C.F.R.
§3280.2(a)(16, and any amendments thereto, as “[A] structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which, in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty body
feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or more square
feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes
the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein.”
15.04.070 Person. “Person” means an individual, partnership, firm or corporation.
15.04.080 Uniform Dwelling Code. “Uniform Dwelling Code” means those
administrative code provisions, and any future amendments, revisions or modifications
thereto, contained in the following chapters of the Wisconsin Administrative Code:
Wis. Adm. Code Chapter Ind. 20--Administration and Enforcement
Wis. Adm. Code Chapter Ind. 21--Construction Standards
Wis. Adm. Code Chapter Ind. 22--Energy Conservation Standards
Wis. Adm. Code Chapter Ind. 23--Heating, Ventilating and Air
Conditioning Standards
Wis. Adm. Code Chapter Ind. 24--Electrical Standards
Wis. Adm. Code Chapter Ind. 25--Plumbing and Potable Water Standards
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
15.05.000 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
15.05.010 Creation of Office. For the purpose of administrating and enforcing the
provisions of this ordinance, the City shall establish the office of Building Inspector who
shall be certified for inspection purposes by the department in each of the categories
specified under Section Ind. 26.06, Wisconsin Administrative Code, and by the
Department of Health and Social Services in the category of plumbing.
15.05.020 Subordinates. The Building Inspector may appoint, as necessary,
subordinates, which appointments shall be subject to confirmation by the Council. Any
subordinate hired to inspect buildings shall be certified under Ch. Ind. 26, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, by the department.
15.05.030 Duties. The Building Inspector shall administer and enforce all provisions of
this ordinance and the Uniform Dwelling Code, and the Uniform Building Code.
15.05.040 Powers. The Building Inspector or an authorized certified agent may at all
reasonable hours enter upon any public or private premises for inspection purposes and
may require the production of the permit for any building, plumbing, electrical or heating
work. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises to
the Building Inspector or his/her agent while in the performance of his/her duties.
15.05.050 Records. The Building Inspector shall perform all administrative tasks
required by the department under the Uniform Dwelling Code. In addition, the Inspector
shall keep a record of all applications for building permits in a file for such purpose and
shall regularly number each permit in the order of its issue. Also, a record showing the
number, description and size of all buildings erected indicating the kind of materials used
and the cost of each building and aggregate cost of all one-and two-family dwellings shall
be kept. The Building Inspector shall make a written annual report to the Common
Council relative to these matters.
15.06.000 BUILDING PERMITS.
15.06.010 Building Permits Required. No building or structure of which initial
construction, addition or alteration, shall be commenced after the effective date of this
ordinance shall be built, enlarged, altered or repaired unless a building permit for that
work shall first be obtained by the owner, or his or her agent, from the building inspector.
Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon that form as designated
from time to time by the appropriate administrative department of the State of Wisconsin.
15.06.020 Intent; Submission of Plans; Design Standards. A. Intent. The intent of
this Section is to establish standards for the design and appearance of new one- and twofamily
dwellings proposed to e constructed in developments for which a final plat was
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
approved on or after September 1, 2004, and for new one- and two-family dwellings
constructed on lots in neighborhoods existing before September 1, 2004, or constructed in
developments for which a final plat was approved before September 1, 2004. These
regulations are intended to allow a mixture of affordable housing types in a manner
which will not adversely affect the appearance of, or property values within existing
neighborhoods. For this reason, design standards have been established which regulate
the appearance of such new one- and two-family dwellings, allowing only those that are
acceptably comparable in appearance to surrounding dwellings in one- and two-family
residential districts.
B. The applicant shall submit two (2) sets of plans, two (2) copies of the plat of
survey, heat calculations and an erosion control plan for all new one- or twofamily
dwellings at the time that the building permit application is filed. The
application shall include a list of the building features, selected by the applicant
from the table set forth in subsec. E. hereof, to e included in the new one- or twofamily
dwelling design.
C. All new one and two-family dwellings shall have a minimum width of 26 feet; a
minimum roof pitch of 4:12; a minimum 7-1/4” wide fascia and rake trim; and
approved footings and foundations as provided in Wis. Adm. Code §§COMM
21.15 – 21.18 (as amended).
D. New one and two-family dwellings on corner lots shall be of similar design and
appearance; and shall provide similar aesthetic enhancements, on all street
exposures.
E. In addition to the other requirements set forth in this Section, the following
minimum point totals resulting from any combination of the following building
features shall be required for approval of a building permit:
1. Seven (7) points shall be required for all one- or two-family dwellings
constructed in developments for which a final plat was approved on or
after September 1, 2004.
2. Six (6) points shall be required for all one- or two-family dwellings
constructed on lots in neighborhoods existing before September 1, 2004,
or constructed in developments for which a final plat was approved before
September 1, 2004.
3. Table of Building Features and Points:
Item Points Building Features
A 1 1- ½ story dwelling with dormers.
B 1 Bay, angled bay or boxed out window treatments.
C 1 Covered front entry/porch of at least 4’ x 8’.
D 1 Heavy textured dimensional roofing material.
E 1 Main roofline to be at least 6:12 pitch.
F 1 Masonry or cementitious replicated masonry in combination
with wood, natural-like products or other city approved
products on entire front elevation.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
G 1 Minimum of 3- ½” trim around all doors and windows.
H 1 Roof dormers on 6:12 or greater pitched roof.
I 1 Shutters on street elevations constructed of wood, engineered
wood-like products or other city approved products. Shutters
must be proportional to the size of the windows.
J 2 Covered front entry/porch of at least 5’ x 12’ or larger with
architectural treatments, i.e.; railing, posts, etc.
K 2 Garage offset at least 2’ behind front wall of dwelling.
L 2 Masonry or cementitious replicated masonry on at least 25%
of the gross wall and recessed areas of the front elevation.
M 2 Multi-level dwelling designed for sloped sites excluding
basement walkouts in rear wall.
N 2 Offset or stagger of the front wall plane by at least two feet
(but not including the garage wall or a recessed entry).
O 2 Shutters on all elevations constructed of wood, engineered
wood-like products or other city approved products. Shutters
must be proportional to the size of the windows.
P 2 Wood, engineered wood-like products or other city approved
products on all exterior wall surfaces.
Q 2 Masonry or cementitious simulated masonry products on at
least 15% of the exterior gross wall area.
R 3 A combination of masonry or cementitious simulated
masonry products on at least 15% of the exterior gross wall
area in combination with wood, engineered wood-like
products or other city approved products on all other exterior
wall surfaces.
S 3 Side-loaded garage with windows in front wall of garage that
are compatible with other windows in the front elevation.
F. For the purpose of the point system set forth in subsec. E. hereof, city approved
products shall include, but are not limited to, masonry, wood, engineered wood
products, and cementitious exterior wall coverings.
G. The City encourages creativity in the use of new and natural products or
architectural features that will enhance the appearance of buildings, including, but
not limited to, masonry techniques such as returns at corners, the creation of
shadow lines with rowlocks, solders, quoins, and brick and stone mixes.
H. The Building Inspector may, in his discretion, permit an applicant to substitute or
combine materials and building features not identified in subsecs. E., F. and G
hereof, provided, however, that the overall building aesthetics shall comply with
the design standards and intent of this section.
I. If the required minimum point total set forth in subsec. E. hereof is not met and
the Building Inspector does not permit a substitution or combination of materials
and building features, the applicant may, within twenty (20) days from the date of
denial of a building permit, request that the dwelling design or the decision of the
Building Inspector be reviewed by the Design Review Board. A decision of the
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
Board shall be made within thirty (30) days of receipt of the applicant’s request
for review. In making its decision, the Board may affirm or reverse the
determination of the Building Inspector, or grant a special exception to the design
standards set forth in this section; provided, however, that a special exception may
be granted only if the applicant can show that the proposed dwelling will not
adversely affect the appearance of, or property values within, the residential
neighborhood in which the proposed dwelling is to be constructed or located.
J. The provisions of this Section shall be reviewed one (1) year following its
adoption and periodically thereafter as may be deemed appropriate.
15.06.030 Issuance of Permit. If the Building Inspector finds that the proposed building
or repair or addition complies with all City ordinances and the Uniform Dwelling Code,
the Inspector shall officially approve the application and a building permit shall be
subsequently issued to the applicant. The issued building permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at the building site. A copy of any issued building permit shall be kept
on file with the Building Inspector.
15.06.040 Waste and Material Disposal. A. For any activity for which a building
permit is required under this section, all waste and unused scrap building materials
(including without limitation garbage, debris, or hazardous material) shall be properly
disposed of into a dumpster or other means of collection approved by the building
inspector. The means of collection shall be placed on site at the commencement of the
construction, enlargement, alteration, or repair, and remain on site until final inspection
of premises.
B. At the end of each work day the site should be made free of all waste and unused
scrap building material except that properly contained or disposed of as allowed
in Section A.
15.06.050 Razing Permits.
A. Definitions.
1. “Building” includes any building, dwelling or structure, or any portion of
a building, dwelling or structure, whether used for agricultural,
commercial, industrial, institutional, residential or other purposes.
2. “Historic building” means any building or object listed on, or any
building or object within and contributing to a historic district listed on,
the national register of historic places in Wisconsin, the state register of
historic places, or identified as potentially eligible to be listed on such
national or state registers, or listed on the inventory of historic places
maintained by the City entitled Intensive Survey Report (1998), as
amended from time to time.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
3. “Raze” means to demolish and remove any building, dwelling or structure
and to restore the site to a dust-free and erosion-free condition.
B. No person may raze a building in the City without a permit. Application for
such permit shall be submitted to the Building Inspector along with payment of
an application fee. A permit to raze a building other than a historic building
may be issued by the Building Inspector. An application to raze a historic
building shall be referred to the Design Review Board for review and
recommendation and then to the Plan Commission for review and action,
including issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness, pursuant to Sections
20.30.010 through 20.30.050 of the Zoning Ordinance.
C. The Plan Commission shall require an applicant for a permit to raze a historic
building to publish a Class 2 notice of such application prior to Plan
Commission action on the application.
D. If an application is made for a permit to raze a historic building, , or an order is
issued under §66.0413 to raze a historic building, or the City intends to raze a
city-owned historic building, the City shall notify the state historical society of
the application, order or intent as provided in §66.0413(3), Stats., and no such
historic building may be razed for 30 days after such notice is given, unless a
shorter period is authorized by the state historical society.
E. Northing in this Section shall be deemed to abrogate or limit the authority of the
Common Council, Building Inspector or other designated City officer under
§66.0413, Stats. to order the owner of a building which is old, dilapidated or out
of repair and consequently dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for
human habitation to raze or repair the building, or the City’s right to commence
and prosecute a court action to obtain an order determining that the building
constitutes a public nuisance, or for any other relief.
15.06.060 HVAC Permit Required. No heating, air conditioning, boiler, heat pump,
venting or other such work as contemplated by this code and the Uniform Dwelling Code
and Uniform Building Code shall be commenced unless a permit for that work shall first
be obtained by the owner, or his or her agent, from the building inspector.
Application for a HVAC permit shall be made in writing upon that form as designated
from time to time by the appropriate administrative department of the State of Wisconsin.
No permit shall be issued to any person or entity not certified by the State of Wisconsin
as an HVAC contractor.
15.06.070 Change of Occupancy Permit Required. No person or business that is
changing occupancy of a building zoned for business or commercial use shall occupy the
building without first making application for a Change of Occupancy Permit. The
Change of Occupancy Permit is issued by the City Building Inspector. The cost for
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
completing a Change of Occupancy Application form is $50.00. No building nor part
thereof shall be occupied until such permit is approved by the Building Inspector.
15.07.000 BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES MAINTENANCE STANDARDS;
GENERALLY.
A. Title. This section and sections 15.07.010, 15.07.020, 15.07.030 and 15.07.040, et seq. of
this Municipal Code shall collectively be known as the Maintenance Standards for all
buildings, structures and premises in the City, and is referred to as “this article”.
B. Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this article is to safeguard the public
health, safety and welfare, and to protect the housing and building stock of the City from
falling into disrepair and becoming a public nuisance by establishing minimum standards
for basic equipment and facilities for structural soundness, sanitation and safety from fire,
water and weather, by fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of all
buildings, structures and premises, and by providing for administration, enforcement and
penalties.
C. Scope and necessity of article. The provisions of this article apply to all buildings,
structures and premises which are now or may become in the future substandard with
respect to structure, premises, protection against fire hazard, equipment or maintenance,
inadequate provisions for light or air, lack of proper heating, unsanitary conditions,
overcrowding or other conditions which may be deemed to be harmful to the safety,
health or welfare of the occupants, the neighborhood or the general public. The existence
of such conditions, factors or characteristics adversely affects public comfort, safety,
health and welfare and leads to the creation, continuation or aggravation of urban blight,
or depreciates property values. Adequate protection of the public, therefore, requires the
establishment and enforcement of these minimum standards.
D. Applicability of article.
1. In regard to time of construction, alteration or repair. Every portion of a
building, structure or premises shall comply with the provisions of this article,
irrespective of when such building, structure or premises shall have been
constructed, altered or repaired, except as may be provided in this article.
2. Application of building codes. Any alterations to buildings, structures or
premises or changes of use therein, which may be caused directly or indirectly by
the enforcement of this article shall be done in accordance with applicable
sections of the state and City building codes.
3. Application of zoning laws. Nothing in this article shall permit the
establishment, conversion or use of any buildings, structures or premises in
conflict with the zoning ordinances of the City.
4. Conflict with other ordinances. In any case where a provision of this article is
found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or
health ordinance or code of the City existing on the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived, the provision which establishes the
higher standard for the promotion and protection of the comfort, safety and
health of the people shall prevail.
5. Existing buildings. This article establishes minimum standards and requirements
for the initial and continued occupancy, and for the maintenance, of all buildings,
structures and premises and does not replace or modify standards or requirements
otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings,
structures, premises, equipment or facilities, except as may be provided in this
article.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
6. Existing remedies. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to abolish or impair
existing remedies of the City relating to buildings, structures or premises which
are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
7. Definition of “approved”. As used in this article, “approved” means approved by
or in accordance with regulations established by the Building Inspector and this
article and all applicable ordinances of the City.
15.07.010 BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
No person shall occupy or use as an owner, operator or occupant, or let to another for
occupancy, any building, structure or premises, or any portion thereof, which does not
comply with the following requirements:
A. Structures. The building components of all structures shall be maintained in a sound
condition and shall be maintained so that wind, water, moisture, animals and/or insects
cannot penetrate into the structure. Any structural deficiency and any breach of the
structure shall be corrected and any infestation or harborage of insects or animals shall
be eliminated.
B. Foundations. The foundation shall be structurally sound and support the loads imposed
by the building or structure at all points. Foundations shall be free from spalling,
missing or loose stone and masonry units, water, damp areas, efflorescence and any
form of mildew or mold.
C. Basement. No basement, crawl space, or any level of a building or structure that is
below the immediate outside grade shall have wet floors, standing water, efflorescence
or any form of mildew or mold.
D. Exterior surfaces. All exterior surfaces shall be an approved siding, cladding or
masonry product, protected from wind, water, moisture and other elements, and from
animals and insects. Painted or finished exterior surfaces which are chipped, peeling or
missing protective coatings shall be refinished or repainted with colors that match the
surrounding surface area, applied in a workmanlike manner. Clad surfaces shall be
replaced with materials of like kind and color.
E. Masonry or Cementitious elements. All concrete or masonry elements must be free of
spalling, loose, broken, or missing sections. Cracked, deteriorated or missing mortar
joints shall be replaced. Painted surfaces that are chipped or peeling shall be refinished
or repainted with colors that match the surrounding surface area, applied in a
workmanlike manner.
F. Metallic Surfaces. All metallic surfaces which are chipped, peeling or missing
protective coatings shall be protected from wind, water, moisture and other elements,
and from rust by coating products applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s
directions and in a workmanlike manner. Damaged or missing metallic surfaces shall be
repaired or replaced with materials of like kind and color, to match the surrounding
surface area.
G. Exits and stairways. Every required exit, including, but not limited to, stairways (and
the component parts thereof), fire escaped, horizontal exits and doors, shall be adequate
for safety and shall lead to a street, alley or open court which leads to a public way.
Locking devices for all exits shall comply with applicable codes. All required exits, and
all passageways leading to and from such exits, shall be operational, kept in good repair
and unobstructed at all times. Component parts of stairways, including, but not limited
to, handrails, guardrails, balustrades, treads and risers, shall be kept firmly fastened, in
good repair and be clean and free from defects. Properly balustraded railings, capable of
bearing imposed loads as specified by applicable codes, shall be installed and
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
maintained on the open portions of stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells. Every
stairway shall be so constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting a normally imposed load.
H. Doors and windows. All doors and windows shall operate as originally designed, be
provided with storms and screens that are in good operating condition, be weathertight,
rodentproof, supplied with glass window panes or an approved substitute which are
glazed, be without open cracks and holes, be capable of being easily opened and held in
position by window hardware, be provided with an approved locking device, and be kept
in a good state of maintenance and repair.
I. Roofing and guttering. Damaged or missing roofing shall be replaced with material of
like kind and color. The roof, flashing, eaves and soffits shall be structurally sound,
tight, and shall prevent wind, water, moisture and other elements, animals and/or insects
from penetrating the building or structure. Gutters and downspouts shall be maintained
in good repair, direct and convey water away from all foundations and to grade or to a
storm water system, and shall not be broken, rusted, detached or damaged. Roof
drainage shall be adequate to prevent water from causing moisture or dampness to
accumulate in the walls or interior portion of the building or structure.
J. Detached garages, sheds and accessory structures. All detached garages, sheds and
other accessory structures shall be maintained in the same manner and to the same
standards as the principal building or structure.
K. Fences. Fences, including gates, shall be straight, plumb and maintained in sound
condition and repair, free from damage, breaks or deteriorated or missing structural
components. Painted or stained fences shall be maintained in good condition and repair,
with adequate paint, stain or other approved protective coatings, applied in a
workmanlike manner.
L. Building equipment and systems. All nonfunctioning or replaced equipment and
systems, including but not limited to, boilers, furnaces, air conditioning units, ducts,
plumbing, wiring and electrical parts or accessories, shall be promptly removed from the
premises.
M. Building drainage. All premises shall be so graded and maintained that no water
accumulates or stands on the premises or within any building or structure located on the
premises for a period greater than 24 hours. Concentrated flow of building and site
drainage shall not be directed towards any abutting property, or any City property,
public sidewalk or right-of-way except as part of an approved site plan. All building
drainage, including, but not limited to, downspouts and sump pumps, shall not be
discharged nearer to any abutting property than the required offset. Where the point of
discharge on the premises lies at a higher elevation than the abutting property, the
direction of discharge shall be parallel to the abutting property line. The point of
discharge of water shall be located so as to not cause damage to, nor create an erosion,
water or ice hazard or nuisance on, any abutting property or any City property, public
sidewalk or right-of-way, and such location shall, therefore, be subject to final approval
by the Building Inspector. The discharge of storm water to a lot surface or any City
property, public sidewalk or right-of-way which creates a public nuisance or potentially
hazardous condition is subject to enforcement action under section 10.15.030 A. of this
Municipal Code.
N. Site Drainage. All premises shall be so graded and maintained that no water
accumulates or stands on the premises or within any building or structure located on the
premises. Landscaping, filling, relocating or otherwise altering the natural flow of
surface water in any manner that obstructs natural flow, or concentrates or diverts water
towards or onto any abutting property is prohibited. Where surface drainage occurs, the
premises shall be landscaped so that such surface drainage is directed and conveyed
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
along the abutting property line. For existing buildings, structures or premises where
compliance with this section may present unnecessary hardship, City staff will evaluate
the site conditions and may recommend an approved remedy for the site drainage. The
discharge of storm water to a lot surface or any City property, public sidewalk or rightof-
way which creates a public nuisance or potentially hazardous condition is subject to
enforcement action under section 10.15.030 A. of the Municipal Code.
O. Open spaces. All unpaved or open spaces shall be put into a lawn, except for such areas
set aside for trees, shrubbery or gardens or landscaped in an approved manner.
P. Paving of Driveways, Approaches and Sidewalks. Every existing driveway, driveway
approach and sidewalk which abuts, lies upon or crosses over a public street or right-ofway
shall be paved within one year from the date of written notice from the Building
Inspector to comply with this section. Driveways shall be paved with concrete or
asphalt. Driveway approaches and sidewalks shall be paved with concrete.
Q. Construction sites. All premises for which a permit has been issued to construct, alter,
repair, remodel or change in any way a new or existing building or structure shall be
maintained in the following manner:
1. Erosion control and landscaping. New construction sites shall implement and
maintain erosion control measures until all soils are stabilized. Such sites shall
be landscaped before the end of the second growing season following final
inspection of the building or structure by the Building Inspector.
2. Paving of driveways, approaches and sidewalks. Every new driveway and
sidewalk which abuts, lies upon or crosses over a public street or right-of-way
shall be paved within one year after final inspection of the building or structure
by the Building Inspector. Every new driveway approach which abuts, lies upon
or crosses over a public sidewalk, street or right-of-way shall be paved before an
occupancy permit is issued for the building or structure by the Building
Inspector. Driveways shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. Driveway
approaches and sidewalks shall be paved with concrete.
3. Construction materials, debris and mud. All construction sites shall be kept free
of loose, discarded or excess construction materials or debris which are unsightly
or may be blown by the wind about the site or onto neighboring properties. Such
materials and debris shall be immediately removed from the construction site and
from neighboring properties by the site owner and/or by the general contractor.
During the construction period, any mud or soil from the site which is tracked or
deposited onto any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way shall be immediately
removed therefrom by the site owner and/or by the general contractor. In
addition to penalties provided in other City ordinances, violations of this section
may result in the site being placarded and/or the construction work being halted
until the site complies and such compliance is confirmed by the Building
Inspector.
4. Cessation of construction activity. Except as provided in this subsection, if
construction activity ceases or no substantial construction work is performed on a
premises for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days, the exterior of the building
or structure shall be completed forthwith in accordance with the approved
building plans and this article and all applicable ordinances of the City. In such
event, all construction materials shall be immediately removed from the premises
or stored in the building, all erosion control measures shall be maintained, all
grasses and weeds shall be kept cut, and all required landscaping shall be
completed during that planting season. The provisions of this subsection shall
not apply if a cessation of construction activity or a failure to perform substantial
construction work is due to an act of God, strike or other acts beyond the control
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
of the site owner or the general contractor, or if in the judgment of the Building
Inspector the site owner or general contractor has demonstrated good faith efforts
to continue or complete the work.
15.07.020 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to protect and
promote the public comfort, health, safety and welfare in buildings, structures
and premises as provided by:
1. Establishing minimum standards for safe and sanitary maintenance
of the exterior property area of all buildings, structures and premises.
2. Fixing the responsibilities of occupants, operators and owners of all
buildings, structures and premises.
3. Preserving or enhancing the aesthetics, physical characteristics and
values of properties within the City as a community in which to live
and work by regulating buildings, structures and premises which are
now or may become substandard with respect to protection against
fire hazard, inadequate provisions for light, air and open space,
unsanitary conditions, overcrowding or other conditions which are
deemed to be harmful to the comfort, safety, health or welfare of the
occupants, the neighborhood or the general public. The existence of
such conditions, factors or characteristics adversely affects public
comfort, safety, health and welfare, leads to the creation,
continuation or aggravation of urban blight, or depreciates property
values.
B. Definitions. When used in this section, the following words, terms and
phrases shall have the specific meaning as hereinafter defined, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
1. Debris - Any junk, wood, bricks, cement, concrete blocks, machinery
or parts thereof, furniture (unless designed for outdoor use),
refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, dryers, stoves and other
appliances, automobiles, trucks, tractors and other vehicles or parts
thereof, construction materials, and any other unsightly accumulation
of discarded items or materials, such as may tend to or do depreciate
property values in the area, create a blighted condition, interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of the life, health or safety of another or
others, or create or continue a nuisance or health or safety hazard.
2. Dwelling - Any building or structure which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
3. Exterior property area - The open space on the premises and on
adjoining property under the control of occupants, operators or owners
of such premises.
4. Garbage - The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
5. Nondwelling structure - A garage, shed or other similar storage or
convenience building attached to or detached from a dwelling and used
primarily for recreation and/or the storage of vehicles, lawn and
garden equipment and appliances, and other household tools or
equipment. A nondwelling structure shall not be used for living or
sleeping by human occupants.
6. Occupant - Any person (including the owner or operator) living and
sleeping in a dwelling or having actual possession of such dwelling.
7. Operator - Any person who has charge, care, management or control
of a building, structure or premises which are let or offered for
occupancy.
8. Owner - Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, has
legal title or equitable title to any building, structure or premises; or
charge, care, management or control of any building, structure or
premises as personal representative, administrator, trustee or guardian
of the owner, or in any other representative or fiduciary capacity.
9. Person - An individual, firm, corporation, service corporation, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership, partnership, association
or other entity.
10. Premises - A platted or unplatted lot or parcel of land, or part thereof,
either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling
structure.
11. Rubbish - Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, including, but not limited to, the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper products,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, logs, firewood, excelsior, rubber, leather,
tree and shrub branches, tree and shrub trimmings, yard and garden
wastes, food and other containers (metal and glass), metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar material.
12. Terms defined in Zoning Ordinance - Where words, terms or phrases
are not defined under the provisions of this section and are defined in
§20.02.040 of the Zoning Ordinance (as amended from time to time),
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in that section of
the Zoning Ordinance.
13. Terms not defined - Where words, terms or phrases are not defined
under the provisions of this section or under the provisions of
§20.02.040 of the Zoning Ordinance (as amended from time to time),
they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted meanings or
such as the context in this section may imply.
C. Maintenance of Exterior Property Areas. All exterior property areas shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition free from any accumulation
of debris, garbage or rubbish. No person, as occupant, operator or owner,
shall permit or continue the use of any building, structure or premises which
does not comply with the requirements of this section, and the Building
Inspector shall cause inspections to be made of all buildings, structures and
premises, as necessary, to secure compliance with this section.
D. Abatement by City. Any person failing to comply with this section shall be
notified by the Building Inspector in writing. Upon failure of such person to
comply with the orders of the Building Inspector within thirty (30) days of the
date of such notice, the Building Inspector may cause the exterior property
areas of a building, structure or premises to be put into compliance by the
removal and disposal of accumulated debris, garbage or rubbish from the
building, structure or premises.
E. Recovery of Costs; Special Charge for Services. Where, due to a person’s failure
to comply with this section, the Building Inspector causes the exterior property
areas of a building, structure or premises to be put into compliance by the removal
and disposal of accumulated debris, garbage or rubbish, the Building Inspector
shall report the costs thereof in writing to the City Administrator, specifying the
amount chargeable to each lot or parcel of land and describing such lot or parcel.
Such amount may be imposed as a special charge for current services against the
land pursuant to sec. 66.0627, Stats. (as amended from time to time). Written
notice of such special charge shall be mailed to the land owner. Such charge is
not payable in installments. If such special charge is not paid within thirty (30) of
the date of such notice, the charge is delinquent, and shall become a lien on the
land against which it is imposed as of the date of the delinquency. A delinquent
special charge shall be included in the current or next tax roll for collection and
settlement under ch. 74, Stats.
F. Penalties. In addition to any other legal or equitable relief or remedies to which
the City may be entitled, or causes of action which the City may elect to pursue,
penalties for violation of this section shall be as provided in sec. 15.07.030,
Municipal Code.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
15.07.030 Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any
regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Section 15.08.000 of this Municipal Code. Each violation and each day a violation
continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not preclude the
City from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of this
chapter.
15.07.040 CONTROL OF NUSIANCE AND NOXIOUS WEEDS AND OTHER
RANK VEGETATION
A. Nuisance and Noxious Weeds and Other Rank Growth of Vegetation Prohibited.
No person owning, occupying or controlling land within the City shall plant or permit
to grow or pollinate upon the land any nuisance weeds as defined in sec. 23.235,
Stats. or noxious weeds as defined in sec. 66.0407, Stats., nor shall any person allow
any weeds, grasses, plants or other rank vegetation to grow or pollinate on lands in
the City which he owns, occupies or controls so as to constitute a public nuisance as
defined in Section 12.02.020 6. Land containing such nuisance or noxious weeds,
weeds, grasses, plants or other rank vegetation, is declared in a state of neglect and a
public nuisance.
B. Destruction of Noxious Weeds and Grasses; Other Prohibited Weeds and
Grasses. Per sec. 66.0407 (1)(a), Stats., all noxious weeds shall be destroyed at such
time and in such manner as will effectually prevent them from maturing to the bloom
or flower stage. Per sec. 66.0407 (1)(b), Stats., in this Section and in Sections
15.07.050 and 15.07.060 “noxious weeds” shall include, but are not limited to any
weeds, grasses or plant growth which, if allowed to pollinate, would cause hay fever
in humans or would cause a rash through contact with the skin, any nuisance or
noxious weeds listed in the Wisconsin Statutes, and the following weeds, grasses,
plants and vegetation:
Cirsium Arvense (Canada thistle) Ambrosia artemisiifolia (common ragweed)
Ambrosia trifida (giant ragweed) Euphoria esula (leafy spurge)
Arctium minus (burdock) Convolvulus arvensis (field bindweed)
Tragopogon dubius (goat's beard) Cirsium vulgaries (bull thistle)
Pastinaca sativa (wild parsnip) Xanthium strumarium (cocklebur)
Rumex Crispus (curled dock) Cannabis sativa (hemp)
Alliarita Petiolata (garlic mustard) Plantago lancellata (English plantain)
Amaranthus retroflexus (pigweed) Chenopodium album (common
lambsquarters)
Ambrosia trifida (great ragweed) Milkweed
Ragweed (all varieties) Thistles (all varieties)
Smartweed Dandelions (over 8 inches in height)
Noxious grasses, as defined in this Section and in Sections 15.07.050 and 15.07.060,
shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
Agrostia alba (redtop) Dactylis glomerata (orchard grass)
Phleum pratense (timothy) Poa pratensis (Kentucky blue grass)
Sorghum halepense (Johnsongrass) Setaria (foxtail)
This section shall not apply to Canada thistle or annual noxious weeds that are located
on land that the state Department of Natural Resources owns, occupies or controls
and that is maintained in whole or in part as habitat for wild birds by the Department.
C. Annual Notice. The City shall annually on or before May 15 publish as required by
state law a notice that every person is required by law to destroy all nuisance weeds
and noxious weeds, and all grasses, plants and other rank growth of vegetation as
defined in Section 12.02.020 6., on lands within the City which he owns, occupies or
controls.
D. Enforcement. If an owner, occupant or person controlling land within the City fails
to destroy any nuisance weeds, noxious weeds, grasses, plants or other rank
vegetation as required by the annual notice, the Weed Commissioner shall give five
(5) days' written notice by mail to such person that the Weed Commissioner, upon
expiration of the five (5) day period, will abate such public nuisance by destroying or
causing the destruction of all such weeds, grasses, plants and other rank vegetation
growing upon said land by mowing, use of chemicals and/or by cutting. The Weed
Commissioner is empowered to enter upon public or private lands for such purpose.
E. Costs and Fees; Tax on Land; Special Charge for Services. Where due to a
person’s failure to comply with this Section, the Weed Commissioner causes nuisance
weeds, noxious weeds, weeds, grasses, plants or other rank vegetation to be
destroyed, the Weed Commissioner shall report the costs thereof in writing to the City
Clerk, specifying the amount chargeable to each lot or parcel of land. Such costs
shall be determined annually by the Finance Committee and shall include the cost of
labor and equipment, and a fee for the Weed Commissioner’s services to investigate,
inspect and re-inspect the land. Such costs and fees (collectively, the “total charges”)
shall be billed to the land owner. If not paid by November 15 of the year in which
billed, the total charges, together with an additional administrative fee for billing and
collection equal to 10% of the total charges, shall be placed on the next succeeding
tax roll as a tax on the land affected, as provided in sec. 66.0517(3), Stats. Such tax
shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes under chs. 74 and 75, Stats. In
addition to any other method provided by law, the total charges may be imposed as a
special charge for services against the land pursuant to sec. 66.0627, Stats. Written
notice of such special charge shall be mailed to the land owner. A special charge is
not payable in installments. If not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of such
notice, the special charge is delinquent and shall become a lien on the land against
which it is imposed as of the date of the delinquency. A delinquent special charge
shall be included in the current or next tax roll for collection and settlement under ch.
74, Stats.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
15.07.050 REGULATION OF LAWNS, GRASSES AND WEEDS
A. Purpose; Definitions. This Section is adopted to correct the problems associated
with unmanaged lawns, grasses and weeds being allowed to grow to excessive height
on lands within the City. As used in this Section:
1. “Lawn” shall mean turf grasses commonly used in regularly cut yard areas
such as, but not limited to blue grass, fescue and rye grass blends.
2. “Natural lawn area” shall have the meaning specified in Section 15.07.060 B.
3. “Nuisance” shall mean any public nuisance as defined by the Wisconsin
Statutes or in Section 12.02.020 6., or physical conditions dangerous to human
life or detrimental to the health of persons on or near the land where the
condition exists.
B. Nuisance Declared. The Common Council finds that lawns, grasses and weeds on
lands within the City which exceed eight (8) inches in height adversely affect the
health and safety of the public in that they tend to emit pollen and other discomforting
bits of plant matter; constitute a fire hazard in that flammable litter and debris can
become entangled and hidden in them; interfere with the vision of operators of
vehicles on adjacent roads and public ways; impede the safe and convenient use of
sidewalks and other public ways; and adversely affect property values of neighboring
lands. For those reasons, any lawn, grass or weed on land within the City which
exceeds eight (8) inches in height is declared to be noxious, in a state of neglect and a
nuisance.
C. Nuisances Prohibited; Mowing Required. No person owning, occupying or
controlling land within the City shall permit any nuisance as defined in subsections
A.3. or B. hereof to grow, pollinate or remain on his land within the City. To prevent
such growth and pollination, it shall be the duty of every land owner or occupant to
regularly mow or cut, or cause to be regularly mowed or cut upon the land which he
owns, occupies or controls, all lawns, grasses and weeds exceeding eight (8) inches in
height.
D. Parkways; Maintenance. In this subsection, “parkway” means that area of land
located between the curb or gutter and the sidewalk. The parkway shall be kept free
and clear of all nuisance weeds and noxious weeds, and all lawns, grasses and weeds
which exceed eight (8) inches in height. The parkway shall not be paved, surfaced or
covered with any material which shall prevent the growth of vegetation, and shall be
mowed and maintained as a lawn. Every person who owns, occupies or controls land
within the City which land abuts a parkway, shall maintain, or have maintained by the
person’s tenant, the parkway directly abutting such land as provided herein and in
Section 15.07.040.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
E. Exceptions. This Section shall not apply to: (i) lands actively being farmed; (ii)
those portions of land designated as approved natural lawn areas by the Weed
Commissioner under Section 15.07.060; (iii) those portions of land located in a
designated floodplain area, drainage way, or wetland as defined in the Wisconsin
Statutes or City ordinances; or (iv) lands owned by governmental entities or where
federal, state or local regulations provide otherwise.
F. Inspection. The Weed Commissioner or designee shall inspect or cause to be
inspected all lands within the City to determine if any nuisance as defined in
subsections A.3. or B. hereof exists.
G. Notice of Nuisance; Abatement. If the Weed Commissioner determines that any
nuisance as defined in subsections A.3. or B. hereof exists, he shall immediately give
written notice to the owner, occupant or person in control of the land that the City
intends to have the lawn, grasses or weeds mowed or cut so as to comply with this
Section and Section 15.07.040. The notice shall be mailed at least five (5) days prior
to the date of the City's action to have the lawn, grasses or weeds mowed or cut and
shall be mailed to or served on the owner or person in control of the affected land or,
if such person is not known and there is a tenant occupying the land, then to the
tenant. The notice shall inform the owner, occupant or person in control of the land
that if he fails to abate the nuisance within the prescribed time period the City shall
abate the same and the costs and fees thereof shall be assessed to the land as a tax or
special charge, that he has a right to appeal the Weed Commissioner’s determination,
and the procedure to request a hearing thereof.
H. Appeal; Bond; Due Process Hearing. If the owner, occupant or person in control of
the affected land believes that the lawn, grasses or weeds thereon are not a nuisance,
he may appeal the Weed Commissioner’s determination to the Common Council.
The request for a hearing before the Common Council shall be in writing and must be
received in the City Clerk's office within five
(5) days of the date of the Weed Commissioner's notice. The request for a hearing
shall include payment by the appellant of a bond in the sum of $25. If a decision is
rendered in the appellant’s favor, the $25 bond shall be returned to the appellant. If
the appellant fails to appear for the hearing or if a decision is rendered against the
appellant, the bond shall be forfeited and applied to the cost of the Weed
Commissioner or designee abating the nuisance. Upon receipt of a timely written
appeal and payment of the bond, a hearing shall be set before the Common Council
and shall be held within seven (7) days from the date of receipt of such appeal. The
City shall not mow or cut the lawn, grasses or weeds on the affected land until it
renders a decision on the appeal. At the hearing, the appellant may appear in person
or by an attorney, may present his witnesses, cross-examine witnesses presented by
the City, and subpoena witnesses to testify in his behalf. At the close of the hearing
the Common Council shall make its determination in writing, setting forth its findings
of fact and conclusions. If the Common Council determines that a nuisance exists, it
shall order the Weed Commissioner to mow or cut the affected land, unless the land
has been mowed or cut by the appellant within forty-eight (48) hours of the Common
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
Council's decision. If the appellant does not abate the nuisance within said fortyeight
(48) hour period, the Weed Commissioner shall cause the same to be abated and
the costs and fees thereof in excess of the bond shall be billed and collected as
provided in Section 15.07.040 E.
I. Abatement by City. If the owner, occupant or person in control of the affected land
fails to mow or cut the lawn, grasses or weeds as directed in the notice sent pursuant
to Section G. hereof, or if the owner, occupant or person in control of the affected
land cannot be found, the City may elect to mow or cut said lawn, grasses or weeds,
or cause the same to be mowed or cut, and the costs and fees thereof shall be billed
and collected as provided in Section 15.07.040 E. The Weed Commissioner is
empowered to enter upon public or private lands for such purpose.
15.07.060 REGULATION OF NATURAL LAWN AREAS
A. Purpose. The City recognizes that the use of ferns, wildflowers and other native and
naturalized plants in a managed landscape design can be economical, lowmaintenance
and effective in soil and water conservation. However, it is not the
intent of this Section to allow natural lawn areas to be completely unmanaged or
overgrown. Areas that present a health or safety hazard or provide a breeding ground
for undesirable wildlife known to create a health or safety hazard will not be
permitted, nor will those nuisance weeds, noxious weeds, grasses and plants
identified herein which are known indicators of neglect. Therefore, this Section is
adopted to permit managed natural lawn areas within the City while maintaining
public health and safety.
B. Definitions. As used in this Section:
1. “Owner” shall mean the legal title holder and/or the beneficial owner of any
lot or parcel of land within the City, according to the most current records of
the City Assessor.
2. “Natural lawn area” shall mean any land managed to preserve or restore native
or naturalized plants, including but not limited to ferns, wildflowers, grasses,
forbs, shrubs and trees, which are designed and purposely cultivated to exceed
eight (8) inches in height from the ground, but specifically excluding those
nuisance weeds, noxious weeds, grasses, plants and rank vegetation identified
in Section 15.07.040.
3. “Natural Lawn Management Plan” shall mean a written plan relating to the
management and maintenance of a natural lawn area which contains a legal
description of the area upon which the permitted vegetation will exceed eight
(8) inches in height; a statement of the purpose of the natural lawn area; a list
of the plants, seeds and forbs to be planted; a description of the plant
succession involved; a statement whether the area will be cultivated prior to
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
planting or have plugs inserted in the area; and the specific management and
maintenance techniques to be employed thereon.
C. Natural Lawns Areas Allowed Only with Permit. An owner or occupant of land
within the City desiring a natural lawn area on land which he owns, occupies or
controls may apply for a natural lawn area permit, provided that the owner or
occupant completes an application form, pays the registration fee, submits a Natural
Lawn Management Plan for the area which complies with the provisions of this
Section, and obtains a permit. The growth of a natural lawn area in excess of eight
(8) inches in height from the ground is prohibited within the City unless a Natural
Lawn Management Plan is approved and a natural lawn area permit is issued by the
City Clerk. An unpermitted natural lawn area is deemed a public nuisance under
Section 12.02.020 6.
D. Application Process. A land owner or occupant who desires to plant and cultivate a
natural lawn area must submit to the City Clerk a complete, signed application on a
form provided by the City, a Natural Lawn Management Plan, and a $25 nonrefundable
registration fee. Upon submitting such items, copies of the completed
application form and Natural Lawn Management Plan shall be delivered by the City
Clerk to the Weed Commissioner. The Weed Commissioner shall review such items
and, within thirty (30) days of the submittal, notify the applicant and the City Clerk in
writing whether the application and the Natural Lawn Management Plan are approved
or rejected based upon compliance with the requirements of this Section. If
approved, the City Clerk shall issue a natural lawn area permit to the applicant. If
denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the provisions with which the
application or Natural Lawn Management Plan does not comply, along with his right
to appeal such denial, and the procedure to request a hearing thereof.
E. Limitations and Restrictions on Natural Lawn Areas. Natural Lawn Management
Plans shall limit the planting and cultivating of natural lawn areas to lands legally
owned or occupied by the applicant. Applicants are strictly prohibited from planting,
developing or maintaining a natural lawn area on any lands the City owns or leases,
or in which the City holds an easement interest, including but not limited to
parkways, streets, alleys and other public ways and rights-of-way.
F. Maintenance of Setbacks and Drainage Swales; Waiver of Setback; Revocation
of Waiver. Subject to subsection E. hereof, all natural lawn areas shall be set back a
minimum of ten (10) feet along any street frontage, measured from inside the
sidewalk, or where there is no sidewalk, from the property line of the affected land,
and a minimum of ten (10) feet from any side or rear property line. In addition, all
drainage swales shall be kept free of plantings.
G. Public Health and Safety Regulations. When in the opinion of the Fire Chief the
presence of a natural lawn area constitutes a fire hazard due to weather and/or other
conditions, the Fire Chief may order the cutting of natural lawn areas to the extent
necessary to produce a safe condition. As a condition of receiving approval of a
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
natural lawn area permit, a land owner shall be required to cut the natural lawn area
within forty-eight (48) hours of receiving such written order from the Fire Chief.
Natural lawn areas shall not be managed, maintained or removed by burning. Natural
lawn areas shall be kept free of litter and/or debris, and shall not harbor undesirable
wildlife.
H. Inspection. The Weed Commissioner or designee shall inspect or cause to be
inspected all lands within the City to determine if any public nuisance exists in
violation of this Section.
I. Enforcement; Notice of Nuisance; Abatement. If an approved natural lawn area
fails to comply with the Natural Lawn Management Plan or the provisions of this
Section, the affected land is deemed a public nuisance under Section 12.02.020 6. In
that event the Weed Commissioner shall give five (5) days' written notice by mail to
the owner, occupant or person in control of the land that unless the owner of occupant
earlier acts to abate the nuisance, the Weed Commissioner, upon expiration of such
five (5) day period, will revoke the natural lawn area permit and/or abate the nuisance
by destroying or causing the destruction of all plants growing upon the land which
cause such non-compliance or nuisance condition, with the costs and fees thereof
assessed to the land as a tax or special charge. The notice shall also inform the owner
or occupant that he has a right to appeal the Weed Commissioner’s decision, and the
procedure to request a hearing thereof.
J. Appeal. An applicant or permit holder aggrieved by the Weed Commissioner’s
decision to deny or revoke a natural lawn area permit, or who believes that the plants
growing on the land are not a public nuisance, may appeal to the Common Council
for a hearing pursuant to the procedure in
Section 15.07.050 H., without a bond. The Common Council may affirm, reverse or
modify a decision of the Weed Commissioner and issue an order accordingly. The
decision rendered by the Common Council shall be final and binding. Failure to file
an appeal within five (5) days of the date of the Weed Commissioner’s notice shall
result in denial or revocation of the natural lawn area permit, or abatement of the
public nuisance by the City.
K. Abatement by City. If the owner, occupant or person in control of the natural lawn
area fails to abate the public nuisance as directed in the notice sent pursuant to
Section I. hereof, or if the owner, occupant or person in control of the natural lawn
area cannot be found, the City may elect to abate the nuisance, and the costs and fees
thereof shall be billed and collected as provided in Section 15.07.040 E. The Weed
Commissioner is empowered to enter upon public or private lands for such purpose.
L. Exceptions. This Section shall not apply to: (i) lands actively being farmed; or (ii)
lands owned by governmental entities or where federal, state or local regulations
provide otherwise.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
15.08.000 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.
15.08.010 Violation Fees. No person shall erect, use, occupy or maintain any one or two
family dwelling in violation of any provision of this ordinance or the Uniform Dwelling
Code or cause to permit any such violation to be committed. Any person violating any of
the provisions of the ordinance shall upon conviction for each violation be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than twenty-five dollar(s) ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollar(s) ($500.00), together with the costs of prosecution and, if in default of payment
thereof, shall be imprisoned for a period of not less than one (1) day or more than six (6)
months or until such forfeiture and costs are paid. Each day that the violation continues,
after notice, shall constitute a separate offense.
15.08.020 Corrections. If an inspection reveals a non-compliance with this ordinance or
the Uniform Dwelling Code, the Building Inspector shall notify the applicant and the
owner, in writing, of the violation(s) to be corrected. All cited violations shall be
corrected within 30 days after written notification unless an extension of time is granted
pursuant to Sec. Ind. 20.10 (1)(c), Wisconsin Administrative Code.
15.08.030 Failure to Correct. If, after written notification, the violation is not corrected
within 30 days, a stop work order may be served on the owner of his or her representative
and copy thereof shall be posted at the construction site. Such stop-work order shall not
be removed except by written notice of the Building Inspector after satisfactory evidence
has been supplied that the cited violation has been corrected.
15.08.040 Separate Offense Per Day. Each day each violation continues after the 30
days written notice period has run shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this
ordinance shall preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or
remove a violation of any provision of this ordinance or the Uniform Dwelling Code.
15.08.050 Double Fees Charged. If any construction or word governed by the
provisions of this ordinance or the Uniform Dwelling Code is commenced prior to the
issuance of a permit, double fees shall be charged.
15.09.000 APPEAL TO BOARD OF APPEALS. Any person feeling aggrieved by an
order or a determination of the Building Inspector may appeal from such order or
determination to the Board of Appeals. Those procedures customarily used to effectuate
an appeal to the Board of Appeals shall apply.
15.10.000 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES. This ordinance shall not be construed as an
assumption of liability by the City for damages because of injuries or property destroyed
by a defect in any dwelling or equipment.
15.11.000 SEVERABILITY. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this
ordinance, of the Wisconsin Uniform Building Code, or of Chapters Ind. 20, 21, 22, 23,
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
24 and 25, Wisconsin Administrative Code is adjusted unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected.
15.12.000 FEES FOR BUILDING PERM ITS AND INSPECTIONS. At the time the
application for a building permit is filed, the applicant shall pay the following fees:
A. MINIMUM PERMIT FEE FOR ALL PERMITS $50.00
B. RESIDENCE-ONE & TWO FAMILY AND ATTACHED
GARAGES
$.28/sq.ft.
C. RESIDENCES & APARTMENTS, THREE FAMILY & OVER,
ROW HOUSING, MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS,
INSTITUTIONAL
$.28/sq.ft.
D. RESIDENCES-ADDITIONS $.28/sq.ft. or fraction
thereof
E. LOCAL BUSINESS, OFFICE BUILDINGS OR ADDITIONS
THERETO
$.26/sq.ft. or fraction
thereof
F. MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL
(Office areas to be included under par. E.)
$.21/sq.ft. or fraction
thereof
G. PERMIT TO START FOOTINGS AND FOUNDATIONS $210 Multi-family,
Industrial &
Commercial
$160 One & Two
families
H. AGRICULTURE BUILDINGS, DETACHED GARAGES &
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
$.22/sq.ft.
I. ALL OTHER BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, ALTERATIONS
& REPAIRS WHERE SQUARE FOOTAGE CANNOT BE
CALCULATED
$9.00/$1,000 valuation
1. Sign Permits #30.00/sign
2. Commercial Parking Lots $.06/sq. ft. (40 Min.)
3. Fire Protection Permit (Sprinklers, heat, and smoke Submittal Fee $50.00
Detectors, Inc.) Review Fee $130.00
Min. or actual cost
4. Flammable Liquid Storage Installation and Removal $8.00/1000 gal. cap.
($30.00 minimum)
J. HEATING, INCINERATOR UNITS AND WOOD BURNNG
APPLIANCES
$50.00/unit up to and
including 150,000 input
BTU units. Additional
fee of $16.00/each
50,000 BTU or fraction
thereof.
$750 maximum/unit.
K. COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL EXHAUST HOODS &
EXHAUST SYSTEMS
$110.00/unit
L. HEATING & AIR CONDITIONING DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEMS
$1.60/100 sq. ft. of
conditioned area with a
$50 minimum
M. AIR CONDITIONING $50.00/unit up to 3 tons
or 36,000 BTU’s.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
Additional fee of
$16.00/each ton or
12,000 BTU’s or
fraction thereof.
$750.00 maximum/unit
N. WRECKING, RAZING AND INTERIOR DEMOLITION FEES
(Fees may be waived at the discretion of the Building Inspector)
$50.00 minimum plus
$.06/sq. ft.
O. MOVING BUILDINGS
Over public ways $175.00 plus $.06/sq. ft.
P. RE-INSPECTION $50.00/Inspection
Q. PLAN EXAMINATION:
1. One & Two Family Residence
$175.00
2. Apartment, Three Family Residence Row Housing, Multiple
Family buildings
$225.00 plus
$20.00/unit
3. Commercial/Industrial Alterations & Additions $225.00
4. Additions to One & Two Family Dwellings $65.00
5. Alterations to One & Two Family Dwellings $40.00
6. Accessory buildings, greater than 120 sq. ft. $55.00
7. Decks, swimming pools $35.00
8. Heating plans, lighting and energy calculations to heating
plans submitted separately
$60.00 each
9. Priority Plan Review – At the discretion of the Building
Inspector and depending upon workload of the Department, two
(2) business day priority plan review may be provided at double
the regular rate for plan review fees. Certified municipalities
may also charge double the regular State plan review fees in
addition to those listed above. Priority plan review shall not
apply to submittals requiring review and/or approval by other
governing agencies of the municipality.
10. Re-submission of previously approved plans $50.00
R. SPECIAL INSPECTIONS & REPORTS $150.00
S. WISCONSIN UNIFORM BUILDING PERMIT SEAL State charge plus $10.00
Note 1: Permits may be obtained individually or on one form in
the categories of construction, heating, ventilation and air
conditioning, electrical and plumbing.
Note 2: An additional fee for plan review may be assessed at the
time of application for renewal of the permit.
T. OCCUPANCY PERMITS
1. Residential $45.00/unit, addition,
alteration or accessory
building over 120 sq. ft.
2. Office, Commercial & Industrial $160.00
3. Temporary Occupancy Permits (6 mos. or less) $80.00
U. POOLS-IN GROUND, ABOVE GROUND & SPAS $9.00/$1,000 valuation
($55.00 minimum)
V. DECKS AND SHEDS $50.00
W. EROSION CONTROL FEES:
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
1. One & Two Family Lots $130.00/lot
2. Multi-Family Units $160.00/building plus
$5.00/1000 sq. ft. of
disturbed lot area with a
$2000 maximum
3. Commercial Lots $160.00/building plus
$5.00/1000 sq. ft. of
disturbed lot area with a
$2000 maximum
4. Industrial $160.00/building plus
$5.00/1000 sq. ft. of
disturbed lot area with a
$2000 maximum
5. Institutional Lots $160.00/building plus
$5.00/1000 sq. ft. of
disturbed lot area with a
$2000 maximum
6. Other $50.00 minimum
X. REROOFING, RESIDING OR TRIM
1. Residential $40.00
2. Commercial $9.00/$1,000 valuation
$250 max./building
Y. Other fees charged to the municipality from other government
entities for reviewing plans or permits. Fees charged are required
to be paid at the time of application.
Z. Failure to obtain permit before work commences Double fees-1st offense
Triple fees-Subsequent
Offenses
aa. Failure to call for final inspection $50.00/inspection
Double Fees-2nd offense
Triple fees-Subsequent
Offenses
Note: The State fee schedule for commercial buildings COMM 61-65, 70 & 75-90
projects may be charged in lieu of or in addition to this fee schedule at the municipality’s
discretion.
Note: Gross square footage calculations are based on exterior dimensions, including
garage and each finished floor level. Unfinished basements or portions thereof are not
included.
Note: In determining costs, all construction shall be included with the exception of
heating, air conditioning, electrical or plumbing work.
Note: Check with local municipality regarding fee schedule.
Note: All fee categories shall be rounded up to the next full dollar amount.
The recommended approval of amendments, code changes, products, systems or quality control agencies
by the Code Committees and the Wisconsin Uniform Code Associations does not constitute an approval or
acceptance by any local community. Such acceptance is a function of local government administered by
the designated local officials without the necessity of submitting further data because it is supported by
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
factual reports describing the nature and use of the product or system and its performance under designated
standard tests by recognized testing agencies.
15.13.000 EROSION CONTROL.
15.13.010 Intent. The City of Port Washington finds that urbanizing land uses have
accelerated the process of soil erosion, and sedimentation in the waters of the City. The
purpose of this section is, therefore, to conserve the soil, water, and related resources and
control erosion and sedimentation caused by land disturbing activities. Such
conservation activities will preserve natural resources, control floods, protect the capacity
of drainage facilities, protect the quality of public waters, and protect the tax base.
15.13.020 Applicability. Any land disturbing activity shall be subject to the erosion and
sediment control provisions of this Section, if:
A. An Area of 4,000 square feet or greater will be disturbed by excavation, grading,
filling, or other earth-moving activities, resulting in the loss of removal of
protective ground cover, vegetation, or
B. Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof, will exceed four hundred (400)
cubic yards, or
C. Any Public (federal, state or local) street, road or highway is to be constructed,
enlarged, relocated or substantially reconstructed, or
D. Any Water Course is to be changed, enlarged, or materials are removed from
stream or lake beds, or
E. Any Proposed Land Use by a unit of government or by public or private utilities
in which underground conduits, piping, wiring, waterlines, sanitary sewers, or
storm sewers, or similar structures will be laid, repaired, replaced or enlarged, if
such use involves more than 300 linear feet of earth disturbance.
15.13.030 Standards and Criteria. Any owner, land occupier, or land user performing
an activity described in Section 15.13.020 of this Ordinance shall comply with the
following standards and criteria:
A. General Erosion And Sediment Control Standard
The City Engineer shall not approve plans nor shall the City Building Inspector
issue permits required by this Ordinance for land disturbing uses unless erosion
and sedimentation during and after the land disturbance will not exceed that
which would have been eroded if the land had been left in its undisturbed state
and/or area controlled in accordance with established specifications, including but
not limited to Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practice Handbook
or other technical guidelines as developed by Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources – Bureau of Water Resources Management – Nonpoint Source and
Land Management Section.
B. Standard For Tracking
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
For plan approval and issuance of a permit, there must be adequate provisions to
prevent the tracking or causing of any material to accumulate from the site onto
any public or private street or property. Any material reaching a public or private
street or property shall be removed by mechanical means (not flushing) before the
end of each workday.
C. Site Dewatering
Water pumped from the site shall be treated by temporary sedimentation basins,
grit chambers, sand filters, upflow chambers, hydro-cyclones, , swirl
concentrators, or other appropriate controls designed and used to remove particles
of 100 microns or greater for the highest dewatering pumping rate. If the water is
demonstrated to have no particles greater than 100 microns during dewatering
operations, then no control is needed before discharge, except as determined by
the City Engineer, water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion of
the site or receiving channels.
D. Drain Inlet Protection
All storm drain inlets shall be protected with straw bales, filter fabric, or
equivalent barrier meeting accepted design criteria, standards and specifications.
E. Design Criteria, Engineering Standards, and General Principles.
This section does not require the use of any particular type of structural or
nonstructural measures to control erosion and sedimentation. The applicant for a
permit may employ any structural or nonstructural measures which he believes to
be necessary to achieve all applicable standards set forth in this Ordinance.
However, the City Engineer is required to evaluate these measures to determine
that they follow currently accepted design criteria and engineering standards. The
following general principles shall be used by the City Engineer when evaluating
erosion control plans by this Ordinance.
(1) Erosion control plans shall incorporate best management practices to
reduce soil loss during construction.
(2) The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time
during development.
(3) Such minimum exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of time as is
practicable.
(4) Temporary vegetation, mulching, or other cover shall be used to protect
critical areas, and permanent vegetation shall be installed as soon as
practical.
(5) Sod shall be laid in strips at those intervals necessary to prevent erosion
and at right angles to the direction of drainage.
(6) The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils of the
site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
(7) Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected and shall be
deemed a dominant factor in developing the site.
F. Standards For Filling. All fill material placed on any lot or parcel shall consist of
non-odorous and non-combustible material which shall be free of garbage,
decomposable substance, food waste, and organic material other than soil. The
following materials are specifically prohibited:
(1) Cardboard boxes, wooden boxes and other containers.
(2) Wood, excelsior and other combustible or flammable materials.
(3) Garage sweepings, fly ash (wet or dry) and industrial acids.
(4) Any material which is likely, after exposure to the elements, to become
capable of becoming air-borne.
G. Additional Land Disturbing Standards
(1) The top sixteen (16) inches of all fills shall be of soil and the upper four
(4) inches thereof shall be of topsoil suitable for growing vegetation. No
area shall be filled to a maximum height greater than five (5) feet above
the grade of the immediately adjacent lands. If dust shall accumulate
upon the surface of the fill, the permittee shall furnish facilities in order to
provide for proper settling of the dust by sprinkling water thereon, or by
the application of calcium chloride or other suitable substances, all of
which shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer, both as to quality
of materials and manner of application.
(2) All land disturbing projects shall be landscaped immediately upon
completion of the project. Where immediate landscaping is determined
by the City Plan Commission to be impracticable due to climate, weather,
labor supply, or other relevant conditions, the Plan Commission shall set a
time when landscaping shall be completed. In no case shall landscaping
be delayed for more than one year after the completion of the projects.
(3) The finished grade of any lot that is filled shall be according to the
grading plan recommended by the Engineering Department.
(4) In order to protect adjacent property owners from possible damage due to
change in the existing grade of adjoining lands, no change in the existing
topography of any land shall be made which would result in increasing
any portion of the slope to a ratio of more than one-foot vertical to fourfeet
horizontal within a distance of 30 feet from the property line, except
with the written consent of the abutting property owner and with the
approval of the Plan Commission, or which would alter the existing
drainage or topography in any way as to adversely affect the adjoining
property. In no case shall any slope exceed the normal angle of repose of
the material involved and all slopes shall be protected against erosion.
(5) In the event any property owner changes or permits a change to be made
in the grade of their property that adversely affects the depth of water and
sewer services, or any other utility, said property owner may be required
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
to pay any cost incurred by the City in the raising or lowering of said
utilities or for reconstructing the property to proper grade.
15.13.040 Erosion Control Permit.
Unless specifically exempted herein, no land owner, land occupier, or land user
may undertake a land disturbing activity without having applied for and received
an erosion control permit.
A. Each Application for a Land Disturbing Permit shall be made in duplicate
to the Building Inspector on forms furnished by the City and shall include
the following where applicable:
(1) Name and address of the applicant, owner of the site, architect,
professional engineer, and contractor.
(2) Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded
subdivision; or metes and bounds.
(3) Erosion Control Plan
(4) Receipt of paid permit fee from the City Treasurer.
B. The following exceptions are provided from the Erosion Control Permit
requirement:
(1) The owner and occupier of public lands are exempt from the
payment of any permit fee.
(2) The city may, for its convenience, enter into an agreement with
public or private utilities and governmental units to waive the
need for a permit for each individual land disturbing activity if
the utility or governmental unit will agree to adopt and follow a
procedure for each land disturbing activity which meets all
applicable standards contained in Section 15.13.030 of this
Ordinance. Further, the agreement shall provide that in the
event that a utility or governmental unit activity fails to meet the
standard, the agreement shall terminate and the utility or
governmental unit shall be subject to the penalties of this
Ordinance.
15.13.050 Erosion Control Plan Required.
Unless specifically exempted herein, every applicant for an Erosion Control
Permit shall submit a plan to control erosion, and sedimentation which would
result from the proposed activity.
If the proposed land disturbing activity involves 3 lots or less and five acres or
less of land, the permit applicant may submit a simplified Erosion Control
Checklist Plan on forms available from the City. An approved Erosion Control
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
Checklist Plan, specifying those control devices and practices necessary to control
erosion and signed by the permit applicant and the City Engineer shall constitute
the approved control plan.
15.03.060 Contents Of The Erosion Control Plan.
A control Plan shall be submitted if the proposed land disturbing activity involves
four residential lots or greater than 5 acres of land. The Control Plan shall contain
any such information the City Engineer may need to determine soil erosion, and
sedimentation potential and control. The City Engineer may require the
following, as well as any other information which, in his judgment, is needed to
evaluate the Control Plan:
A. A Location Map of the site at a scale not smaller than one (1) inch equals 100
feet showing the location of the predominant soil types and the existing
vegetative cover.
B. A Topographic Map at a scale not smaller than one (1) inch equals 200 feet
with a vertical contour interval of two (2) feet of the site including enough of
the contiguous properties to show existing onsite drainage patterns and
watercourses that may affect or be affected by the proposed development of
the site. The site boundaries shall also be shown clearly on the map.
C. A Plan of the site at a scale not smaller than (1) inch equals 100 feet showing:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the land occupier, along
with the name and telephone number of the party responsible for
maintaining erosion control structures.
(2) The existing 100 year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways; lakes,
streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other water courses on and
immediately adjacent to the site. Also, when applicable the City of
Port Washington floodland zoning district boundaries.
(3) A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion
dates of the development sequence and the time of exposure of each
area of soil disturbing activity prior to the completion of effective
measures for erosion and sediment control.
(4) Existing and proposed topography of the site with a maximum of two
(2) foot contour intervals showing:
(a) Location of proposed land disturbing activity, proposed
disturbance of protective cover, any proposed additional
structure on the site, areas to be seeded or mulched, areas to
be vegetatively stabilized and areas to be left undisturbed.
(b) Elevations, dimensions, locations of all proposed soil
disturbing activities including where topsoil will be
stockpiled, so it will not contribute to erosion and
sedimentation.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
(c) The finished grade, stated in feet vertical per foot
horizontal, of cut and fill slopes.
(d) The kinds of utilities and proposed areas of installation.
(e) Proposed paved and covered areas in square feet or to scale
on a plan map.
(f) The type of proposed soil (upper 16 inches) on areas not
covered by buildings, structures, or pavement. Description
shall be in such terms as: original surface soil, subsoil,
sand, silt, clay or other.
(g) Proposed kind of cover on areas not covered by buildings,
structures or pavement. Description shall be in such terms
as: lawn, turfgrass, shrubbery, trees, forest cover, riprap,
mulch, or other.
(h) Seeding mixtures and rates, lime and fertilizer application
rates, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary
and permanent vegetative control measures.
(i) Methods to prevent tracking of soil off the site of the land
disturbing activity.
(j) Estimated cost of erosion and sediment control features.
15.13.070 Review of Application and Erosion Control Plan.
The City’s Engineering Department shall receive all permit applications, which
shall be accompanied by either an Erosion Control Plan or an Erosion Control
Checklist Plan. The City Engineer shall determine if measures included in the
plan to control erosion, and sedimentation during and after the land disturbing
activities are adequate to meet all the applicable standards as set forth in Section
15.13.030 of the Ordinance. Upon receipt of the City Engineer’s review
comments the City shall inform the permit applicant, whether the application is
approved, approved conditionally with revisions, or disapproved. If the City
approves the Control Plan, he shall issue the permit. If additional information or
revisions are required, the City shall so notify the applicant. In the event that the
plan is disapproved, the applicant may resubmit a new Control Plan or may appeal
the City’s decision as provided in Section 15.09.000 of this Ordinance. If the City
requires revisions to the Erosion Control Plan, the applicant must revise the
permit application and control plan accordingly and reapply for the permit;
however, no additional permit fee is required, or the applicant may appeal the
decision as provided in Section 15.09.000 of this Ordinance.
15.13.080 Permit Conditions.
All permits issued under this Section shall be issued subject to the following
conditions and requirements and any permittee who begins to perform any land
disturbing activity authorized by permit shall be deemed to have accepted all of
these conditions:
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
A. That all land disturbances, construction and development will be done
pursuant to the Erosion Control Plan as approved by the City.
B. That the permittee shall give at least two (2) working days notice to the City
in advance of the start of any land disturbing activity.
C. That the permittee shall request a final inspection of all land disturbing
activities and/or the completion of installation of all onsite detention
facilities immediately upon completion or prior to removing equipment from
site.
D. That approval must be obtained from the City Building Inspector prior to
any modifications to the approved Erosion Control Plan.
E. That the permittee will be responsible for maintaining all public rights-ofway,
streets, runoff and drainage systems, and drainage ways as specified in
the approved erosion control plan until they are accepted and become the
responsibility of a governmental entity.
F. That the permittee will be responsible for repairing any damage at his
expense to all adjoining drainage systems caused by excessive sedimentation
resulting from activities which are not in compliance with the approved
Erosion Control Plan.
G. That the permittee must provide and install at his expense all drainage, and
erosion control improvements required by this Ordinance and the approved
Erosion Control Plan.
H. That no work will be done on the site during periods of high wind velocity
unless provision has been made to eliminate dust and flowing dirt.
I. That no portion of the land which undergoes the land disturbing activity will
be allowed to remain uncovered for greater than two (2) weeks after notice is
given to the City Building Inspector that the land disturbing activity is
completed.
J. That the permittee agrees to permit the City to enter onto the land regulated
under this Ordinance for the purpose of inspecting for compliance with the
approved control plan and permit.
K. That in the event that the permittee fails to perform as specified in the
Erosion Control Permit, the permittee authorizes the City to perform any
work or operations necessary to bring the condition of the lands into
conformity with the approved control plan or plan as modified by the City
and further consents to the City of Port Washington drawing the total of the
costs and expenses of such work and operations from the letter of credit or
cash deposit provided for in Section 15.13.110 of this Ordinance.
15.13.090 Permit Duration.
Permits issued under this Section shall be valid for a period as specified on the face of the
permit by the City Building Inspector and work must be completed prior to the expiration
date of the permit. However, the City may extend the expiration date of the permit if it
finds that such an extension will not cause an increase in erosion, sedimentation or
runoff. The City Building Inspector is further authorized to modify the plans if necessary
to prevent any increase in sedimentation, erosion or runoff resulting from any extension.
City of Port Washington Chapter 15 – Page 7/11/14
15.13.100 Surety Bond.
As a condition for approval and issuance of a Land Disturbing Area Permit, consisting of
lots of 5 acres of land, the City shall require the permittee to deposit an appropriate
irrevocable letter of credit or cash bond to guarantee the faithful execution of the
approved Control Plan and Permit Conditions equal to the cost of the Land Disturbing
Work. The form of the Letter of Credit or Cash Bond shall be such that it is readily
available for City use without any restrictions and as approved by the City Attorney.
15.13.110 Inspection.
A. The City shall inspect all Land Disturbing Sites at least once per month.
B. The City shall perform all required inspections within 2 business days of the
requested inspection.
C. The City shall inspect all erosion control devices after each rainfall and at least
daily during prolonged rainfalls. Any deficiencies shall be immediately corrected
by the Contractor. In addition, the Contractor shall make a daily review of the
location for silt fences and filter barriers in areas where construction activity
changes the earth contour and drainage runoff to ensure the proper location for
effectiveness. Where deficiencies exist, additional erosion control shall be
installed as approved or directed by the City Engineer.
15.13.120 Enforcement.
A. The City of Port Washington may post a stop work order if:
(1) Any land disturbing activity regulated under this ordinance is being
undertaken without a permit;
(2) The Control Plan is not being implemented as it was submitted;
(3) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
B. Failure to comply with any of the provisions provided by this ordinance may also be
subjected to fines in accordance with Ordinance 15.080.000. In addition to the citations,
the cost of cleanup by a third party must be taken to gain compliance for the Erosion
Control Ordinance and will be billed to the owner.
CHAPTER 16
Electrical Code
Table of Contents
16.01.000 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
16.01.010 Appointment
16.01.020 Qualifications
16.01.030 Powers and Duties
16.01.040 Record and Reports
16.02.000 LICENSES
16.02.010 Contractors Required to Have Licenses
16.02.020 Classes of Licenses
16.02.030 Examinations
16.02.040 Application
16.02.050 Qualifications Required of Applicants
16.02.060 License Fees
16.02.070 Issuance
16.02.080 Use of License
16.02.090 Work in Progress
16.02.100 Renewal
16.02.110 Revocation
16.03.000 BOARD OF EXAMINERS OF ELECTRICIANS
16.04.000 PERMITS
16.04.010 When Required
16.04.020 Application
16.05.000 PERMIT FEES
16.06.000 INSPECTIONS
16.06.010 Wire Connections
16.06.020 Completion of Construction
16.06.0030 Concealed Wires
16.06.040 Notifications
16.06.050 Certificate of Inspection
16.07.000 ARBITRATION
16.08.000 CODES ADOPTED
16.09.000 LIABILITY OF CITY
16.10.000 PENALTY
16.01.000 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
16.01.010 Appointment. The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation of the Common Council. Until such time as a full-time Electrical
Inspector is appointed, the Common Council may designate some other officer or
employee of the City to act in such capacity, in addition to his other duties, or the
Common Council may employ a part-time electrician possessing the necessary
experience and qualifications.
16.01.020 Qualifications. The Electrical Inspector shall be a competent electrician, shall
have had at least 6 years experience as a journeyman in the practice of his trade or 4 years
training in a recognized college of electrical engineering, shall be well-versed in
approved methods of electrical construction for safety to life and property, the statutes of
the State of Wisconsin relating to electrical work, the rules and regulations issued by the
Industrial Commission of Wisconsin, the National Electrical Code of the National Fire
Protection Association, and shall be of good moral character.
16.01.030 Powers and Duties.
A. The Electrical Inspector shall issue all permits pertaining to electrical work and
see that all electrical light, power and heating installations and all other electrical
apparatus connected with the same, are in strict conformity with provisions of
this chapter, the statutes of the State of Wisconsin, the rules and regulations
issued by the Industrial Commission of Wisconsin, and also are in conformity
with the latest and most approved methods of construction for safety of life and
property. The regulations as laid down in the National Electrical Code of the
N.F.P.A. shall be prima facie evidence of such latest and most approved
methods. He shall see that all of the above mentioned rules, regulations, statutes
of the State of Wisconsin and ordinances of the City of Port Washington are
enforced.
B. The Electrical Inspector shall make a thorough examination upon request or
complaint or upon the change of use of commercial or industrial zoned property,
of all electrical wires and appliances installed within the City and when such
wires or appliances are found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, he shall
notify the person owning, using, operating or installing the same, to place them
in a safe condition. Any person failing or refusing to make the necessary repairs
or changes and have such work completed within 15 days, or any longer period
which may be deemed reasonable by the Electrical Inspector, after the receipt of
such notice, shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter imposed, and the
Electrical Inspector may order the discontinuance of electrical service to such
defective wires or appliances until they have been repaired, removed or changed
as directed by the Electrical Inspector, subject to the limitations of this chapter.
C. The Electrical Inspector may, during reasonable hours, enter any public or
private building in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of
making any inspection or test of the electrical wires and appliances contained
therein, and may turn off all electrical currents and cut or disconnect, in cases of
emergency, any wire where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or
property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department.
16.01.040 Records and Reports. The Electrical Inspector shall keep adequate and
complete records of all permits issued and inspections made and other official work
performed under the provisions of this chapter and shall make a complete annual report to
the Common Council covering all of his activities.
16.02.000 LICENSES.
16.02.010 Contractors Required to Have Licenses. No person, either individually, as a
member of a firm or as an officer or employee of a corporation shall conduct the business
of electrical wiring construction or contracting unless such persons shall have a license as
required by this chapter and no electrical work, except minor repair work, shall be done
by a person not have such a license. Exceptions are:
1. The Electrical Inspector may, however, issue a permit to any person desiring to
personally install electrical wiring in his own private, single residence, if the
person desiring the permit can prove he is competent to do such work in
conformity with all the rules and regulations governing the installation of
electrical wiring in residences and such person shall pay the same permit fee as
is required of contractors under Section 16.05.000.
2. This section shall not apply to servicing by the manufacturer of electrical
appliances or special equipment installed by him.
16.02.020 License. There shall be a license issued appertaining to electrical work in the
City of Port Washington. A license shall be issued to a person desiring to enter into
electrical wiring and construction with 10 business days of submittal of all of the
following:
1. Evidence that the contractor or at least one full-time employee of the contractor is
a Certified Master Electrician.
2. Payment of the license fee.
16.02.040 Application. Any person desiring such license shall make application to the
Board of Examiners not less than 10 days prior to the month in which an examination is
to be held.
16.02.050 Qualification Required of Applicants.
1. Any person making application for a license must meet the requirements as set
forth in Wisconsin Administrative Code, Comm. Chapter 17 and any
amendments thereto.
2. Existing list of licensed persons as of the date of adoption of this ordinance shall
remain in effect as long as such licensed person continues to meet the
qualifications in place before the adoption of this ordinance.
16.02.060 License Fees.
The fee for a new applicant for a license shall be forth ($40.00) dollars. Renewal fee for
each succeeding year shall be twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
16.02.070 Issuance. The Board of Examiners shall, upon being satisfied as to the
competency of the applicant and upon payment by the applicant to the City Treasurer of
the license fee as above stipulated, and after approval by the Common Council, issue to
such applicant a license authorizing him to conduct business of electrical wiring and
construction or work as a maintenance electrician in a public building or industrial plant.
16.02.080 Use of License. No holder of a license shall allow the use of his license,
directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining local permits for others except that a
person with a license may lawfully obtain permits for firms or corporations who are
actively engaged in the electrical contracting business with a recognized business
location if such person is an officer of such corporation or an employee of such business.
16.02.090 Work in Progress. If the only employee of an electrical firm, association or
corporation holding a license shall leave such employment, work in progress for which a
permit has been issued may be completed if the other requirements of this chapter are
complied with.
16.02.100 Renewal. Every license shall expire on June 30 following the date of its issue
and may be renewed upon payment to the City Treasurer of the renewal fee pertaining to
that class of license, not later than June 30 in the year in which the license expires.
Should any person fail to renew his license, he will be required to make application for
and take the examination for, a new license in the same manner as a new applicant,
before he will be issued a new license. Temporary licenses shall not be issued.
16.02.110 Revocation. Any license may be revoked by the Board of Examiners should
the license violate any ordinance or law relating to electric wiring. Any person whose
license shall have been revoked, shall not again be license within a period of one year
from the date of such action.
No license shall be revoked except by a majority vote of the Board of Examiners at a
regular or special meeting, and no license shall be revoked unless the license has been
notified in writing of the charges against him at least 10 days before such meeting. The
licensee shall have the right to appear before the Board of Examiners to answer the
charges and present testimony in his defense.
16.03.000 BOARD OF EXAMINERS OF ELECTRICIANS. The Board of Examiners
shall consist of the Electrical Inspector, who shall be chairman of the Board, a Class A
licensed electrician, a journeyman electrician having had at least 6 years of experience as
a journeyman electrician in the City and who holds no class of electrician’s license, a
representative of the local electrical utility and the City Engineer, appointed for one year.
16.04.010 PERMITS.
16.04.010 When Required.
A. Before any electrical wires or electrical apparatus shall be installed for
lighting or power purposes, or any electrical construction work done,
except minor repair work, a permit therefore shall be obtained from the
Electrical Inspector by a licensed electrician.
Repair work shall mean the replacement of broken or defective sockets,
snap, push or toggle switches, loose receptacles and portable electrical
appliances.
A permit shall be required for the installation of any electrical outlet for
use on any circuit other than a low voltage circuit. Permits shall be
required for outlets, commercial electrical refrigerators, oil burners, gas
burners and other electrical apparatus of a similar nature.
B. Electrically illuminated Signs. Permits for electrically illuminated signs
will be granted only to Class A licensed electricians.
C. Emergency Work. In cases of emergency, work may be started before
the permit has been issued, provided the Electrical Inspector is notified
the same day such work is sarted..
16.04.020 Application. The application shall describe the proposed installation or work
and give the location of the premises where the same is to be placed. No permit shall be
issued unless satisfactory proof is furnished to the Electrical Inspector upon his request,
that the applicant has been employed to perform the work or installation and will be
responsible for the performance thereof in the manner required by ordinances and law, or
unless proof be submitted that the applicant has paid to the Electrical Inspector the fees
therein required.
16.05.000 PERMIT FEES.
Minimum Permit Fee $20.00
Outlets $ 0.55
Fixtures: Medium Base $ 0.55
Lamps: Tubular $ 0.40/tube
Neon Lights: per transformer $ 3.00
Motors $ 6.00 ea.
Range $ 6.00
Water Heater $ 6.00
Clothes Dryer (or outlet) $ 6.00
Garbage Disposal $ 6.00
Dishwasher $ 6.00
Hot tubs, whirlpools, spas, etc. $ 6.00
Generators, transformers, reactors,
Rectifiers, or similar devices $ 1.00/kw
Feeder or Subfeeder $ 6.00
Services: Temporary $20.00
0 to 100a $20.00
101 to 200a $20.00
201 to 400a $20.00
401 to 600a $20.00
601 and above $20.00
(Plus $1.00 for every 100 amps over 600 amps.)
Heating Unit and Motors $ 6.00
Fans, exhaust and vent $ 3.00
Built-Ins $ 6.00
Electric Heating $ 1.00/kw
Refrigeration units, air conditioner,
air cooling units $15.00/unit
Fuel dispensing pumps $15.00/unit
Power Receptacle $ 6.00
Wire ways, busways, under-floor raceways $ 0.50/ft
Signs (internally lighted only) $20.00
Swimming Pools: Indoor $25.00
Inground $25.00
Above Ground $25.00
Sump Pumps $ 2.50
Low Voltage Systems (intercoms, bells, etc.) $ 1.00
REINSPECTION FEE $25.00
16.06.000 INSPECTIONS.
16.06.010 Wire Connections. No person shall connect up the electrical wiring and
equipment of any building, to any electrical supply lines or turn on the current, unless a
Certificate of Inspection has been issued by the Electrical Inspector. The electrical utility
supplying electrical service to any building shall secure a copy of the Certificate of
Inspection from the Electrical Inspector before supplying service to such building.
16.06.020 Completion of Construction. Upon the completion of the construction and
installation of the electrical wiring and equipment of any building, the person doing the
same shall notify the Electrical Inspector, who shall inspect the installation within 24
hours of the time such notice is given, and if the installation is found to be in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue a Certificate of Inspection authorizing
connection to the electrical service and the turning on of the current. If the Electrical
Inspector, at the time of the inspection, finds any fault with the electrical wiring or
equipment, he shall, within 24 hours, notify the person of such fault.
16.06.030 Concealed Wires. All wires which are to be concealed, shall be inspected
before concealment and no other craft shall cover up or conceal such wires unless the
installation has been inspected and approved by the Electrical Inspector.
16.06.040 Notifications. All notifications for inspection must be made at the office of
the Electrical Inspector not later than 5:00 p.m. of the day before the inspection is
desired.
16.06.050 Certificate of Inspection. No Certificate of Inspection shall be issued by the
Electrical Inspector unless the electrical wiring and equipment for the light, power, heat
or other similar purposes is safe both with respect to life and fire hazard and it is in the
strict conformity with the ordinances of the City and the statutes of the State of
Wisconsin and the orders of the State Industrial Commission.
16.07.000 ARBITRATION. Where the Electrical Inspector refuses to issue a Certificate
of Inspection in the electrical work of any building, or condemns the same, the owner
may within 5 days after receiving the written notice from the Electrical Inspector, file
notice in writing with the Electrical Inspector for arbitration and the owner shall within 2
days thereafter select a licensed electrician who, with the Electrical Inspector, shall select
a third party who shall be a journeyman electrician and the 3 shall constitute a Board of
Arbitration to determine whether such electrical work is defective and unsafe and their
decision shall be final and conclusive. Said board shall furnish the Electrical Inspector
and the owner with a copy in detail of their findings.
16.08.000 CODES ADOPTED. The Wisconsin State Electrical Code, as amended, and
the National Electrical Code, as amended, are by reference made a part of this chapter.
16.09.000 LIABILITY OF CITY. This chapter shall not relieve or lessen the
responsibility or liability of any part owning, operating, controlling or installing any
electrical equipment for damages to anyone injured or any property destroyed by any
defect therein nor shall the City be held as assuring any such liability by reason of the
inspection authorized herein or Certificate of Inspection issued herein provided.
16.10.000 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 25.04 of this Code.
CHAPTER 17
Plumbing Code
Table of Contents
17.01.000 STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED
17.01.010 Adopted by Reference
17.01.020 To Be On File
17.02.000 PLUMBING DEFINED
17.03.000 PLUMBING SUPERVISOR
17.03.010 Appointment, Term and Compensation
17.03.020 Duties and Authority
17.04.000 PLUMBING PERMITS
17.04.010 Required
17.04.020 Application
17.04.030 Issuance, Term, Suspension and Revocation
17.04.040 Restrictions on Issuance
17.04.050 Appeals for Failure to Issue, Suspension and Revocation
17.04.060 Fees
17.05.000 PLUMBERS TO BE LICENSED
17.06.000 REGISTRATION OF PLUMBERS
17.06.010 To Be On File
17.06.020 Information To Be Supplied
17.06.030 Registration Requirements
17.10.000 PENALTY
17.15.000 SEVERABILITY
City of Port Washington Chapter 17 - 1 6/7/06
17.01.000 STATE REGULATION ADOPTED.
17.01.010 Adopted By Reference. Ch. 145, Wis. Stats.; the State Plumbing Code, Ch.
H62, Wis. Adm. Code; and Chs. H61 and H63, Wis. Adm. Code, are adopted and by
reference make a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as though set out in
full. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of such requisitions shall constitute a
violation of this chapter, punishable according to the penalties provided herein.
17.01.020 To Be On File. A copy of the State Plumbing Code shall be on file in the
offices of the Building Inspector and the City Clerk.
17.02.000 PLUMBING DEFINED. In this chapter, “plumbing” means and includes:
1. All piping, fixtures, appliances, equipment, devices and appurtenances in
connection with the water supply, water distribution and drainage systems,
including hot water storage tanks, water softeners and water heaters connected
with such water and drainage systems, and the installation thereof.
2. The construction, connection or installation of any drain or waste piping system
from the outside or proposed outside foundation walls of any building to the
mains or other sewerage system terminal within bounds of or beneath an area
subject to easement for highway purposes, including private domestic sewage
treatment and disposal systems, and the alteration of any such systems, drains or
waste piping.
3. The water service piping from the outside or purposes outside foundation walls
of any building to the main or other water utility service terminal within bounds
of or beneath an area subject to easement for highway purposes and its
connections.
4. The water pressure systems other than municipal systems as provided in Ch. 144,
Wis. Stats.
5. A plumbing and drainage system so designed and vent piping so installed as to
keep the air within the system in free circulation and movement; to prevent with
margin of safety unequal air pressures of such force as might blow, siphon or
affect trap seals or retard the discharge from plumbing fixtures or permit sewer
air to escape into the building; to prohibit cross-connection, contamination or
pollution of the potable water supply and distribution system; and to provide an
adequate supply of water to properly serve, cleanse and operate all fixtures,
equipment, appurtenances and appliances served by the plumbing system.
17.03.000 PLUMBING SUPERVISOR.
17.03.010 Appointment, Term and Compensation. The City Council shall appoint a
Plumbing Inspector(s) as it deems necessary, who shall be a licensed plumber and who
shall serve for a 4-year term, subject to removal for just cause, and whose compensation
shall be as fixed by the Council from time-to-time.
City of Port Washington Chapter 17 - 2 6/7/06
17.03.020 Duties and Authority.
A. General. The Plumbing Supervisor shall enforce all provisions of this chapter
and all other State and City provisions relating to the construction, installation,
alteration and repair of all plumbing within the City and shall make such
inspections, perform such tests and issue such orders as may be necessary for
such enforcements.
B. Authority To Enter Premises.
B-1. In the discharge of his duties, the Plumbing Inspector or his authorized
agent may enter any building, upon presentation of the proper credentials, during
reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspection and may require the production
of any permit or license required hereunder. No persons shall interfere with the
inspector while in the performance of his duties; and any person so interfering
shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to a penalty as provided by Ch.
17.10.000.
B-2. If consent to entry to personal or real properties which are not public
buildings, or to portions of public buildings which are not open to the public, for
inspection purposes has been denied, the Plumbing Inspector shall obtain a
special inspection warrant under Chapters 66.122 and 66.123, Wisconsin
Statutes.
C. Permits. The Plumbing Inspector or his authorized agent shall prepare suitable
forms for permit applications and permits, shall take applications and issue to
qualified applicants permits as required for all work contemplated by this chapter
and shall maintain suitable records of the permits issued.
D. Records and Reports.
D-1. To the City Council. The Plumbing Inspector shall keep in his office a daily
record of all the transactions of his office, including permits issued and shall make
such reports thereon to the City Council as it may require.
D-2. To the Department of Health and Social Services. The Plumbing Supervisor
shall make such reports to the Department of Health and Social Services as are
required under Ch. 145.04 (3) Wisconsin Statutes.
D-3. Record of Special Locations. The Plumbing Inspector shall keep a record of
all sewer and water connections and shall make maps showing the locations of the
same and the positions of all house drains, connections, junctions and other data
necessary for the efficient operation of his office.
E. Stop Work Order. The Plumbing Supervisor may order work stopped on the
construction, installation, alteration or repair of plumbing when such work is
being done in violation of this chapter. Work so stopped shall not be resumed
except with written permission of the Plumbing Inspector, provided if the stop
work order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written order within a
reasonable period of time.
City of Port Washington Chapter 17 - 3 6/7/06
17.04.000 PLUMBING PERMITS.
17.04.010 Required. No work contemplated by this chapter shall be started until a
permit therefore has been obtained from the Plumbing Inspector or his authorized agent,
provided no permit shall be required for minor repairs to faucets or the removal of
stoppages in soil and waste pipes.
17.04.020 Application. The application shall be in writing upon forms which the
Plumbing Inspector shall provide and shall include the name of the owner and the
description of the property on which the work is to be done, along with such pertinent
information as the Plumbing Inspector may require, and shall state that the property
owner and the applicant will be bound by and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
17.04.030 Issuance, Term, Suspension and Revocation. When the Plumbing Inspector
is satisfied that the work proposed by the applicant can be done in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, and after the appropriate fees have been paid to him, he shall
issue the permit. Such permit shall be good for the continuous performance of the work
named thereon. A permit shall automatically expire when work ceases for a period of 60
days without good and reasonable cause for same and shall automatically expire on
completion of the work for which it was issued, provided the Plumbing Inspector may,
upon notice, suspend or revoke such permit for violation of the provisions of this chapter.
17.04.040 Restrictions On Issuance.
A. No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person who is in violation of this
chapter until such violation has been corrected.
B. No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person against whom an order issued
by the Plumbing Inspector is pending, provided this restriction may be waived
by the Plumbing Inspector.
17.04.050 Appeals For Failure to Issue, Suspension and Revocation. Any person
directly interested who is aggrieved by the decision of the Plumbing Inspector to refuse to
issue a permit or to suspend or revoke such permit or to order work stopped under
Section 17.03.020A may obtain review of such determination under chapter 68,
Wisconsin Statutes.
City of Port Washington Chapter 17 - 4 6/7/06
17.04.060 Fees.
17.04.060A. The following fees shall be paid to the Plumbing Inspector before the
plumbing permit is issued:
Fixtures $ 7.00/each
Bldg. Sanitary Sewer 30.00
Bldg. Storm Sewer 30.00
Bldg. Drains-Sanitary 25.00
Bldg. Drains-Storm 25.00
Water Service
(Up to and including 2”) 30.00 + W.S. Permit
Water Service
(more than 2”) 40.00 + W.S. Permit
Water Service Permit – ¾”
(includes 2 valves) 55.00
Water Service Permit- 1”
(includes 2 valves) 63.00
Water Meter Permit – 1 ¼”
(includes 2 valves) 100.00
No Final Inspection Before Occupancy 25.00
Re-inspection 25.00
Minimum Fee 25.00
17.04.060B. Penalty for Failure to Obtain Permit. If plumbing work is begun before
the permit has been obtained, double the above fees shall be charged.
17.05.000 PLUMBERS TO BE LICENSED. All plumbing work shall be done only by
a plumber licensed by the State for such work, provided a property owner may make
repairs or installations in a single-family building owned and occupied by him as his
home if a permit therefore is issued and the work is done in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
17.06.000 REGISTRATION OF PLUMBERS.
17.06.010 To Be On File. All master plumbers engaged in the business of plumbing in
the City and all journeymen plumbers and apprentice plumbers working at the plumbing
trade in the City shall register with the Plumbing Inspector who shall keep such
registration on file in his office.
17.06.020 Information To Be Supplied. Such registration shall consist of the full name
and address, license number and current receipt number of each master or journeyman
licensee. For an apprentice, the year of apprenticeship and the shop to which he is
indentured shall be indicated.
City of Port Washington Chapter 17 - 5 6/7/06
17.06.030 Registration Requirements Limited. The purpose of this section is solely to
provide for the administration of State licensing requirements and this chapter. No fee
shall be charged for any plumber’s registration, nor shall any information other than that
specified in Section 17.06.020 be required.
17.10.000 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or
any regulation, rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Section 25.04 of this Municipal Code.
17.15.000 SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of
this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity
of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof.
City of Port Washington Chapter 17 - 6 6/7/06
CHAPTER 18
Subdivision Control
Table of Contents
18.01.000 PURPOSE
18.02.000 GENERAL
18.02.010 Platting of Subdivision Required
18.02.020 Platting of Other Divisions Required
18.02.025 Condominium Plats
18.02.030 Exceptions
18.03.000 DEFINITIONS
18.04.000 PROCEDURE
18.04.010 Subdivisions
18.04.020 Land Division Other Than Subdivisions
18.05.000 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
18.05.010 General
18.05.020 Streets
18.05.030 Intersections
18.05.040 Alleys
18.05.050 Easements
18.05.060 Blocks
18.05.070 Lots
18.06.000 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
18.06.010 Monuments
18.06.020 Required Installations
18.06.030 Financial Guarantee
18.06.040 Engineer’s Approval
18.06.060 Dedication of Facilities
18.06.070 Supervision and Inspection Fees
18.06.080 Underground Facilities
18.07.000 PLATS AND DATA
18.07.010 Preliminary Consultation Data
18.07.020 Preliminary Plat
18.07.030 Final Plat
18.08.000 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES
18.08.010 Consideration in Plat Layout
18.08.020 Reservation
18.03.030 Dedication
18.08.040 Alternate Methods in Lieu of Dedication
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 1 7/29/10
18.09.000 SUBDIVISIONS CREATED BY SUCCESSIVE DIVISIONS
18.09.010 Assessor’s Plat
18.09.020 Reasonable Compliance
18.10.000 EXISTING SUBSTANDARD LOTS
18.10.010 Conveyance Requested
18.10.020 Determination of Ownership
18.11.000 REGULATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF HIGHWAY OR
DRIVEWAY TO SERVE MORE THAN OWN PARCEL OF
LAND
18.11.010 Permit Required
18.11.020 Approval
18.12.000 VARIANCES
18.13.000 PENALTY
18.14.000 IMPACT FEES
18.14.010 Legislative Findings
18.14.020 Title, Authority
18.14.030 Intent and Purpose
18.14.040 Rules of Construction
18.14.050 Definitions
18.14.060 Imposition of the Impact Fees
18.14.070 Calculation of the Impact Fees
18.14.080 Fee Payment
18.14.090 Administration of Impact Fees
18.14.100 Use of Funds
18.14.110 Refunds
18.14.120 Exemptions
18.14.130 Penalty Provision
18.14.140 Appeal
18.14.150 Severability
18.15.000 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
18.15.010 Purpose, Intent, and Findings of Fact
18.15.020 Definitions
18.15.030 Storm Water Management Plan and Facilities Required
18.15.040 Applicability, Jurisdiction, Comity and Exemptions
18.15.050 Storm Water Management Concepts
18.15.060 Permitting Requirements, Procedures and Fees
18.15.070 Storm Water Management Plan Contents
18.15.080 Maintenance Agreement
18.15.090 Financial Guarantee
18.15.100 Fee Schedule
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 2 July 2010
18.15.110 Illicit Discharges and Unauthorized Connections
18.15.120 Inspection, Enforcement and Penalties
18.15.130 Appeals
18.16.000 APPLICATION REVIEW AND DEVELOPMENT FEES
18.16.010 Application Fees and Development Review Fees
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 3 July 2010
CHAPTER 18
Subdivision Control
18.01.000 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the City of Port Washington and these regulations are
designed to lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to further the orderly layout
and use of land; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to provide adequate
light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of
population; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks, playgrounds, and other public requirements; and to facilitate the further resubdivision
of large tracts into smaller parcels of land. These Regulations are made with
reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of the City with a view of
conserving the value of the buildings placed upon land, providing the best possible
environment for human habitation, and for encouraging the most appropriate use of land
throughout the City.
18.02.000 GENERAL.
18.02.010 Platting of Subdivision Required. Any division of land within the City of its
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction which results in a subdivision as defined herein
shall be surveyed and a plat thereof approved and recorded, pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter and Chapter 236, Wisconsin Statutes.
18.02.020 Platting of Other Divisions Required. Any division of land other than a
subdivision within the City or its extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction (pursuant to
18.02.010), of which a plat has not been approved and recorded, shall be surveyed and a
certified survey map of such division approved and recorded as required by Section
18.04.020.
18.02.025 Condominium Plats. A condominium plat submitted pursuant to §703.11 of
the Wisconsin Statutes shall be reviewed in the same manner as a subdivision plat as set
forth herein.
18.02.030 Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
1. Transfer of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order;
2. Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages, or easements;
3. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if
additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below
the minimum sizes required by this ordinance or other applicable laws or
ordinances.
18.03.000 DEFINITIONS: The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
1. “Subdivision” – The division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land by the owner
thereof or his agent for the purpose of sale or building development where:
The act of division creates 5 or more parcels or building sites of 1 ½ acres each or
less in area; or
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 4 July 2010
Five or more parcels or building sites of 1 ½ acres each or less in area created by
successive divisions within a period of 5 years.
2. “Plat” – As used in this chapter, refers to the map prepared, as required by either
Section 18.02.010 or Section 18.02.020, for the purpose of recording
“subdivisions” or “other divisions” of land as provided herein.
3. “Subdivider” – The owners of land which is being divided pursuant to Section
18.02.010 or Section 18.02.020.
4. “Extraterritorial Plan Approval Jurisdiction” – The unincorporated area
within 1½ miles of the corporate limits of the City.
5. “Street” – A way for vehicular traffic other than an alley.
6. “Major Streets” – Those which serve as the principal arteries of through traffic
movement.
7. “Collector Streets” – Those which carry traffic from minor streets to the system
of major streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a
residential development and streets for circulation within such a development.
8. “Minor Streets” – Those which are used primarily for access to the abutting
property, further defined as follows:
Local Access Streets-Those through streets used primarily for access to abutting
property.
Cul-de-sac Streets-Those streets, closed at one end, on a permanent rather than a
temporary basis.
Loop Streets-Those local access streets originating and terminating on the same
street.
Frontage Streets-Those streets which are parallel to and adjacent to major streets
and highways, and which provide access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic.
9. “Sidewalk” – A Portland cement walkway with a minimum width of 5 feet.
10. “Condominium” – As used in this Chapter is property subject to a condominium
declaration established under Chapter 703 of Wisconsin Statutes.
18.04.000 PROCEDURE.
18.04.010 Subdivisions.
A. Preliminary Plat.
1. Required – before submitting a final plat for approval the subdivider shall submit
a preliminary plat to the Plan Commission in order that general agreement may
be reached on layout and arrangement of streets and lots before a final plat is
prepared. The form and data required for plat submittal shall be designated
under section 18.07.000.
2. Preliminary Consultation – The subdivider shall, before submitting the plat for
official filing, meet with the Plan Commission for preliminary consultation in
order to insure that the plat is acceptable for processing.
3. Preliminary Plat (Repealed)
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 5 July 2010
4. Official Filing – Following the preliminary consultation, the plat, and fifteen (15)
copies thereof shall be officially filed with the City Clerk. The filing fee, and
any service fees required by any state agency pursuant to section 236.12(7),
Wisconsin Stats., shall accompany the filing. Upon receipt of all of the above,
the City Clerk shall forward the necessary copies to any agencies as required by
section 236.12, Wisconsin Statutes; retain one copy in the official file; and
forward two copies to the city engineer, along with any pertinent data applicable
thereto.
5. Official Approval – Within the time allowed by section 236.11, Wisconsin Stats.,
the Plan Commission shall take action to approve, approve conditionally, or
reject the preliminary plat and shall state in writing any conditions of approval or
reasons for rejection, unless the time is extended by agreement with the
subdivider.
Approval of the preliminary plat shall entitle the subdivider to final approval of
the layout shown by such plat if the final plat conforms substantially to such
layout and conditions of approval have been met.
B. Engineering Data.
B-1. Following approval of the preliminary plat and prior to submittal of a final
plat the subdivider shall furnish to the City Engineer the following engineering
data pertaining to utilities and improvements in the plat as is pertinent and as
requested by the Engineer.
1. Plan and profiles showing existing and proposed grades for all streets, alleys, and
public right-of-ways at a scale no smaller than 40 feet to the inch horizontally
and 4 feet to the inch vertically.
2. Plans and profiles of all storm sewers if they are being provided, including the
location of a minimum of one storm sewer lateral per lot extended from the main
to the lot line if the lot is to be serviced, culverts and surface water drainage
facilities, at a scale no smaller than 40 feet to the inch horizontally and 4 feet to
the inch vertically.
3. Plans and profiles of all sanitary sewers, including the location of a minimum of
one sanitary sewer lateral per lot line, extended from the sewer main to the lot
line, at a scale no smaller than 40 feet to the inch horizontally and 4 feet to the
inch vertically.
4. Plan and profiles of all water distribution mains, including stop box locations
and appurtenances, including the location of a minimum of one water lateral per
lot, extending from the water main to the lot line, all at a scale no smaller than 40
feet to the inch horizontally and 4 feet to the inch vertically.
5. A grading plan showing all lots within the proposed plat, street right-of-ways,
existing contours across all street right-of-ways and lots, existing and proposed
contours of all land to be dedicated for public use, proposed building elevations,
all lot corner elevations and lot corner and building corner elevations of abutting
properties, all at a scale no smaller than 40 feet to the inch horizontally.
The contour intervals for existing and proposed contours shall in no case be
larger than 2 feet.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 6 July 2010
6. A drainage plan showing the overland flow of surface waters as it will occur
after completion of the grading in accordance with the approved grading plan.
The City Engineer may allow the Grading Plan and Drainage Plan to be
combined on one plan, but the combining of the two plans shall only be allowed
upon express written consent of the City Engineer. Said drainage plan shall
include accepted procedures for minimizing and controlling erosion and
sedimentation during the construction phase of development. Should the City
Engineer determine, after reviewing the Preliminary Plat, that the soil, slope,
vegetation and drainage characteristics of the site are such as to require
substantial cutting, clearing, grading, filling or other earthmoving operations in
the development of the subdivision that may entail a severe erosion hazard, the
City Engineer shall require the developer to provide soil erosion and
sedimentation control plans and specifications prepared by a Registered
Professional Engineer, Architect or the U.S. Soil Conservation Service using as a
guide the handbook titled “Minimizing Erosion in Urbanizing Areas” as
developed by the Ozaukee County Soil and Water Conservation District.
7. Construction plans, with the exception of the Grading Plan and Drainage Plan,
shall e prepared on 24” x 36” reproducible (tracing) material. Construction plans
for water and sanitary sewer shall be on one sheet. A complete set of
reproducible tracings of all construction plans shall be furnished the City
Engineer upon his final approval of the plans. The Grading Plan and Drainage
Plan shall be prepared on reproducible (tracing) material, not to exceed 40” x
40” size. A reproducible tracing shall be furnished by the City Engineer upon
his final approval of the plans. Legends for plans shall be supplied by the City
Engineer, for use by the subdivider’s Engineer.
8. All underground storm sewer systems shall be designed to convey the runoff
generated from a ten (10) year frequency rainfall event. In addition there shall
be provisions within the design layout of the subdivision or area to be served by
this storm sewer for the conveyance of the runoff volume in excess of the ten
(10) year return frequency rainfall event so as to provide protection of major
structures, buildings and roadways from flooding and ponding in excess of 2-
feet.
All storm water detention facilities shall be designed to contain and
accommodate the runoff from a rainfall event having a return frequency of not
less than one hundred (100) years. The release rate from any storm water
detention facility shall be as determined under Section 18.06.020, D.
B-2 Approval by Engineer. All such construction plans and profiles, Grading
and Drainage Plans and pertinent data shall be approved by the City Engineer
before the final plat shall be deemed acceptable for filing.
C. Final Plat.
C-1 (a) Filing Fee. (Repealed)
C-1 When Filed. The final plat and such copies thereof as shall be required shall
be submitted to the City Clerk within 2 years of approval of the preliminary plat.
However, if approval of the preliminary plat must be obtained from another
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 7 July 2010
approving authority subsequent to approval by the Plan Commission, the final plat
shall be submitted within 2 years of such approval. The Plan Commission may
waive failure to comply with this 2 years requirement.
C-2 Engineer’s Check. In order to insure that the plat is acceptable for processing
it shall be submitted initially to the City Engineer for checking.
C-3 Forwarding. Upon official filing, the City Clerk shall forthwith forward the
plat to the Plan Commission and shall forward the necessary copies of the plat to
any agencies as required by Section 236.12, Wisconsin Statutes.
C-4 Referral to Council. The Plan Commission shall refer the final plat with its
recommendation to the Common Council within 30 days of its submission unless
the time is extended by the Council.
C-5 Council Approval. The Council shall approve or reject the final plat within
60 days of its submissions unless the time extended by agreement with the
subdivider. Reasons for rejection shall be stated in the minutes of the Council
meeting and a copy thereof or a written statement of such reasons shall be
supplied the subdivider.
C-6 Optional True Copy. If the original of the final plat has been filed with
another approving authority, the subdivider may file a true copy of such plat in
lieu of the original.
However, before approval by the Common Council will be inscribed on the
original of the final plat, the surveyor or the subdivider shall certify the respects in
which the original of the final plat differs from the true copy, and all
modifications must first be approved.
D. Optional Processing Procedure. Where the developer chooses to follow the
optional procedure in processing the plat as provided by Section 236.12,
Wisconsin Statutes, the City Clerk and Plan Commission shall modify their
procedure and the wording of the necessary certificate and approval accordingly.
18.04.020 Land Divisions Other Than Subdivisions.
A. Preliminary Plat. Before submitting a final plat for approval the
subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat according to the procedure
designated for a subdivision under 18.04.010A except that no state agency
actions are required.
B. Final Plat. The final plat in the form of a certified survey map shall be
submitted according to the procedure designated for a subdivision, under
18.04.010 B and C, except that no state agency actions are required and if
the platting does not involve the creation of additional new streets only the
approval of the Plan Commission shall be required. Six copies of the final
plat shall be submitted.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 8 July 2010
C. Requirements.
C-1 Reasonable Compliance. To the extent reasonably practicable the plat
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter hereinafter stated relating to
general requirements and design standards and required improvements.
C-2 Registered Surveyor. The survey shall be performed and the map
prepared by a registered surveyor. Such map shall describe the entire
ownership involved in the process of division, provided however that where
the division results in a residual parcel in excess of 10 acres, not intended for
immediate sale or other conveyance, the Plan Commission may waive the
requirement for inclusion of the residual parcel in which case a supplementary
map of reasonable accuracy shall be attached showing the relationship to the
original ownership of the parcel or parcels being severed.
C-3 Monuments. All corners shall be monumented in accordance with
Section 236.15 (1) (c) and (d), Wisconsin Statutes.
C-4 Engineering Standards. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance
with Section 236.20 (2) (a), (b), (c), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (1), Wisconsin
Statutes, on durable white paper 8 ½ inches wide by 14 inches long. All lines
shall be made with non-fading black ink to a scale of 200 feet to an inch. The
Registered Land Surveyor shall furnish the City Engineer an 8 ½ x 14”
reproducible tracing of the Certified Survey Map after certified for approval
by the City Plan Commission and/or Common Council.
C-5 Percolation Tests. If any lots in the plat are not to be served by municipal
sanitary sewer, percolation tests shall be submitted according to the procedure
designated under the rules of the State Board of Health applicable to
subdivision.
C-6 Filing Fees. (Repealed)
D. Certificates and Affidavits.
D-1 Owners and Surveyors. The map shall include the certificate of
ownership and the affidavit of the surveyor who surveyed and mapped the
parcel, typed, lettered, or reproduced legibly with non-fading black ink, giving
a clear and concise description of the land surveyed by bearings and distances,
commencing with some corner marked and established in the United States
Public Land Survey or some corner providing reference to a corner marked
and established in the United States Public Land Survey. Such affidavit shall
include the statement of the surveyor to the effect that he has fully complied
with the requirements of this section.
D-2 Certificate of Approval. The certificate of approval of the Plan
Commission or Common Council as required, shall be typed, lettered, or
reproduced legibly with non-fading black ink on the face of the map.
E. Recording. Following approval of the final plat the certified survey map
shall be filed by the subdivider for recording with the Register of Deeds.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 9 July 2010
18.05.000 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
18.05.010 General. The proposed subdivision shall conform to:
1. The provisions of Chapter 236, Wisconsin Statutes;
2. All applicable ordinances of the City;
3. The Master Plan;
4. The official map;
5. The rules of the State Board of Health relating to lot size and lot elevation if the
subdivision is not served by a public sewer and provision for such service has not
been made.
6. The rules of the State Highway Committee relating to safety of access and the
preservation of the public interest and investment in streets and highways if the
subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts on a state trunk highway or
connecting street.
18.05.020 Streets.
A. General Considerations.
A-1 Design Criteria. The streets shall be designed and located in relation to
existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions and natural terrain
features such as streams and existing tree growth, to public convenience and
safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be
served by such streets. Sidewalks shall be provided on all streets as described
in Sections 18.05.020 C, D, E, and L unless in the opinion of the Board of
Public Works additional sidewalk may be required.
In any industrial district on any street where it is industrial zoned on both
sides where sidewalks are required to be installed on each side of a street, the
Common Council may in its discretion, allow sidewalk to be installed on only
one side, or neither side of, any such street, under such conditions and
pursuant to a design as may be approved by the City Council.
A-2 Construction standards. Construction of all streets shall conform to the
current standards as established by the City Engineer and shall be subject to
approval of the City Engineer before acceptance.
B. Conform to Official Map. The arrangement, width, grade and location of
all streets shall conform to the official map.
C. Arrangement.
C-1 Major Streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of major streets and highways and shall have sidewalks
installed on each side of the street.
C-2 Collector Streets shall be properly related to the mass transit system,
to special traffic generating from facilities such as schools, churches, and
shopping centers, to population densities, and to major streets into which
they feed and shall have sidewalks on each side of the street.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 10 July 2010
C-3 Minor streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to
topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient
drainage and sewer systems, and to require the minimum amount of street
necessary to provide convenient, safe access to property and shall have
sidewalks installed on both sides unless in the opinion of the Board of
Public Works sidewalks are only needed on one side.
D. Railroads and Limited Access Highways. Where a subdivision borders or
contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way,
the Plan Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on
each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate
use of the intervening land as for park purposes in residential districts or
for commercial or industrial purposes in other districts and a sidewalk
shall be included on the developed side of these streets.
E. Controlled Access. Where a subdivider borders on or contains an existing
or proposed major street, the Plan Commission may require that frontage
streets be provided, that the backs of lots abut the major streets and be
provided with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along
the rear property line, that deep lots with rear service alleys be provided or
that provisions be made for the adequate protection of residential
properties and the separation of through and local traffic and a continuous
sidewalk system shall be provided either along said frontage streets or
through the proposed development if approved by the Board of Public
Works.
F. Width. The right-of-way of all streets shall be of the width specified on
the official map or master plan, or, if no width is specified there, they shall
be not less than the width specified below:
Right of Way
1. Major Streets 100 feet
2. Collector Streets 80 feet
3. Local Access Streets 60 feet
4. Cul-de-sac or Loop Streets 50 feet
5. Frontage Streets 30 feet
* Note: Cul-de-sac Streets refer to permanent rather than temporary culde-
sacs, and Loop Streets refer to local access streets originating and
ending on the same street.
G. Grades. The grade of major and collector streets shall not exceed 6%, and
the grade of all other streets shall not exceed 10%, unless necessitated by
exceptional topography and approved by the Plan Commission. The
minimum grade of all streets shall be no less than ½ % and such minimum
shall not be permitted for sustained distances.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 11 July 2010
H. Horizontal Curves. A minimum sight distance with clear visibility,
measured along the center line, shall be provided of at least 300 feet on
major streets, 200feet for collector streets, and 100 feet on minor streets.
I. Vertical Curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected by
vertical curves of minimum length equivalent to 15 times the algebraic
difference in the rate of grade for major streets and collector streets and ½
of this minimum length for all other streets.
J. Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on major and collector streets.
K. Street names. New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing
streets, but streets that are continuations of others already in existence and
named shall bear the name of the existing streets.
L. Cul-de-sac or Dead End Streets. Streets designed to have one and
permanently closed shall not normally exceed 500 feet in length and shall
terminate with a turnaround of not less than 120 feet in diameter or rightof-
way and a roadway of not less than 100 feet in diameter. Sidewalks
shall be provided on both sides of a cul-de-sac or dead end street unless
eliminated by the Board of Public Works. The Board of Public Works
may also require a pedestrian corridor sidewalk be installed from the end
of the cul-de-sac or dead end street when it is considered essential to the
City’s continuous sidewalk system.
M. Reserve Strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the City under
conditions approved by the Plan Commission.
N. Half-Streets. Where a half-street is adjacent to the subdivision, the other
half of the street shall be dedicated by the subdivider.
18.05.030 Intersections.
A. Right Angle. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and not
more than two streets shall intersect at one point unless approved by the Plan
Commission.
B. Rounded. Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of
15 feet or of a greater radius where the Plan Commission considers it necessary.
C. Jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than125 feet shall be avoided.
Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous.
18.05.040 Alleys.
A. Commercial and Industrial. Alleys shall be provided in all commercial and
industrial districts, except that the Plan Commission may waive this requirement
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 12 July 2010
B. Residential. Alleys shall not be approved in residential areas unless necessary
because of topography or other exceptional circumstances.
C. Width. The width of alleys shall be not less than 24 feet.
D. Dead End. Dead end alleys are prohibited except under very unusual
circumstances, and crooked and “T” alleys shall be discouraged. Where dead
end alleys are unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turn-around
facilities at the dead end.
18.05.050 Easements.
A. Utilities. Easements across lots or centered on rear of side lot line shall be
provided for utilities, and shown on the final plat, where required by the Plan
Commission. The easements shall be provided for telephone, electric power,
natural gas, storm or sanitary sewer, water main or other utility and in no case
shall be less than ten (10) feet in width.
B. Drainage. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water course, and
such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.
Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open
channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential
volume of flow.
18.05.060 Blocks.
A. Shape and Size. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated.
B. Crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks not less than 15 feet wide may be required
by the Plan Commission where deemed desirable to provide convenient
pedestrian circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation, and other community facilities.
18.05.070 Lots.
A. In general. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
B. Lot dimension:
1. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 13 July 2010
2. Residential lots to be served by private sewerage disposal facilities shall
comply with the rules of the State Board of Health.
3. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service
and parking facilities required by the type of use and development
contemplated.
4. Residential lots abutting on major streets and highways shall be platted
with sufficient depth to permit adequate separation between the buildings
and such traffic ways.
5. Lots shall be designed with a suitable proportion between width and depth.
Neither long narrow, nor wide shallow lots are normally desirable.
Normal depth should not exceed 2 ½ times the width, nor be less than 100
feet.
C. Corner Lots. Corner lots should be designed to permit full setback on both
streets as required by the applicable zoning district requirements.
D. Access to Public Streets. Every lot shall front or abut on a public street. Lots
with an access only to private drives or streets shall be permitted only with Plan
Commission approval.
E. Lots at Right Angles. Lots at angles to each other should be avoided wherever
possible, especially in residential areas.
F. Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines.
G. Large Lots. Where lots are created of a size larger than normal for the area, the
Plan Commission may require that the plat be so designed as to allow for the
possible future subdivision of such lots into normal sizes compatible with the
area.
H. Municipal Boundaries. Lots shall follow municipal boundary lines whenever
practicable, rather than cross them.
I. Double Frontage. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided
except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from
traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages topography and
orientation.
18.06.000 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
18.06.010 Monuments. The subdivisions shall be monumented as required by Section
236.15, Wisconsin Statutes, which is hereby adopted by reference.
18.06.020 Required Installation. Before the final plat of a subdivision located within
the corporate limits will be approved, the subdivider shall provide, cause to be provided,
and where required by the Common Council, dedicate the following facilities and
improvements; facilities and improvements must be installed within the time required by
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 14 July 2010
the Common Council, but in no event to exceed two (2) years. Either the city or the
subdivider may require that a Subdividers Contract be entered into setting forth details
about the installation of improvements, such as but not limited to responsibility on
guaranty or warranty of the work, liability during construction, contributions and
reimbursements, sureties, etc.
A. Water and Sewer. Water, sanitary sewer mains and manholes, lift stations
and laterals to the lot lines in those cases where the subdivision has been designed
to be served by such utility systems, where connection can be reasonably
provided to existing systems or to systems to be constructed in the reasonably
near future, and where the installation of such facilities is deemed necessary by
the Plan Commission or the Board of Public Works. The subdivider shall pay the
full cost or equivalent for mains in diameter only up to inches for water and 12
inches for sewers, (and the cost for off-site extension of such utilities up to the
subdivider’s lands only in proportion to the share of the design capacity for such
utilities attributable to the subdivider’s lands).
B. Streets. All new streets and additional right-of-way along existing streets shall
be in conformance with the established street map of the City, and the standards
set forth in Section 18.05.020 of this Chapter. Except for cul-de-sacs and street
boulevards for center strip drainage, no dedication shall be required in excess of
100 feet of width. All new streets shall be graded and surfaced, including curb
and gutter, except that where principal thoroughfares lie entirely or partially
within the plat, the subdivider shall not be required to bear the cost of
improvements in excess of those required for normal 36 foot wide paving. All
newly constructed residential streets shall be built as described by the most recent
edition of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction, and shall be constructed using either of the
following methods and materials, unless, based upon soils, subsurface conditions,
proposed usage or other engineering considerations specific to the location of the
proposed street, the City Engineer disapproves of such methods or materials:
1. A minimum of twelve (12) inches of Crushed Aggregate Base Course,
gradation No. 2, compacted to 95% of modified proctor. The finished
surface shall be two (2) lifts of hot mix asphalt consisting of a 3 ¾ inch
binder course of 19 mm aggregate, and a 1 ¾ inch surface course of
12.5 mm aggregate, superpave type E-3, PG 58-28; or
2. A minimum of four (4) inches of crushed stone, gradation no. 2,
compacted to 95% of modified proctor. Streets shall be constructed
with a minimum of seven (7) inch Portland cement concrete (Pcc)
pavement, non-reinforced, with integral curb and gutter. Only concrete
mix designs approved by the City Engineer may be used. Concrete
strength must be a minimum of 3,500 pounds per square inch at 28 days.
C. Storm Water Detention Facilities. Storm water detention facilities designed
to contain runoff from acreage only within the proposed subdivision shall be paid
for entirely by the subdivider. Storm water detention facilities which would
include service for acreage outside the proposed subdivision shall be constructed
by the subdivider with the subdivision required to pay for only those
proportionate costs by area which service that subdivision. For example, if the
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 15 July 2010
entire drainage area is 100 acres and the proposed subdivision is only 50 acres,
the subdivider would pay for 50% of the total cost associated with the detention
facility.
D. Surface Drainage. Where the natural terrain and drainageways are so
arranged to be conductive to the construction of open drainage channels, storm
detention basins, swales or ditches, the Subdivider shall include facilities of this
type in the Drainage Plan and shall cause to have the same installed as approved
by the City Engineer. This work shall be included in the grading contract and
shall not be considered a portion of storm water main construction. Where the
surface drainage facilities to be constructed will serve a substantial area tributary
to the subdivision, the subdivider may petition the City Engineer to prepare a
division of costs showing what portion of the oversizing of facilities results from
serving the area upstream of the subdivision. The subdivider shall pay the full
costs for such facilities up to the ratio of the design capacity for storm waters
generated within the plat compared to the total design capacity as determined by
the City Engineer.
Surface water runoff from a development which are regulated under this
ordinance shall not exceed the runoff peak rate and volume that existed under predevelopment
conditions under a rainfall event having a return frequency of ten
(10) years. The design criteria for sizing of any storm water detention facility is
provided in Section 18.094.010B, B-1, number 8.
E. Erosion and Sedimentation Control. The subdivider shall cause all grading,
excavations, open cuts, side slopes, and other land surface disturbances to be so
mulched, seeded, sodded or otherwise protected that erosion, siltation,
sedimentation, and washing are prevented in accordance with plans and
specifications within such time as required by the Plan Commission and approved
by the City Engineer.
Topsoil shall be re-established throughout the graded area, immediately after final
grade has been established. Temporary vegetation and mulching shall be used to
protect all areas subject to excessive wind or water erosion during the
development of the subdivision. Permanent vegetation shall be installed as soon
as practical.
The Subdivider shall make every effort to protect and retain all existing trees,
shrubbery, vines and grasses not actually lying in public roadways, drainageways,
building foundation sites, private driveways, paths and trails. Such trees are to be
protected and preserved during construction in accordance with sound
conservation practices recommended by the U.S. Department of Agricultural
Information Bulletin No. 285, “Protecting Trees Against Damage From
Construction Work”, U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964. Such trees are to
be preserved by well islands or retaining walls whenever abutting grades are
altered.
In areas where siltation and sedimentation is anticipated, sediment basins shall be
installed and maintained to trap, remove and prevent sediment from being washed
outside the area being developed. In addition, the Plan Commission may require
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 16 July 2010
that permanent vegetation such as crownvetch be planted to stabilize any slopes
and embankments that will not be subject to regular mowing and/or other
maintenance because of excessive grade.
F. Parkway Lawn. Wherever sidewalk is required by this ordinance or by the
Board of Public Works, or where sidewalk is installed even if not required, any
area lying between such sidewalk and the curb of a street shall be graded with
four inches minimum of topsoil and shall be seeded or sodded, unless otherwise
provided by the Board of Public Works.
G. Street Trees. The City shall provide and plant street trees on both sides of all
roadways, at subdivider’s expense. Said trees shall have a trunk diameter of not
less than one and one-half (1 ½”) at the point one foot above the root system. The
species of trees to be planted shall be approved by the Board of Public Works and
City Engineer, and all trees failing to survive for a period of two years shall be
replaced by the City, at subdivider’s expense.
H. Street Lights. The City shall provide and install, at subdivider’s expense, all
streetlights in the subdivision as approved by the Board of Public Works and City
Engineer.
J. The City shall provide and install, at subdivider’s expense, all road signs in the
subdivision as approved or required by the Board of Public Works or the
Common Council, as the case may be. Road signs shall be defined to include, but
not be limited to, stop signs; yield signs; no parking signs; speed limit signs;
school crossing signs; street name signs; and any other signs, whether warning,
cautionary, advisory, identifying, or the like.
18.06.030 Financial Guarantees. In the event the aforesaid facilities and improvements
have not been fully installed at the time the plat is submitted for final approval, the
subdivider shall file with the City Treasurer, or his/her deputy or other designated agent,
a surety bond executed by the subdivider as principal and a responsible bonding company
duly licensed and authorized to do business in the State of Wisconsin as surety, payable
to the City of Port Washington, Wisconsin, and conditioned upon the faithful
performance and payment of any and all work to be performed by the subdivider pursuant
to this chapter; or other satisfactory financial guarantee for this purpose. Such bond or
other financial guarantee shall be approved by the City Attorney and shall be of an
amount determined by the City Engineer to amply cover the cost of completing said
facilities and improvements.
18.06.040 Engineer’s Approval. There shall be filed with the Plan Commission at the
same time as the final plat is filed, cross-sections and profiles of streets, and all other
construction drawings related to the improvements in the subdivision. The Director of
Public Works shall review the same and make recommendations thereon to the Plan
Commission prior to approval of the final plat. All construction of improvements
required of the subdivider and contemplated by this ordinance or other regulation shall be
subject to supervision and approval of the Director of Public Works. The actual cost
thereof for each subdivision shall be estimated by the Director of Public Works and be
considered in the financial guarantee specified in Section 18.06.030, above. When all
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 17 July 2010
improvements have been approved by the Director of Public Works, the subdivider shall
be entitled to a return of any amount not expended for supervision purposes. In the event
such estimated guarantee does not equal the actual cost, the subdivider shall pay such
additional amount within 30 days of billing.
18.06.060 Dedication of Facilities. All facilities and improvements installed prior to the
final approval of the plat shall be considered along with streets and other public areas
upon the approval of the plat. Facilities and improvements completed under bond or
other financial guarantee after the approval of the plat shall be considered dedicated upon
their approval and acceptance and release of the bond or other guarantee.
18.06.070 Supervision and Inspection Fees: All fees and costs connected with
supervision and inspection of proposed improvements shall be paid by the Subdivider to
the City as described in Section 18.06.040.
18.06.080 Underground Facilities. Facilities for distribution of electric, telephone, and
gas utility service located within a subdivision, shall be installed underground, except
where the Common Council, upon recommendations of the Plan Commission, finds that
adverse soil conditions or problems of utility distribution make such installation
prohibitively expensive or similar equipment may be installed upon the ground surface if
the location and utility-approved landscape screening plan therefore have been approved
by the Plan Commission.
18.07.000 PLATS AND DATA.
18.07.010 Preliminary Consultation Data. The following information shall be
provided at the time of the preliminary consultations:
1. General. Information including data on existing covenants, land
characteristics and available community facilities and utilities, and
information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of
residential lots, typical lot width and depth, business areas, playgrounds,
park areas, and other public areas, tree planting, proposed protective
covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements.
2. Location Map. A location map showing the relationship of the proposed
subdivision to existing community facilities which serve or would be
influenced by it, and including the development name and location, main
traffic arteries, churches, title, scale, north arrow and date.
3. Proposed Layout. A sketch plan showing a simple sketch form of the
proposed layout of street, lots, and other features in relation to existing
conditions. The sketch plan may be a free hand pencil sketch made
directly on a print of the topography survey.
18.07.20 Preliminary Plat.
A. The preliminary plat shall be drawn with waterproof non-fading black ink or
legibly drawn with pencil on tracing cloth, or tracing paper of good quality at
scale of 200 feet to an inch and shall show accurately on its face:
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 18 July 2010
1. The date, scale and northpoint.
2. The proposed subdivision name, which shall not duplicate the name of any
plat previously recorded in Ozaukee County.
3. The name and address of the owner, the subdivider, and the engineer,
planner or surveyor preparing the plat.
4. Location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter section, township,
range and county.
5. A small scale drawing of the section or government subdivision of the
section in which the subdivision lies with the location of the subdivision
indicated thereon.
6. The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision.
7. Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of adjoining
parcels of unsubdivided land.
8. Zoning on and adjacent to the subdivision.
9. Location, widths and names of all existing and platted streets, alleys, or
other public ways and easements, railroad and utility right-of-ways, parks,
cemeteries, water courses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings, bridges,
and other pertinent data as determined by the Plan Commission.
10. The water elevation of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey
and the approximate high and low water elevation of such lakes or
streams.
11. If the subdivision borders a lake or stream, the distances and bearing on a
meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary high
water mark of the lake or stream.
12. Layout, width and approximate grades of all new streets and right-ofways,
such as alleys, highways, easements for sewers, water mains, and
other public utilities.
13. Direction and distance to nearest water and sewer mains.
14. Approximate dimensions and areas of lots.
15. Proposed building lines.
16. Approximate radii of all curves and lengths of tangents.
17. Approximate location and area of property proposed to be dedicated for
public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property
owners in the subdivision with the conditions, if any, of such dedication or
reservation.
18. Contours at 2-foot vertical intervals or at more frequent intervals is
required by the Plan Commission for land of unusual terrain
characteristics. All pertinent elevations should be shown and shall be
based on City of Port Washington datum.
The area for which such data is to be shown shall extend beyond the
boundaries of the actual property being platted a distance which will
adequately relate the plat to its surroundings.
18.07.030 Final Plat.
A. Compliance with Section 236.20. A final plat of subdivided land shall comply
with requirements of Sec. 236.20, Wisconsin Statutes, which is hereby adopted
by reference.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 19 July 2010
B. Legibility of Affidavits. The affidavits and certificates required by Chapter 236,
Wisconsin Statutes, shall be lettered or printed legibly with black durable ink or
typed legibly with black ribbon on the final plat.
C. Duplicate tracing. A duplicate tracing on cloth of the final plat shall be filed
with the City Engineer, together with a reduced copy at 1-inch equals 200 feet.
18.08.000 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES. The following regulations are
intended to provide for the preservation and proper location of school, park, recreation,
and other public use areas to meet the needs of the expanding community, because of the
development of vacant lands; and to insure that such provision is in appropriate
proportion to the additional need created by the development, and coordinated with the
environmental pattern and goals established by the community.
18.08.010 Consideration In Plat Layout.
A. In the design and layout of plats, consideration shall be given to the provision of
the foregoing open space and public use areas, consistent with the purpose
stated, and in compatibility with the specific terrain and related use
characteristics of the site.
B. Upon preliminary approval by the Plan Commission of the general layout plan
and prior to approval of a final plat, determination shall be made as to the
specific method whereby such areas shall be preserved.
18.08.020 Reservation. The subdivider may be required to reserve such areas for a
period not to exceed 2 years, after which time, if agreement has not been reached for the
acquisition of the area by the City, the reservation shall be released.
18.08.030 Dedication.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section and sec.
18.08040:
1. Community Park. A community park is a park typically greater than 25
acres and having a service radius of 1 to 2 miles. Such parks serve a large
portion of the community, and may include, but are not limited to: areas
of intense active recreation (e.g., pools and sport complexes): natural
areas for walking, viewing, sitting and picnicking; areas of diverse
environmental quality; or any combination of the foregoing attributes.
2. Neighborhood Park. A neighborhood park is a park typically of 5 to 25
acres and having a service radius of ¼ to ½ mile. Such parks may
include, but are not limited to, areas for intense recreational activities
(e.g., field games, court games, crafts, play equipment, ice-skating and
picnicking). Busy streets, creeks and railroad tracks are barriers to these
parks.
3. Mini Park. A mini park is a park typically of 1 to 5 acres and having a
service radius of ¼ mile. Such parks may include, but are not limited to,
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 20 July 2010
B. Dedication Required. Within the corporate limits of the City the subdivider shall
be required to dedicate sufficient land to provide park, recreation, and general
open space to meet the anticipated neighborhood needs of residential and
development areas, as such park development is determined necessary or
desirable by the Port Washington Comprehensive Park and Open Space plan. In
addition to land, the subdivider shall be responsible for the cost of street
improvements (sanitary sewer; storm sewer; water main; curb and gutter;
sidewalk; rough grading; road base and paving; one each sanitary, storm and
water laterals; and street trees at 35’ intervals) abutting the proposed dedication
and the pro-rata share for the purchase and installation of park equipment
calculated as of 2001 at $12,500 per acre of park land (or such other amount as
may be applicable in the future due to changes in the cost of such park
equipment). The amount of required dedication shall be in direct proportion to
the need generated by the additional new dwelling unit potential (based upon the
specific plat layout) as follows:
1. Based upon minimal area standards per dwelling unit, dedication of 1,000
square feet of land for park, recreation and general open space shall be
required for each additional new dwelling unit potential.
2. For each dwelling unit in any multiple family dwelling, apartment or
townhouse, the amount of land to be provided shall be determined on the
basis of 500 square feet of land for park, recreation and general open
space.
18.08.040 Alternate Methods In Lieu Of Dedication.
A. To inure the most uniform application of this requirement, where the dedication
of lands within a specific plat is not feasible or compatible with the Port
Washington Comprehensive Park and Open Space Plan, or by mutual agreement
between the subdivider and the City, the subdivider may, in lieu of such
dedication, satisfy the requirement for provisions of such park, recreation and
general open space by payment of an amount in dollars equal to the value of an
improved park. For purposes of determining the amount due hereunder, an
improved park shall include: then current land value as determined by the City
Assessor, plus the cost of street improvements (sanitary sewer; storm sewer;
water main; curb and gutter; sidewalk; rough grading; road base and paving; one
each sanitary, storm and water laterals; and street trees at 35’ intervals) with unit
costs for the development calculated by the City Engineer for a typical park
frontage which shall be equal to 8.38’ (based on a 25 lot subdivision with
frontage equal to 57% of the depth) per 1,000 square feet of required park land
dedication, plus the pro-rata share for the purchase and installation of park
equipment calculated as of 2001 at $12,500 per acre of park land (or such other
amount as may be applicable in the future due to changes in the cost of such
park equipment).
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 21 July 2010
B. Disposition of Funds.
1. Monies received under the provisions of paragraph A. of this section shall
be allocated to and used from the following separate accounts as follows:
50% into the Community Park development account; 35% into the
Neighborhood Park development account; and 15% into the Mini Park
development account. If a Mini Park is not developed within three (3)
years of receipt of such monies, the monies shall revert to the
Neighborhood park development account. If a Neighborhood Park is not
developed within five (5) years of receipt of such monies, the monies shall
revert to the Community Park development account.
2. Such monies shall be used exclusively for site acquisition or development
of lands and related improvements that will serve the City’s park,
recreation and general open space needs resulting from such new
residential development.
3. Payments required under the provisions hereof shall be made at the time
the plat is submitted for final approval.
C. Planned Developments. Where lands have been reserved in private ownership
under the “Planned Development” provisions of the zoning ordinance to meet
the park, recreation and general open space needs of the development, such
reservation may be considered to be in lieu of the equivalent dedication
requirement for such purposes, provided, however, that suitable “open space
easements” have been conveyed to the City to insure the permanent retention of
such lands for such purposes. Notwithstanding the foregoing, school land
dedication shall be required in any case.
18.09.000 SUBDIVISION CREATED BY SUCCESSIVE DIVISIONS.
18.09.010 Assessor’s Plat. Where it is not practical to be filed in accordance with this
chapter, the Common Council may in lieu of thereof order an assessor’s plat to be made
under Section 70.27 of the Wisconsin Statutes and may assess the cost thereof as
provided in such section, or to the subdivider.
18.09.020 Reasonable Compliance. Regardless of the type of plat filed, any such
subdivision shall comply with all provisions of this chapter to the extent that they may be
reasonably applied.
18.10.000 EXISTING SUBSTANDARD LOTS.
18.10.010 Conveyance Restricted. In the case of a lot of record at the time of the
passage of this chapter which does not conform to the zoning regulations to the City of
Port Washington, and which adjoins along a side lot line property held in the same
ownership, no such lot shall be conveyed to another owner nor shall a building permit be
issued for a structure on such a lot except in conformity with the following:
1. Petition for Determination. The owner of such substandard lot may at any time
prior to the proposed conveyance of such lot or request for building permit,
petition the City for determination as to the status of such lot.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 22 July 2010
2. Referral to Plan Commission. Such petition shall be referred to the Plan
Commission for study to determine the practical possibility of a redivision of
such ownership to provide lots, which will be in conformity to the zoning
regulations of the City.
3. Time Limit. The Plan Commission shall complete its study and determination
within 40 days of the date the petition was received.
4. Criteria. The Plan Commission in making its determination shall give
consideration, among others, to the following factors:
Compatibility. The size, quality and character of existing lots and building
development in the immediate area with a view to maintaining compatibility and
protecting existing values.
Sewerage Disposal. Where public sewer is not available, the lot size necessary to
insure sewerage disposal.
Practicability. The economic and engineering practicability of any possible
redivision.
Hardship. The degree of practical hardship which may be imposed upon the
owner.
5. Method of Redivision. Such redivision may be accomplished as is most
appropriate by:
(a) Vacation and replatting of all or a part of a recorded plat.
(b) Combining of lots or parts of lots.
(c) Redefining of lot lines by a plat or “other divisions” as provided by
Section 18.04 (2) of this chapter.
18.10.020 Determination of Ownership. For the purpose of this section, lots and
property shall be considered in the same ownership when owned by: the same individual
or corporations; and individual and another in joint tenancy, or as tenants in common, and
either of said joint or common tenant or tenants owns other lots individually or as joint
tenant or tenant in common with another; an individual and other lots are owned by his
spouse, parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren or the spouse of any child or
grandchild, or a brother or sister of spouse or a brother or sister of such person; and when
any of said lots are owned by a corporation in which said individual is an officer or
director of controlling stockholder.
18.11.000 REGULATION FOR CONSTRUCTION OF HIGHWAY OR DRIVEWAY TO
SERVE MORE THAN ONE PARCEL OF LAND.
18.11.010 Permit Required. No person, firm or corporation shall construct or permit to
be constructed within the City any highway or driveway arranged or planned to serve
more than one parcel of land for residential purposes, unless a license or permit shall first
be obtained from the City Clerk.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 23 July 2010
18.11.020 Approval. No such license or permit shall be issued until the plans and
specifications for such highway or driveway shall be approved by the City Engineer as to
specifications, and by the Commission Council after reference of such matter to the City
Plan Commission as to location, width, and general plan.
18.12.000 VARIANCES. When, in the judgment of the Plan Commission or the
Common Council, it would be inappropriate to apply literally a provision of this chapter
because the subdivision is located outside the corporate limits or because extraordinary
hardship would result, the Common Council upon considering the recommendation of the
Plan Commission may waive or vary such provisions so that substantial justice may be
done and the public interest secured, provided that in no event shall the requirement of
filing and recording the plat or survey be waived.
18.13.000 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any
files and regulations adopted hereunder shall be subject to a penalty provided in Section
25.04.
18.14.000 IMPACT FEES.
18.14.010 Legislative Findings: The City of Port Washington Common Council finds,
determines and declares that:
A. The City of Port Washington has expanded or must expand certain facilities,
requiring major capital improvements in order to maintain current levels of
service if new development is to be accommodated without decreasing current
levels of service. This must be done in order to promote and protect the public
health, safety and welfare;
B. The imposition of impact fees is one of the preferred methods of ensuring that
development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital facilities necessary
to accommodate such development. This must be done in order to promote and
protect the public health, safety and welfare;
C. Each of the types of land development described in this ordinance, will create a
need for the construction, or expansion of capital facilities.
D. The fees established by Section 18.04.070 are derived from, are based upon, and
do not exceed the costs of providing additional public facilities necessitated by
the new land developments for which the fees are levied.
E. The report entitled “City of Port Washington Public Facilities Needs” dated
March 1, 1995, and the revised version thereof dated March 31, 2000 (including
the “ENGINEER’S REPORT,” “IMPACT FEE CALCULATIONS,” “DESIGN
STUDY REPORT FOR EXPANSION OF THE NIEDERKORN LIBRARY,”
and all Appendices and attachments thereto), set forth reasonable methodologies
and analyses for the assessment and determination of the impact of new
development on the need and costs for additional facilities in the City of Port
Washington.
18.14.020 Title, Authority.
A. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Port Washington
Impact Fee Ordinance”.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 24 July 2010
B. The City of Port Washington Common Council has the authority to adopt this
ordinance pursuant to Chapter 66 of the Wisconsin State Statutes.
18.14.030 Intent and Purpose.
A. This ordinance is intended to assist in the implementation of the City of Port
Washington Comprehensive Plan.
B. The purpose of this ordinance is to assure that new land development bears a
proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide
needed improvements or expansion of existing public facilities in the City of
Port Washington required by such new land development.
18.14.040 Rules of Construction.
A. The provisions of this ordinance shall be liberally construed so as to effectively
carry out its purpose in the interest of public health, safety and welfare.
B. For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this ordinance, unless
otherwise stated in this ordinance, the following rules of construction shall apply
to the test of this ordinance:
1. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the test of
this ordinance and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative
table, the text shall control.
2. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word
“may” is permissive.
3. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used
in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular,
unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
4. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation
involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunction “and”, “or”, or “either…or”, the
conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
(a) “And” indicates that all the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
(b) “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.
(c) “Either…or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
5. The word “includes” shall not limit a term to the specific example but is
intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of
like kind or character.
6. “Administrator” means the City Administrator or the municipal officials
he/she may designate to carry out the administration of this ordinance.
Any municipal official so designated shall be approved by the appropriate
municipality before exercising duties hereunder.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 25 July 2010
18.14.050 Definitions.
A. “Capital costs” means the capital costs to construct, expand or improve public
facilities, including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering and design
costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, except that not more than
10% of capital costs may consist of legal, engineering and design costs unless
the political subdivision can demonstrate that its legal, engineering and design
costs which relate directly to the public improvement for which the impact fees
were imposed exceed 10% of capital costs. “Capital costs” does not include
other noncapital costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities or the
costs of equipment to construct, expand or improve public facilities.
B. “Capital Improvement” includes parks planning, land acquisition, site
improvements, buildings, but excludes maintenance and operation.
C. “City of Port Washington Comprehensive Plan” means a long range master plan
which includes the following component plans: Land Use Plan; Environmental
Plan; Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan; and Transportation Plan.
D. “Developer” means a person that constructs or creates a land development.
E. “Impact fees” means cash contributions, contributions of land or interests in
land or any other items of value that are imposed on a developer by a political
subdivision under this section.
F. “Land development” means the construction or modification of improvements
to real property that creates additional residential dwelling units within a
political subdivision or that results in nonresidential uses that create a need for
new, expanded or improved public facilities within a political subdivision.
G. “Political subdivision” means a city, village, town or county.
H. “Public facilities” means highways as defined in s.340.01 (22), and other
transportation facilities, traffic control devices, facilities for collecting and
treating sewage, facilities for collecting and treating storm and surface waters,
facilities for pumping, storing and distributing water, parks, playgrounds and
other recreational facilities, solid waste and recycling facilities, fire protection
facilities, law enforcement facilities, emergency medical facilities and libraries.
“Public facilities” does not include facilities owned by a school district.
I. “Service area” means a geographic area delineated by a political subdivision
within which there are public facilities.
J. “Service standard” means a certain quantity or quality of public facilities
relative to a certain number of persons, parcels of land or other appropriate
measure, as specified by the political subdivision.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 26 July 2010
18.14.060 Imposition of the Impact Fees.
A. The City Council shall prepare or direct the preparation of a Public Facilities
Needs Assessment including, but not limited to, those items and considerations
set forth at s. 66.55 (4). Impact fees imposed herein shall bear a rational
relationship to the need for new, expanded or improved public facilities that are
required to serve land development.
B. Any person who, after the effective date of this ordinance, applies for a building
permit for land development or an extension of such building permit, is hereby
required to pay an impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this
ordinance.
C. No building permit for land development will be issued until the impact fee
herein required has been determined and paid.
18.14.070 Calculation of the Impact Fees.
A. The city administrator shall calculate the fee separately for each improvement
and for each property, in the following manner:
1. Population growth projections. The city administrator shall estimate the
current and future city populations, based on data available to the city
from the US Census Bureau; the State of Wisconsin; Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission; or any other source, or
combination of sources, as determined by the city administrator. The city
administrator shall then calculate the projected growth in population
expected over the projected life of the debt service for the facility or, if
none, over fifteen (15) years, based on the population estimates. The
current combined commercial and industrial area shall be estimated by
dividing the equalized value of all commercial and industrial property in
the city. Said value per square foot shall be adjusted annually for
inflation based on consumer price index, all city average (north central)
for the period ending June 30. The same growth factor applied to
population is then applied to commercial and industrial property.
2. Facility data. The cost of the facility being constructed or improved is
estimated. The portion of the cost which is attributable to the
accommodation of future growth shall be calculated from those figures,
and then converted to cost per new resident or cost per new square foot of
commercial and industrial value, as appropriate.
3. Debt service. The city administrator shall calculate the annual debt
service on the portion of the facility built for future growth, and the tax
rate required to support that level of debt service.
4. Fee calculation when impact fee imposed on property zoned commercial
or industrial. The city administrator shall determine the estimated
average square footage for each type of commercial property, based on
the most recent figures available. The gross impact fee shall be
determined as follows: Per square foot facility cost attributable to growth
x average square footage per property x the ratio of commercial equalized
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 27 July 2010
5. Fee calculation when impact fee imposed on property zoned residential.
The city administrator shall determine the estimated average population
for each type of residential dwelling, based on the last decennial federal
census figures available. The gross impact fee shall be determined as
follows: Per capita facility cost attributable to growth x average
population per dwelling x the ratio of residential equalized valuation to
the sum of total residential and commercial and industrial valuation. The
gross impact fee shall be reduced by a credit, determined by calculating
the present value of all future taxes to be paid by the property to retire the
debt service on which the impact fee is based, resulting in a net impact
fee. In determining the future taxes to be paid by the property, the
property shall be assigned the following equalized value: The average
equalized value of all properties having the same zoning description
(which may encompass more than one zoning district), using a three-year
average for the three calendar years immediately preceding the
submission or application giving rise to imposition of the impact fee. For
this purpose, CCM multi-family (central city mix), or a similar zoning
designation, shall be considered a residential use.
18.14.080 Fee Payment.
A. The feepayer shall pay the impact fee required by this ordinance to the city
administrator, or his/her designee, before the building permit for land
development will be issued.
18.14.090 Administration of Impact Fees.
A. A separate impact fee trust account shall be established for each public facility
for which impact fees are calculated.
B. Upon receipt of impact fees, the city accounting department shall be responsible
for placement of such funds into separate accounts. All such funds shall be
deposited in interest bearing accounts in a bank authorized to receive deposits of
city funds. Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that account and
shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds of such account.
C. The city accounting department shall maintain and keep accurate financial
records for each account that shall show the source and disbursement of all
revenues; that shall account for all monies received; that shall ensure that the
disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively
for the provision of projects specified in the capital improvements program; and
that shall provide an annual accounting for each impact fee account showing the
source and amount of all funds collected and the projects that were funded.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 28 July 2010
D. Funds withdrawn from these accounts must be used in accordance with the
provisions of Section 18.14.100 of this ordinance.
18.14.100 Use of Funds.
A. Funds collected from impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of
constructing, expanding or improving public facilities, including the cost of land,
and including legal, engineering and design costs to construct, expand or improve
such public facilities, and shall not be used for maintenance or operations.
B. Funds shall be expended in the order in which they are collected.
C. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced
provisions of capital facilities for which impact fees may be extended, impact
fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to
the extent that the facilities are of the type described in paragraph A. above.
D. At least once each fiscal period the administrator shall present to the Common
Council a proposed capital improvement program for assigning funds, including
any accrued interest, from the Impact Fee Trust Accounts to specific
improvement projects and related expenses. Monies, including any accrued
interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the same Impact Fee
Trust Accounts until the next fiscal period except as provided by the refund
provisions of this ordinance.
E. Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in Section 18.14.110.
18.14.110 Refunds.
A. Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter
immediately following six (6) years from the date the impact fee was paid shall,
upon application of the then current landowner, be returned to such landowner
provided that the landowner submits an application for a refund to the
administrator within 180 days of the expiration of the six year period.
18.14.120 Exemptions.
A. The following shall be exempted from payment of the impact fee:
1. Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no additional
residential units are created, or where the use is not changed.
2. The construction of accessory buildings or structures.
3. The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or
structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use.
B. Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application of a
building permit for land development. Any claim not so made shall be deemed
waived.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 29 July 2010
18.14.130 Penalty Provision.
A. Violation of this ordinance shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
misdemeanors are prosecuted and upon conviction the violator shall be
punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal
prosecution, the City of Port Washington shall have the power to sue in civil
court to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
B. Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for a
building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.
18.40.140 Appeal.
A. Any developer upon whom an impact fee has been imposed may contest the
amount, collection or the use of the impact fee in the manner provided herein.
However, it shall be a condition to the commencement of such an appeal that the
impact fee from which the developer appeals shall be paid as and when the fee
(or a permitted installment thereof) becomes due and payable, and, upon default
in making any such payment, such appeal may be dismissed. Such appeal shall
be in writing, addressed to the Common Council and filed with the City Clerk. A
copy of the written appeal shall be forwarded to the appropriate department head
who shall submit a written report and recommendation to the Common Council
within ten (10) days of the department head’s receipt of a copy of such appeal.
At its next regular meeting, the Common Council shall review said report and
recommendation, and adopt a proposed resolution of the matter and the City
Clerk shall mail a copy of the report and recommendation and the proposed
resolution to the developer via certified mail-return receipt requested. If the
developer still wishes to contest the matter, the developer may, within ten (10)
days of the date of the developer’s receipt of such proposed resolution, file a
written request with the City Clerk that a hearing be held on the matter. If such
hearing request is received by the City Clerk within five (5) days or more of the
date of the Common Council’s next regular meeting, the Council shall hear the
matter at said meeting; if such hearing request is received less than five (5) days
from the date of the Council’s next regular meeting, the matter shall be heard at
the next succeeding Council meeting. After fully hearing the matter, the
Common Council shall reduce its findings and decision to writing within ten (10)
days, and the City Clerk shall send a copy thereof to the developer via certified
mail-return receipt requested. If the developer still wishes to contest the matter,
the developer may file a writ of certiorari with the circuit court within thirty (30)
days of the date of receipt of the Common Council’s decision.
B. As provided by sec. 66.55(10), Stats., the only matters appealable under this
section are the following:
1. The amount of the impact fee charged and paid by the developer;
2. The method of collection of the impact fee;
3. The use to which the impact fee paid by the developer is made by the
City.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 30 July 2010
18.14.150 Severability.
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions thereof.
18.15.000 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
18.15.010 Purpose, Intent, and Findings of Fact.
A. Purpose. The general purpose of this ordinance is to set forth storm water
requirements and criteria that will diminish the threats to public health, safety,
welfare, and the aquatic environment due to runoff of storm water from land
development activity. Specific purposes are to:
1. Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
2. Prevent and control the adverse effects of storm water; prevent and control
soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; and protect spawning
grounds, fish and aquatic life.
3. Assure the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and receiving water
bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; control increases in the scouring
and transportation of particulate matter; and prevent conditions that
endanger downstream property.
4. Control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; and promote
sound economic growth.
B. Intent. The intent of this ordinance is to manage the long-term, postconstruction
storm water discharges from land development activities. Where
such system plans have been developed and approved by the City, it is the intent
that all land development activities will include storm water management
measures that meet performance standards set forth in those approved plans.
Where such storm water management system plans have not been developed or
approved, it is the intent of the City that the generic storm water management
standards set forth be applied unless otherwise excepted by the City Engineer.
C. Findings of Fact. This ordinance is based on the finding that uncontrolled storm
water runoff from land development activity has a significant impact upon water
resources and the health, safety and general welfare of the community, and
diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically,
uncontrolled storm water runoff can:
1. Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion,
increasing stream bed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, and
diminishing stream base flows.
2. Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life,
recreational, and water supply uses by increasing loadings of nutrients
and other urban pollutants.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 31 July 2010
3. Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by
increasing pollutant loads.
4. Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading.
5. Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by overtaxing
storm sewers, drainage ways, and other minor drainage facilities.
6. Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by increasing
major flood peaks and volumes.
7. Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and
levels of flooding.
8. Aggravate excessive infiltration and inflow of water into sanitary sewer
connections during peak storm events causing the conveyance system to
surcharge, overflow or backup into basements.
18.15.020 Definitions. As used in ss. 18.15.000, et seq. relating to storm water
management regulations:
A. “AGRICULTURAL” means the planting, growing, cultivating, and harvesting of
crops; growing and tending of gardens, and trees; harvesting of trees.
B. “BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES” or “BMP” means structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or
minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state, or to
manage the rate or volume of runoff.
C. “BUSINESS DAY” means a day the City Engineer’s office is routinely and
customarily open for business.
D. “CEASE AND DESIST ORDER” means a court-issued order to halt land
developing activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
E. “CITY PERSONNEL” or “AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL” means employees of
the City of Port Washington or those agents authorized by the City Engineer,
Board of Public Works or the Common Council to implement these storm water
management regulations.
F. “COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE” means all lands included
within the boundary of a certified survey or subdivision plat created for the
purpose of development or sale of property where multiple separate and distinct
land developing activity may take place at different times and on different
schedules.
G. “DESIGN RAINFALL” OR “DESIGN STORM” means a hypothetical discrete
rainstorm characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall
intensity, return frequency, and total rainfall depth.
H. “DISCHARGE VOLUME” means the quantity of runoff discharged from the
land surface as the result of a rainfall event.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 32 July 2010
I. “FEE IN LIEU” means a payment of money to the City in place of meeting all or
part of the storm water performance standards required by this ordinance.
J. “FINANCIAL GUARANTEE” means a performance bond, maintenance bond,
surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted to the
City by the permit holder to assure that requirements of this ordinance are carried
out in compliance with the storm water management plan.
K. “GROSS AGGREGATE AREA” means the total area, in acres, of all land
located within the property boundary containing the land development activity.
L. “GROUNDWATER ENFORCEMENT STANDARD” means a numerical value
expressing the concentration of a substance in groundwater, which is adopted
under s. 160.07, Wis. Stats. and s. NR 140.10, Wis. Adm. Code, or s. 160.09,
Wis. Stats., and s. NR 140.12, Wis. Adm. Code.
M. “GROUNDWATER PREVENTIVE ACTION LIMIT” means a numerical value
expressing the concentration of a substance in groundwater which is adopted
under s. 160.15, Wis. Stats. and ss. NR 140.10, 140.12 or 140.20, Wis. Adm.
Code.
N. “IMPERVIOUS SURFACE” means a surface that releases the rainfall as surface
runoff during a large portion of the design rainfall event. Rooftops, sidewalks,
driveways, parking lots and street surfaces are examples of impervious surfaces.
O. “INFILL AREA” means an undeveloped area of land located within existing
development.
P. “INFILTRATION” means the process by which rainfall or surface runoff
percolates or penetrates into the underlying soil.
Q. “INFILTRATION SYSTEM” means a device or practice such as a basin, trench,
rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but does not
include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of
rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices, such as
swales or road side channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal
only.
R. “KARST FEATURE” means an area or surficial geologic feature subject to
bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and
may include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces,
sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
S. “LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY” means any construction or redevelopment
of buildings, roads, parking lots, paved and unpaved storage areas,
and similar facilities, but not including agricultural activity.
T. “LAND DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY” means any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing
vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that may result in runoff and lead to an
increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land
disturbing construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition,
excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 33 July 2010
U. “MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT” means a legal document that is recorded
with the Ozaukee County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction or
restrictive covenant, and which provides for long-term maintenance of storm
water management practices.
V. “MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE” or “MEP” means a level of
implementing best management practices in order to achieve a performance
standard specified in this ordinance which takes into account the best available
technology, cost effectiveness and other competing issues such as human safety
and welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and
geographic features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet the performance
standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions.
W. “NON-STORM DISCHARGE” means a discharge to the storm sewer system
created by a process other than storm water runoff.
X. “NON-STRUCTURAL MEASURE” means a practice, technique, or measure to
reduce the volume, peak flow rate, or pollutants in storm water that does not
require the design or installation of fixed storm water management facilities.
Y. “OFF-SITE” means located outside the property boundary described in the
permit application for the land development activity.
Z. “ON-SITE” means located within the property boundary described in the permit
for the land development activity.
AA. “ORDINANCE” or “THIS ORDINANCE” means ss. 18.15.000, et seq. relating
to storm water management regulations, as amended from time to time.
BB. “ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK” has the meaning given in s. NR
115.03(6), Wis. Adm. Code.
CC. “OTHER THAN RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT” means development of the
following land uses: commercial; industrial; government and institutional;
recreation; transportation, communication, and utilities.
DD. “OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS” means waters listed in s. NR
102.10, Wis. Adm. Code.
EE. “PEAK FLOW DISCHARGE RATE” means the maximum rate at which a unit
volume of storm water is discharged.
FF. “PERCENT FINES” means the percentage of a given sample of soil, which
passes through a # 200 sieve.
GG. “PERFORMANCE STANDARD” means a narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
HH. “PERVIOUS SURFACE” means a surface that infiltrates rainfall during a large
portion of the design rainfall event. Well-managed lawns, parks, fields,
woodlands, or other vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that are typically
pervious.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 34 July 2010
II. “POLLUTANT” has the meaning given in s. 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
JJ. “POLLUTION” has the meaning given in s. 283.01(10), Wis. Stats
KK. “POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE” means a construction site following the
completion of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization.
LL. “POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER DISCHARGE” means any storm
water discharged from a site following the completion of land disturbing
construction activity and final site stabilization.
MM. “POST-DEVELOPMENT CONDITION” means the extent and distribution of
land cover types, anticipated to occur under conditions of full development that
will influence storm water runoff and infiltration.
NN. “PRE-DEVELOPMENT CONDITION” means the extent and distribution of
land cover types present before the initiation of land development activity,
assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are managed in an
environmentally sound manner.
OO. “PRE-TREATMENT” means the treatment of storm water prior to its discharge
to the primary storm water treatment practice in order to reduce pollutant loads to
a level compatible with the capability of the primary practice.
PP. “PREVENTIVE ACTION LIMIT” has the meaning given in s. NR 140.05(17),
Wis. Adm. Code.
QQ. “RECREATIONAL TRAIL” means a path that is: distinctly set apart from a
roadway, street, or sidewalk; designed for activities such as jogging, walking,
hiking, bird-watching, bicycle riding, roller skating, or similar recreational
activities not involving the use of motorized vehicles, and not a sidewalk under s.
340.01(58), Wis. Stats.
RR. “REDEVELOPMENT” means new construction or replacement of older
development.
SS. “REGIONAL FLOOD” means the peak flow and peak elevation of water with a
one percent (1%) probability of occurring during any one year, considering
rainfall time and intensity patterns, rainfall duration, area distribution, antecedent
moisture, and snow melt. [NOTE: The common misnomer, "100-year flood or
floodplain" implies a temporal element rather than a one in 100 random
probability of the event.]
TT. “RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT” means that which is created to house
people, including the residential dwellings as well as all attendant portions of the
development including lawns, driveways, sidewalks, garages, and access streets.
Residential development includes single family, multi-family, apartments, and
trailer parks.
UU. “RESPONSIBLE PARTY” means any person or entity holding fee title to the
property or other person or entity contracted or obligated by other agreement to
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 35 July 2010
VV. “RUNOFF” or “STORM WATER RUNOFF” means storm water or precipitation
including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface
via sheet or channelized flow.
WW. “SITE” means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land disturbing construction activity occurred.
XX. “SITE RESTRICTION” means any physical characteristic which limits the use
of a storm water best management practice as prescribed in the latest edition of
the Wisconsin Storm Water Manual, Part 2: Technical Design Guidelines for
Storm Water Best Management Practices, as published and amended from time
to time by the state Department of Natural Resources.
YY. “STOP WORK ORDER” means an order issued by the City Engineer that all
construction activity on a site be stopped.
ZZ. “STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN” means a document that identifies
what actions will be taken to reduce storm water quantity and pollutant loads
from land development activity to levels meeting the purpose and intent of this
ordinance.
AAA. “STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN” means a comprehensive
plan developed to address storm water drainage and non-point source pollution
control problems on a watershed or sub-watershed basis, and which meets the
purpose and intent of this ordinance.
BBB. “STRUCTURAL MEASURE” means source area practices, conveyance
measures, and end-of-pipe treatment that are designed to control storm water
runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and peak flow discharge rates.
CCC. “SURFACE WATER” means a “navigable” body of water as that term is defined
in s. 281.31(2)(d), Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time.
DDD. “TECHNICAL STANDARD” means a document that specifies design, predicted
performance and operation and maintenance specifications for a material, device
or method.
EEE. “TIME OF CONCENTRATION” means the time period for the furthest runoff
from the outlet of a watershed to contribute to flow at the watershed outlet.
FFF. “TOP OF THE CHANNEL” means an edge, or point on the landscape, landward
from the ordinary high water mark of a surface water of the state, where the slope
of the land begins to be less than 12% continually for at least 50 feet. If the slope
of the land is 12% or less continually for the initial 50 feet, landward from the
ordinary high water mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high water mark.
GGG. “TR-55” means the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban Hydrology
for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 36 July 2010
HHH. “TYPE II DISTRIBUTION” means a rainfall type curve as established in the
“United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical
Paper 149, published 1973.” The Type II curve is applicable to all of Wisconsin
and represents the most intense storm pattern.
III. “WATERS OF THE STATE” has the meaning given in s. 281.01(18), Wis. Stats.
It generally refers to those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within
the boundaries of Wisconsin, and all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds,
wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage systems and other
surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within the
state or its jurisdiction.
JJJ. “WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT” means the storm water standards and
duties established under the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et. seq., parallel
state law regulating the discharge of pollutants, and implementing regulations.
KKK. “WATER QUANTITY MANAGEMENT” means storm water duties and
practices to abate peaks flood flows during regional storm events as implemented
and enforced by this municipality.
18.15.030 Storm Water Management Plan and Facilities Required.
A. Plan and Facilities Required. No person shall proceed with any residential,
commercial, industrial, or institutional land development or redevelopment or
with land subdivision without providing appropriate storm water management
plans and facilities that adequately control storm water runoff from such
development, redevelopment, or subdivided property.
B. Pre-submittal Conference Required. Prior to the preparation of the storm water
management plan, a pre-submittal conference with the City is required. The
review of storm water management plans shall begin only after a pre-submittal
conference is held, and no permit application and storm water management plan
shall be considered complete prior to such conference.
C. Storm Water Management Plan Submittal Required. A site-specific storm
water management plan must be submitted and approved by the City before any
required new storm water management facilities are constructed, unless
exempted or waived pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance. An approved
site-specific storm water management plan is also required before an existing
drainage system is relocated, deepened, widened, enlarged, filled, obstructed or
otherwise altered in preparation for land development, redevelopment, or
subdivision activity. The plan must be submitted and approved before any land
development activity is commenced or a subdivision plat or certified survey map
is approved by the City and recorded.
18.15.040 Applicability, Jurisdiction, Comity and Exemptions.
A. Applicability. This ordinance applies as set forth hereinbelow to land
development activities that meet applicability criteria specified in this Section.
This ordinance also applies as set forth hereinbelow to land development
activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such
activities are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that meets any
of the following applicability criteria, even through multiple separate and distinct
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 37 July 2010
1. Land development activity that involves an increase of one-half acre
(21,780 square feet) or more of impervious surface but less than 1.0 acre
(43,560 square feet) of land development activity shall be subject to
discharge quantity standards only, as set forth in Section 18.15.050 B.
2. Both discharge quantity and quality standards as set forth in Sections
18.15.050 B. and D. shall apply to any land development activity which
disturbs one acre (43,560 square feet) or more regardless of the amount
of additional impervious surface created.
3. For phased developments, the cumulative effect of all phases shall be
considered. Discharge quantity standards shall apply if the cumulative
amount of new impervious surface is one-half acre (21,780 square feet)
or more, even if the individual components of a development each create
less than one-half acre of impervious surface. Both discharge quantity
and quality standards shall apply if the cumulative amount of land
development activity disturbs one acre (43,560 square feet) or more,
even if the individual components of a development each disturb less
than one acre of land.
4. Land development activity of any size that, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, is likely to result in storm water runoff which exceeds the safe
capacity of existing drainage facilities, storage facilities, or receiving
surface waters, which may cause surcharging and increase flooding risks,
which causes undue channel erosion, unreasonably increases surface
water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter, or
endangers downstream property on a surface water shall be subject to
discharge quantity and quality standards as set forth in Sections
18.15.050 B. and D.
B. Jurisdiction. This ordinance applies to all lands and waters, and all land
development, redevelopment and land subdivision activities within the
boundaries of the City of Port Washington, Wisconsin.
C. Comity. State agencies should design and incorporate best management
practices for surface water quality and storm water quantity management for new
impervious surfaces. The runoff management techniques should be the same as
flood abatement plans and techniques utilized by local governments in the
watershed. The lead agency preparing an environmental assessment for a federal
or state project shall identify the mitigating runoff management techniques to
prevent increases in peak flood flows from new impervious areas.
D. Exemptions From Discharge Quantity Requirements. The following activities
are exempt from discharge quantity requirements:
1. Residential infill where the lot is five acres or less, the development is
exclusively residential, the net increase in the area of impervious surface
is less than 20% of the area of the site, and each boundary of the site is
contiguous to sites that contain existing development at the time the City
receives the plans for the new development.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 38 July 2010
2. Development or redevelopment activity where the area of impervious
surface after development or redevelopment will be 5% or less of the
area of the site.
3. Development activity located in sites riparian to Lake Michigan where
(a) site runoff is directly discharged into Lake Michigan; and (b) the City
Engineer has determined that bluff erosion protection has been
appropriately provided.
4. Construction of recreational trails if the trail width is 10 feet or less and
the trail has a continuous buffer at least 5 feet wide on each side,
disregarding interruption by streets, driveways or other impervious
surfaces crossing the trail.
E. Exemptions From Discharge Quality Requirements. The following activities
are exempt from discharge quality requirements:
1. A post-construction site with less than 10% connected imperviousness
based on complete development of the post-construction site, provided
the cumulative area of all parking lots and rooftops is less than one acre.
2. Routine maintenance for project sites under 5 acres of land disturbance if
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of the facility.
3. Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and fiber optic
lines. This exemption does not apply to the construction of any above
ground structures associated with utility construction.
F. Exemptions From Discharge Quantity and Quality Requirements. The
following activities are exempt from both discharge quantity and quality
requirements:
1. Development approved by the City before the effective date of this
ordinance, provided that the approval had sufficient finality to create a
vested right to proceed with the development.
2. Maintenance, alteration, use or improvement to an existing structure, or
construction activity which does not significantly change or affect the
water quality, hydrologic and hydraulic characteristics of the surface
water discharge.
3. Storm water management facilities to be constructed or measures to be
undertaken by the City when the City has determined that a storm water
management plan is not required.
4. Facilities, or portions thereof, for which a special exception is granted
under Section 20.08.000 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Port
Washington.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 39 July 2010
18.15.050 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT CONCEPTS, STANDARDS,
METHODS.
A. Storm Water Management Concepts.
1. Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales,
natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural
groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved and used, to the extent
possible, to meet the requirements of this ordinance.
2. Emergency overland flow for all storm water facilities shall be provided
to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities
and prevent endangerment of downstream property or public safety.
3. Storm water management facilities shall utilize the following techniques,
in descending order of preference:
a. Preservation of the natural features of development sites,
including natural storage and infiltration characteristics.
b. Preservation and restoration of existing wetlands, native
vegetation, natural streams, channels and drainage ways, as
appropriate.
c. Utilization of constructed wetlands, high quality aquatic
vegetation, and construction methods that create natural settings
and aesthetic enhancements whenever appropriate and possible.
d. The use of multiple BMPs to create treatment trains that
maximize the effectiveness of pollution reduction benefits of
each BMP.
e. Minimization of new impervious surfaces.
f. Conveyance of storm water in open vegetated channels.
g. Construction of structures that provide both quantity and quality
control, with structures serving multiple sites being preferable to
structures serving individual sites.
h. Construction of structures that provide only quantity control,
with structures serving multiple sites being preferable to
structures serving individual sites.
4 The site-specific storm water management system plan required under
the provisions of this ordinance shall be designed in accordance with
good engineering practice. The specific methods to be used in the
calculation of peak rates of discharge, volumes, and water quality
conditions and of the hydraulic capacities of storage and conveyance
facilities shall be left to the judgment of the professional engineer
preparing the plan subject, however, to the approval of the City.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 40 July 2010
5. The site-specific storm water management system plan shall be designed
so that natural topography and land cover features such as swales, natural
streams, channels, drainage ways, natural depressions, native soil
infiltrating capacity and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be
preserved and used to the maximum extent practicable.
6. Those components of storm water structures that handle peak flows shall
be designed in accordance with standard engineering practices.
7. Runoff volumes and peak flow rates used in designing the water quantity
components of storm water structures shall be based on the principles of
the document entitled "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds"
(Technical Release 55: Engineering Division, Soil Conservation Service,
United States Department of Agriculture, June 1992).
8. The most recent rainfall depth data available from the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission or more protective data shall
be the basis for the analyses required by this ordinance.
9. The conveyance and storage facilities incorporated into the site-specific
storm water management system plan required under this ordinance shall
be designed as an integral part of complementary minor and major
subsystems.
10. The minor subsystem, generally consisting of the proposed on-site storm
water conveyance facilities such as storm sewers and storm drains, shall
be designed to avoid nuisance flooding of streets and yards and shall
accommodate the peak rate of runoff from rainfall events up to and
including the 25-year recurrence interval event for arterial streets and
rainfall events up to and including the 10-year recurrence interval event
for all other streets. No storm sewer pipe shall be less than 12 inches in
diameter. The rainfall intensity and depth shall be determined based on
appropriate times of concentration from relationships established and
published by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission.
11. The complementary major subsystem shall consist of the public streets
and interconnected flow paths to the streets and from the streets to
receiving streams and watercourses. The major subsystem shall be
designed to accommodate peak rates of discharge from rainfall events up
to and including the 100-year recurrence interval event with a two-foot
freeboard.
12. Unless otherwise provided for, all land development activities subject to
this ordinance shall establish on-site management practices to control the
peak flow rates of storm water discharged from the site. On-site
management practices shall be used to meet the minimum performance
standards as set forth in this ordinance.
B. Peak Runoff Discharge Performance Standards.
1. The peak flow discharge rates of storm water runoff under the postdevelopment
conditions shall be controlled and reduced as follows:
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 41 July 2010
a. 100-year post-development peak runoff discharge shall not
exceed the lesser of the following:
i. 2-year pre-development peak runoff discharge;
ii. Maximum hydraulic capacity of existing downstream
conveyance, drainage or storage facilities; or
iii. Unit discharge rates established in the City of Port
Washington Storm Water Management Plan.
b. 2-year post-development peak runoff discharge shall not exceed
the 2-year pre-development peak runoff discharge.
c. The design rainfall used for storm water management facility
design shall be the 2-year and 100-year recurrence interval, 24-
hour duration events with a SCS TYPE II distribution with the
latest rainfall depths as determined by Southeastern Wisconsin
Regional Planning Commission.
2. Any storm water management pond shall fully contain the runoff from
the tributary watershed area during the 100-year, 24-hour rainfall with a
SCS TYPE II distribution under the post-development conditions. The
tributary watershed area consists of all on-site and off-site areas draining
to the pond.
3. Emergency overland flow for all storm water facilities shall be provided
to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities
and prevent endangerment of downstream property or public safety.
4. If surface runoff leaves the site at more than one location, discharge at
each location must individually meet the standards set forth in this
ordinance. The discharge comparisons shall be made at storm water
conveyance facilities (e.g., ditches, culverts, storm sewers, storm water
detention ponds, channels, streams, etc.) that are located immediately
downstream of each discharge location of the site.
5. Negative impacts to the hydraulic performance of downstream
conveyance or storage facilities shall be avoided. Where such changes
are proposed, the impact of the proposal on existing storm water
detention ponds shall be assessed using a methodology acceptable to the
City.
6. All storm water runoff conveyance facilities within the boundaries of the
property that is being developed shall be sized to adequately carry the
runoff from a 10-year recurrence interval rainfall. In some cases, less
sophisticated computation methods such as the Rational Method may be
used with prior written approval by the City Engineer.
7. For storms exceeding the design capacity of the conveyance system,
overland drainage routes shall direct the excess runoff to any storm water
management pond(s) proposed for the site.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 42 July 2010
8. The maximum NRCS curve numbers that can be used in the TR-55
analysis of pre-development conditions are set forth in Table 1. If other
methods for computing runoff are used, these shall assume comparable
runoff parameters.
Table 1
Land Cover Curve Number
Wooded areas 65
Open meadow 70
Lawns and residential and commercial landscaped areas 72
Cropland 75
All impervious surfaces, including roofs, driveways,
parking lots, streets and sidewalks, etc. 98
Water surface 99
C. Sorm Water Management Credits. The intent of this ordinance is to manage
the long-term, post-construction storm water discharges from land development
activities with the purpose of diminishing the threats to public health, safety,
welfare, and the aquatic environment due to runoff of storm water. Accordingly,
the kind of development approach that avoids and minimizes such threats is
highly desirable. The City Engineer, upon review of the development proposal
and the accompanying storm water management plan, shall consider the presence
of the following project elements in determining the suitability of a credit in peak
discharge limits at the site in accordance with this ordinance and the procedures
established in the City of Port Washington Storm Water Management Plan.
Credits shall be cumulative for each criterion satisfied as listed hereinbelow:
1. Identification of resources that will be impacted by the project.
Satisfactory consideration of this item will allow a 1.0% increase in the
post-development discharge limit established in Sections 18.15.050
B.1.a. and b.
2. Identification of an overall goal, including, but not limited to, forest
stewardship, water quality preservation and enhancement, farmland
preservation, natural habitat restoration, preservation of scenic beauty,
archaeological and historic properties preservation, integration of
ecological resources or passive recreational uses in development.
Satisfactory consideration of this item will allow a 2.0% increase in the
post-development discharge limit established in Sections 18.15.050
B.1.a. and b.
3. Management of runoff close to its source. Satisfactory consideration of
this item will allow a 2.0% increase in the post-development discharge
limit established in Sections 18.15.050 B.1.a. and b.
4. Engagement of natural processes such as infiltration and vegetative
uptake in storm water management. Satisfactory consideration of this
item will allow a 2.5% increase in the post-development discharge limit
established in Sections 18.15.050 B.1.a. and b.
5. Use of site layout, design, construction, and management techniques that
achieve multiple storm water management objectives such as
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 43 July 2010
groundwater recharge, discharge rate control, runoff volume control,
water quality improvement, and temperature controls. Satisfactory
consideration of this item will allow a 2.5% increase in the postdevelopment
discharge limit established in Sections 18.15.050 B.1.a. and
b.
6. Effort to preserve natural resources in and around the project site to the
maximum extent practicable, including an effort to avoid the isolation of
natural resources within the site. Satisfactory consideration of this item
will allow a 3.0% increase in the post-development discharge limit
established in Sections 18.15.050 B.1.a. and b.
7. Effort to minimize site grading impacts, including construction and
scheduling provisions that limit the amount of bare earth during
construction. Satisfactory consideration of this item will allow a 3.0%
increase in the post-development discharge limit established in Sections
18.15.050 B.1.a. and b.
8. Effort to control total imperviousness to minimize the change in post
development CN and to maintain the pre-development Time of
Concentration. Satisfactory consideration of this item will allow a 3.0%
increase in the post-development discharge limit established in Sections
18.15.050 B.1.a. and b.
9. Effort to increase the aesthetic value of the proposed development and
storm water management facilities through design. Satisfactory
consideration of this item will allow a 3.0% increase in the postdevelopment
discharge limit established in Sections 18.15.050 B.1.a. and
b.
10. Integration of proposed storm water management facilities into the
natural environment through placement, landscaping, and maintenance.
Satisfactory consideration of this item will allow a 3.0% increase in the
post-development discharge limit established in Sections 18.15.050
B.1.a. and b.
D. Runoff Quality Performance Standards. Unless otherwise provided, all land
development activities subject to this ordinance shall establish on-site
management practices to control the quality of storm water discharged from the
site. On-site management practices shall be used to meet the following minimum
standards:
1. Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the state
Department of Natural Resources under subchapter V of ch. NR 151,
Wis. Adm. Code.
2. Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the
state Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards may
be used, provided that the methods have been approved by the City
Engineer.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 44 July 2010
3. The most recent rainfall data available from the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission or more protective data
shall be the basis for the analyses required by this ordinance.
4. Storm water discharges shall be treated to remove, on an average
annual basis, a minimum of 80% of the total suspended solids load. To
achieve this level of control, storm water practices shall be designed in
accordance with the methods set forth in the latest edition of the
“Wisconsin Storm Water Manual, Part 2: Technical Design Guidelines
for Storm Water Best Management Practices,” as published and
amended from time-to-time by the state Department of Natural
Resources.
5. For new development, by design, reduce to the maximum extent
practicable, the total suspended solids load by 80%, based on the
average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management
controls. No person shall be required to exceed an 80% total
suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements of this subsection.
6. For redevelopment, by design, reduce to the maximum extent
practicable, the total suspended solids load by 40%, based on the
average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management
controls. No person shall be required to exceed a 40% total suspended
solids reduction to meet the requirements of this subsection.
7. For in-fill development less than 5 acres that occurs within 10 years
after the effective date of this ordinance, by design, reduce to the
maximum extent practicable, the total suspended solids load by 40%,
based on an average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff
management controls. No person shall be required to exceed a 40%
total suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements of this
subsection.
8. For in-fill development that occurs 10 or more years after the effective
date of this ordinance, by design, reduce to the maximum extent
practicable, the total suspended solids load by 80%, based on an
average annual rainfall, as compared to no runoff management
controls. No person shall be required to exceed an 80% total
suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements of this subsection.
9. Notwithstanding subsecs. 5 to 8, hereinabove, if the design cannot
achieve the applicable total suspended solids reduction specified, the
storm water management plan shall include a written and site-specific
explanation, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, why that level of
reduction is not attained and why the total suspended solids load shall
be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
10. The proposed storm water quality improvement and pollution
reduction measures may include wet detention/retention ponds,
infiltration devices, filter strips, grass swales, oil-grit separator devices
or a combination of structural best management practices recognized
and endorsed in the latest edition of the “Wisconsin Storm Water
Manual, Part 2: Technical Design Guidelines for Storm Water Best
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 45 July 2010
” as published and amended from time-to-time
by the state Department of Natural Resources.
11. If storm water quality ponds are proposed, such ponds shall be
designed and constructed so that:
a. Permanent wet detention volume of the facility shall be
equal to or greater than the runoff volume resulting from a 1.5-
inch, 4-hour rainfall with a Huff Distribution over the area under
post-development conditions.
b. The minimum permanent pond surface area shall be:
i. 1.0% of the drainage area for residential development.
ii. 2.0% of the drainage area for business and institutional
development.
iii. 2.5% of the drainage area for highways, commercial and
manufacturing development.
c. Water quality ponds shall have a sediment forebay area
at the pond inlet location. The surface area of the forebay shall
be a minimum of 12% of the total permanent pond surface area
corresponding to the normal water elevation.
12. Runoff within a non-navigable drainage way that flows into a BMP, such
as a wet pond, is not required to meet water quality performance
standards unless designed to provide treatment.
13. The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet pond, or after a series
of such BMPs, is subject to this ordinance.
14. If infiltration practices are proposed, runoff shall be pre-treated prior to
infiltration where necessary to prolong maintenance of the infiltration
practice and to prevent discharge of storm water pollutants at
concentrations exceeding groundwater preventive action limits or
enforcement standards established by the state Department of Natural
Resources in ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm. Code, as amended from time to
time. Storm water shall not be injected underground through excavations
or openings that would violate s. NR 812.05 Wis. Adm. Code, as
amended from time to time.
E. Fueling and Vehicle Maintenance Areas. Fueling and vehicle maintenance
areas shall, to the maximum extent practicable, have best management practices
designed, installed and maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, such that
the runoff that enters waters of the state contains no visible petroleum sheen.
F. Infiltration. Except as provided in Sections 18.15.050 G. and H., best
management practices shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate
runoff, to the maximum extent practicable, in accordance with the following:
1. For residential developments one of the following shall be met:
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 46 July 2010
a. Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at least 90% of the pre-development
infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall.
However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to
meet this requirement, no more than 1% of the project site is
required as an effective infiltration area.
b. Infiltrate 25% of the post-development runoff from the 2-year,
24-hour design storm with a type II distribution. Separate curve
numbers for pervious and impervious surfaces shall be used to
calculate runoff volumes and not composite curve numbers as
defined in TR-55. However, when designing appropriate
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than 1% of
the project site is required as an effective infiltration area.
2. For non-residential development, including commercial, industrial and
institutional development, one of the following shall be met:
a. Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at least 60% of the pre-development
infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall.
However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to
meet this requirement, no more than 2% of the project site is
required as an effective infiltration area.
b. Infiltrate 10% of the runoff from the 2-year, 24-hour design
storm with a type II distribution. Separate curve numbers for
pervious and impervious surfaces shall be used to calculate
runoff volumes, and not composite curve numbers as defined in
TR-55. However, when designing appropriate infiltration
systems to meet this requirement, no more than 2% of the project
site is required as an effective infiltration area.
3. Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this Section 18.15.050
F. shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible, minimize
the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain
compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of standards
application in accordance with ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm. Code. However,
if site specific information indicates that compliance with a preventive
action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed
or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum extent
practicable.
4. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot
runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial,
industrial and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system.
The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from
clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater
quality in accordance with Section 18.15.050 F. 3. Pretreatment options
may include, but are not limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation,
biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 47 July 2010
5. Notwithstanding Section 18.15.050 F. 3, the discharge from BMPs shall
remain below the enforcement standard at the point of standards
application.
G. Infiltration Exclusions. The runoff from the following areas is prohibited from
meeting the requirements of Section 18.15.050 F.:
1. Areas associated with tier 1 industrial facilities identified in s. NR
216.21(2)(a), Wis. Adm. Code, including storage, loading, rooftop and
parking.
2. Storage and loading areas of tier 2 industrial facilities identified in s. NR
216.21(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code.
3. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas.
4. Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet downgradient of
Karst features.
5. Areas with less than 3 feet separation distance from the bottom of the
infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the
top of bedrock. This exclusion does not prohibit the infiltration of roof
runoff.
6. Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and institutional parking
lots and roads and residential arterial roads with less than 5 feet
separation distance from the bottom of the infiltration system to the
elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock.
7. Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified in
s. NR 811.16(4), Wis. Adm. Code, or within 100 feet of a private well as
specified in s. NR 812.08(4), Wis. Adm. Code, for runoff infiltrated from
commercial, industrial and institutional land uses or regional devices for
residential development.
8. Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in s. NR 720.03(2),
Wis. Adm. Code are present in the soil through which infiltration will
occur.
9. Any area where the soil does not exhibit one of the following soil
characteristics between the bottom of the infiltration system and the
seasonal high groundwater and top of bedrock: at least a 3-foot soil layer
with 20% fines or greater; or at least a 5-foot soil layer with 10% fines or
greater. This does not apply where the soil medium within the
infiltration system provides an equivalent level of protection. This
exclusion does not prohibit the infiltration of roof runoff.
H. Infiltration Exemptions. The following are not required to meet the
requirements of Section 18.15.050 F.:
1. Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6 inches/hour
measured at the site.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 48 July 2010
2. Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for
commercial and industrial development.
3. Redevelopment post-construction sites.
4. In-fill development areas less than 5 acres.
5. Infiltration areas during periods when the soil on the site is frozen.
6. Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land uses and arterial
residential roads.
I. Exceptions to Discharge Quantity and Quality Management Requirements.
The City may establish storm water management requirements either more or
less stringent than those set forth in this ordinance, provided that at least one of
the following conditions apply:
1. The City Engineer determines that a higher level of protection is needed
to protect sensitive natural resources.
2. The City Engineer determines that a higher level of protection from
flooding is required to protect public health and safety.
3. The City Engineer determines that more restrictive discharge controls are
needed because existing downstream conveyance or storage facilities are
or will be rendered inadequate as a result of development activity.
4. The City Engineer determines that the land development activity is
covered by an approved storm water management system plan that
contains management requirements consistent with the purpose and
intent of this ordinance.
5. Provisions are made to manage storm water by an off-site facility,
provided that all of the following conditions for the off-site facility are
met:
a. The facility is in place.
b. The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level
of storm water control equal to or greater than would be
provided by on-site practices meeting the requirements of this
ordinance.
c. The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its longterm
operation and maintenance.
d. The City Engineer finds that meeting the minimum on-site
management requirements of this ordinance is not feasible due to
space or site restrictions.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 49 July 2010
J. Protective Areas.
1. “Protective area” means an area of land that commences at the top of the
channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of
wetlands, and that is the greatest of the widths set forth hereinbelow, as
measured horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland
boundary to the closest impervious surface. However, in this Section
18.15.050 J., “protective area” does not include any area of land adjacent
to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot
enter the enclosure at this location.
a. For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters,
and for wetlands in areas of special natural resource interest as
specified in s. NR 103.04, Wis. Adm. Code, 75 feet.
b. For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a United
States geological survey 7.5-minute series topographic map, or a
county soil survey map, whichever is more current, 50 feet.
c. For lakes, 50 feet.
d. For highly susceptible wetlands, 50 feet. Highly susceptible
wetlands include the following types: fens, sedge meadows,
bogs, low prairies, conifer swamps, shrub swamps, other forested
wetlands, fresh wet meadows, shallow marshes, deep marshes
and seasonally flooded basins. Wetland boundary delineations
shall be made in accordance with s. NR 103.08(1m), Wis. Adm.
Code. This subsection does not apply to wetlands that have been
completely filled in accordance with all applicable state and
federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have
been partially filled in accordance with all applicable state and
federal regulations shall be measured from the wetland boundary
delineation after fill has been placed.
e. For less susceptible wetlands, 10% of the average wetland width,
but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible
wetlands include degraded wetlands dominated by invasive
species such as reed canary grass.
f. Determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent to
wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff
susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the standards
and criteria in s. NR 103.03, Wis. Adm. Code.
g. For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than
130 acres, 10 feet.
2. This Section 18.15.050 J. applies to post-construction sites located within
a protective area, except those areas exempted under Section 18.15.050 J.
4.
3. The following requirements shall be met:
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 50 July 2010
a. Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area to the
maximum extent practicable. The storm water management plan
shall contain a written site-specific explanation for any parts of
the protective area that are disturbed during construction.
b. Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within a
protective area, and where no impervious surface is present,
adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70% or
greater shall be established and maintained. The adequate sod or
self-sustaining vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for
bank stability, maintenance of fish habitat and filtering of
pollutants from upslope overland flow areas under sheet flow
conditions. Non-vegetative materials, such as rock riprap, may
be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent erosion, such as
on steep slopes or where high velocity flows occur.
c. Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or wet
detention basins, which are designed to control pollutants from
non-point sources, may be located in the protective area.
4. This Section 18.15.050 J. does not apply to:
a. Redevelopment post-construction sites.
b. In-fill development areas less than 5 acres.
c. Structures that cross or access surface waters such as boat
landings, bridges and culverts.
d. Structures constructed in accordance with s. 59.692(1v), Wis.
Stats.
e. Post-construction sites from which runoff does not enter the
surface water, except to the extent that vegetative ground cover
is necessary to maintain bank stability.
K. Location and Regional Treatment Option.
1. The BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional storm
water device, practice or system within the same watershed.
2. Runoff within a non-navigable drainage way that flows into a BMP, such
as a wet pond, is not required to meet water quality performance
standards unless designed to provide treatment. This regional treatment
option does not supersede any other federal, state or local regulation of
post-construction runoff, such as ch. NR 103, Wis. Adm. Code and ch.
30, Wis. Stats.
3. The discharge of runoff from a BMP, such as a wet pond, or after a series
of such BMPs, is subject to this ordinance.
4. The City Engineer may approve off-site management measures provided
that all of the following conditions are met:
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 51 July 2010
a. The City Engineer determines that the post-construction runoff is
covered by a storm water management system plan that is
approved by the City and that contains management
requirements consistent with the purpose and intent of this
ordinance.
b. The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
i. The facility is in place.
ii. The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide
a level of storm water control equal to or greater than
that which would be afforded by on-site practices
meeting the performance standards of this ordinance.
iii. The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for
its long-term operation and maintenance.
5. Where a regional treatment option exists such that the City Engineer
exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum on-site storm
water management requirements, the applicant shall be required to pay a
fee in lieu of storm water management practices.
L. Fee In Lieu of On-Site Storm Water Management Practices. Where the City
waives all or part of the minimum on-site storm water management requirements
under this ordinance, the applicant may be required to pay a fee in an amount
determined in negotiation with the City. In determining the fee for land
development projects, the City Engineer shall consider an equitable distribution
of the cost for land, engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the onsite
or regional storm water management practices needed to serve the land
development.
18.15.060 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES AND FEES.
A. Permit Required. No landowner or responsible party may undertake a land
development activity subject to this ordinance without receiving a permit from
the City Engineer prior to commencing the proposed activity.
B. Permit Application, Fees, and Costs. Unless specifically excluded by this
ordinance, any landowner or responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to
the City Engineer a permit application made on a form provided by the City for
that purpose.
1. Unless otherwise excepted by this ordinance, a permit application must
be accompanied by the following in order that the permit application be
considered by the City Engineer: a storm water management plan; a
maintenance agreement; and a non-refundable permit administration fee.
2. The storm water management plan, maintenance agreement and
administration fees shall meet the requirements of this ordinance.
3. Within twenty (20) business days of the receipt of an invoice from the
City, the applicant shall reimburse the City for all of the City’s costs and
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 52 July 2010
expenses incurred (including, but not limited to, professional and
attorneys’ fees) in reviewing the permit application.
C. Review and Approval of Permit Application. The City Engineer shall review
any complete permit application that is submitted with a storm water management
plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fees. The following approval
procedure shall be used:
1. Within thirty (30) business days of the receipt of a complete permit
application, including all items as required by this Section 18.15.060, the
City Engineer shall inform the applicant whether the application, storm
water management plan and maintenance agreement are approved or
disapproved.
2. If the storm water permit application, storm water management plan and
maintenance agreement are approved, or if an agreed upon payment of
fees in lieu of storm water management practices is made, the City
Engineer shall issue the permit.
3. If the storm water permit application, storm water management plan or
maintenance agreements are disapproved, the City Engineer shall detail
in writing the reasons for disapproval.
4. The City Engineer may request additional information from the
applicant. If additional information is submitted, the City Engineer shall
have fifteen (15) business days from the date the additional information
is received to inform the applicant whether the permit application, storm
water management plan and maintenance agreement are approved or
disapproved.
D. Permit Conditions. All permits issued under this ordinance shall be subject to
the following conditions, and holders of permits issued under this ordinance shall
be deemed to have accepted these conditions. The City Engineer may suspend or
revoke a permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification
of the responsible party. An action to suspend or revoke this permit may be
appealed in accordance with this ordinance.
1. Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party of the
responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state and local
laws and regulations.
2. The responsible party shall design and install all structural and nonstructural
storm water management measures in accordance with the
approved storm water management plan and this permit.
3. The responsible party shall notify the City at least three (3) business days
before commencing any work in conjunction with the storm water
management plan, and within the next working day upon completion of
the storm water management practices. If required as a special
condition, the responsible party shall make additional notification
according to a schedule set forth by the City so that practice installations
can be inspected during construction.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 53 July 2010
4. Facilities installation required as part of this ordinance shall be certified
“as-built" by a licensed professional engineer. Completed storm water
management practices must pass a final inspection to determine if they
are in accordance with the approved storm water management plan and
this ordinance. The City shall notify the responsible party in writing of
any changes required in such practices to bring them into compliance
with the conditions of this permit.
5. The responsible party shall notify the City of any significant
modifications it intends to make to an approved storm water management
plan. The City may require that the proposed modifications be submitted
for approval prior to incorporation into the storm water management plan
and execution by the responsible party.
6. The responsible party shall maintain all storm water management
practices in accordance with the storm water management plan until the
practices are transferred to subsequent private owners as specified in the
approved maintenance agreement.
7. The responsible party authorizes the City to perform any work or
operations necessary to bring storm water management measures into
conformance with the approved storm water management plan, and
consents to a special charge against the property as authorized under s.
66.0627, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time, or to charging such
costs against the financial guarantee posted under this ordinance.
8. If so directed by the City, the responsible party shall repair at the
responsible party's own expense all damage to adjoining municipal
facilities and drainage ways caused by storm water runoff, where such
damage is caused by activities that are not in compliance with the
approved storm water management plan.
9. The responsible party shall permit property access to City personnel or to
authorized personnel for the purpose of inspecting the property for
compliance with the approved storm water management plan and this
permit.
10. Where a storm water management plan involves changes in direction,
increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from a site, the City
may require the responsible party to make appropriate legal
arrangements with affected property owners concerning the prevention of
endangerment to property or public safety.
11. The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions set forth in
this ordinance if the responsible party fails to comply with the terms of
this permit.
E. Permit Duration. Permits issued under this Section 18.15.060 shall be valid
from the date of issuance through the date the City notifies the responsible party
that all storm water management practices have passed the final inspection
required under this ordinance.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 54 July 2010
18.15.070 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN CONTENTS.
A. Plan Requirements.
1. In general, the storm water management plan required under this
ordinance shall contain any information the City may need to evaluate:
a. The environmental characteristics of the area affected by land
development activity.
b. The potential impacts of the proposed development upon the
quality and quantity of storm water discharges.
c. The potential impacts upon water resources and drainage
utilities.
d. The effectiveness and acceptability of proposed storm water
management measures in meeting the performance standards set
forth in this ordinance.
The plan shall consist of narrative descriptions and explanations; maps,
charts, and graphs; tables; photographs; supporting calculations; and
references to recognized engineering text and manuals as may be
necessary to provide a clear and concise description of the plan. The
sources of maps and data presented in the plan shall be identified.
For phased developments, the site development storm water management
plan shall consider the cumulative effect of all phases.
The plan shall include computations of peak flow rates and discharge
volumes at each point of discharge into and out of the site concerned
under existing and planned development and redevelopment conditions.
The data shall include times of concentration to key junctions in flow
paths and to points of discharge into and out of the site.
2. Unless specified otherwise by this ordinance, a storm water management
plan shall contain at a minimum the following information:
a. Name, address, and telephone number for the following or their
designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for practice
design and certification; person(s) responsible for installation of
storm water management practices; person(s) responsible for
maintenance of storm water management practices prior to the
transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to another party.
b. A proper legal description of the property proposed to be
developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or
to block and lot numbers within a recorded subdivision plat.
c. Discussion of additional important storm water management
considerations, project elements and supporting documentation
as provided in Section 18.15.050 C.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 55 July 2010
d. Storm water management checklist established in the City of
Port Washington Storm Water Management Plan.
e. Description of pre-development site conditions and supporting
documentation as provided in Section 18.15.070 B.
f. Description of post-development site conditions and supporting
documentation as provided in Section 18.15.070 C.
g. Description of anticipated impacts and supporting documentation
as provided in Section 18.15.070 D.
h. Description of proposed storm water management facilities and
measures and supporting documentation as provided in Section
18.15.070 E.
i. Copies of permit applications and other pertinent correspondence
with the state Department of Natural Resources regarding the
natural resources at and within 100 feet of the site.
B. Pre-Development Site Conditions. The plan shall include a map and
description of the existing conditions of the site concerned including:
1. A map of the site at a scale of 1 inch equals 100 feet or larger showing
the property boundaries referenced to the U. S. Public Land Survey
system or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision
plat; and the topography of the site including contours shown at an
interval of 2 feet or less, together with such spot elevations as may be
necessary; the contours and spot elevations shall be referenced to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, or to City Datum with prior
written approval from the City.
2. The hydrologic and hydraulic characteristics of the site including
drainage flow paths and directions of flow onto, through, and out of the
site; related drainage basin boundaries, including off-site tributary areas;
and times of concentration.
3. The location of areas where storm water may collect or percolate into the
ground.
4. Locations where runoff enters the site from adjacent tributary areas
together with the size of those areas expressed in acres.
5. Locations where runoff leaves the site and the contributing watersheds to
each of these locations expressed in acres.
6. Ground water elevations referred to the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum of 1929, or to City Datum with prior written approval from the
City.
7. Soils by hydrologic group (field verification required).
8. Cover type and condition.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 56 July 2010
9. Location and extent of impervious surfaces, including type and condition
of the surfaces.
10. Locations and outlines of all buildings or other structures.
11. Location of all receiving bodies of surface water on or within 100 feet of
the site into which storm water flows.
12. Documentation of field navigability determination by state Department
of Natural Resources staff.
13. Locations and size of wetlands on or within 100 feet of the site.
14. Documentation of state Department of Natural Resources concurrence
with wetland boundaries.
15. Location and extent of the 100-year recurrence interval flood hazard area
associated with any perennial stream or watercourse on or within 100
feet of the site.
16. Location and extent of environmental corridors on or within 100 feet of
the site.
17. Information regarding current water quality objectives and current water
quality conditions in any perennial watercourses located on or within 100
feet to the site.
18. Locations, sizes, and elevations of all existing storm sewers, channels,
ditches, detention or retention ponds, or other engineered drainage
facilities on or within 100 feet of the site; the elevations being referred to
the National Geodetic Datum of 1929, or to City Datum with prior
written approval from the City.
C. Proposed Post-Development Site Conditions. The plan shall describe the
alterations proposed at the site and the resulting proposed post-development
conditions. The description shall include:
1. Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography and
land cover features to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates and
volumes to surface waters.
2. Proposed changes in the planimetry of the site, and in the topography of
the site by contours having the same contour interval and referred to the
same datum as used to present the topography of the existing site
conditions.
3. The location and outline of all proposed buildings or other structures.
4. Changes in the location, extent and type of impervious surfaces.
5. The location and extent of areas where vegetation is to be disturbed or
planted.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 57 July 2010
6. Impacts on existing natural storage or infiltration areas.
7. Changes in the drainage flow paths into, through, and out of the site, and
related changes in drainage basin boundaries.
8. The location, elevations, and sizes of all proposed minor and major storm
water management facilities; the former including all storm sewers and
inlets, and the latter including curbed roadways, roadway ditches,
culverts, storage facilities, and interconnected flow paths; all elevations
being referred to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, or to
City Datum with prior written approval from the City.
9. Any changes to lakes, streams, watercourses, or wetlands on or within
100 feet of the site concerned.
10. The location and widths of required public rights-of-way or easements
needed to accommodate the recommended storm water management
facilities.
D. Anticipated Impacts. The plan shall contain a description of the following
anticipated impacts of storm water runoff from the proposed development,
redevelopment or land development as managed by the facilities and measures
recommended in the plan:
1. Computed 100-year, 24-hour, SCS TYPE II peak runoff rate at each
location where runoff enters and leaves the site, expressed in cubic feet
per second.
2. Computed 2-year, 24-hour, SCS TYPE II peak runoff rate at each
location where runoff enters and leaves the site, expressed in cubic feet
per second.
3. Computed runoff volume for the 1.5-inch, 4-hour rainfall.
4. All major assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be
clearly stated. The computations shall be made for each discharge
point into and out of the site, and the geographic areas used in making
the calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map(s), including off-site tributary watershed areas.
5. Changes in the locations and conveyance capacities of storm water
discharge points from and to the site concerned.
6. Adequacy of receiving storm sewer, engineered storm water
management facility or watercourse to convey or store the anticipated
peak rate of storm water discharge from the site concerned, giving due
consideration to existing and off-site flows.
7. Changes in the location and extent of the 100-year recurrence interval
flood hazard area of any perennial watercourse location within,
through, or within 100 feet of, the site concerned.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 58 July 2010
8. Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required for the
placement and design of storm water management measures.
9. Changes in ground water elevations referred to National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929, or to City Datum with prior written approval
from the City.
E. Proposed Storm Water Management Facilities and Measures. The plan shall
include a definitive description of the proposed storm water management
facilities and measures for the control of the quantity and quality of the
anticipated storm water runoff from the proposed development, redevelopment or
land division. All site investigations, plans, designs, computations and drawings
shall be certified as prepared in accordance with accepted current engineering
practice and in accordance with the latest editions of “Wisconsin Storm Water
Manual, Part 2: Technical Design Guidelines for Storm Water Best Management
Practices,” “Wisconsin Construction Site Best Management Practices
Handbook,” and “Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in
Wisconsin,” as published and amended from time to time.
The description of the proposed management facilities shall include:
1. For detention and retention facilities: locations, areas, depths, volumes, inlet
and outlet configurations and elevation of the bottoms, and of key inlet
and outlet control structures; all elevations being referred to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, or to City Datum with prior written
approval from the City.
2. For conveyance facilities: locations of inlets and manholes and associated
rim and invert elevations, and pipe sizes, slope and materials; locations,
elevations, and cross sections of ditches, swales and channels; and
culvert sizes, inlet and outlet configurations and elevations; all elevations
being referred to National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, or to City
Datum with prior written approval from the City.
3. Design computations and all applicable assumptions for the storm water
conveyance (open channel, closed pipe, etc.) system.
4. Detailed drawings including cross-sections and profiles of all permanent
storm water conveyance and treatment practices.
5. Design computations and all applicable assumptions for storm water quality
practices (sedimentation type, filtration type, infiltration type) as needed
to show that practices are appropriately sized to accommodate runoff
from the 1.5-inch rainfall.
6. For practice designs that depart from those specified in the latest edition of
“Wisconsin Storm Water Manual, Part 2: Technical Design Guidelines
for Storm Water Best Management Practices,” as published and amended
from time to time, the results of continuous simulation modeling,
conducted according to the guidelines established in that manual, shall be
presented in such a way as to show the reduction in average annual total
suspended solids loading from the developed site.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 59 July 2010
7. An Erosion Control Plan in accordance with the City of Port Washington
Erosion Control Ordinance.
8. Measures to abate any potential pollution of surface and ground waters.
9. A schedule for the construction of the recommended storm water
management facilities and estimates of attendant capital, operation and
maintenance costs.
10. A Maintenance Plan and Maintenance Agreement developed for the life of
each storm water management practice including the required
maintenance activities and maintenance activity schedule.
11. For detention and retention facilities, wetland and prairie restoration
elements, a Landscaping Plan in accordance with the “City of Port
Washington Pond Landscaping Guidelines,” as amended from time to
time.
12. Other information as required by the City to determine compliance of the
proposed storm water management measures with the provisions of this
ordinance.
F. Alternate Requirements. The City may prescribe alternative submittal
requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site storm water
management performance standards under this ordinance.
18.15.080 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
A. Maintenance Agreement Required. The maintenance agreement required for
storm water management practices under this ordinance shall be an agreement
between the City and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of storm
water practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The agreement or shall
be recorded with the Ozaukee County Register of Deeds as a deed restriction or
restrictive covenant so that it is binding upon all subsequent owners of land
served by the storm water management practices.
B. Agreement Provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following
information and provisions:
1. Identification of the storm water facilities and designation of the drainage
area served by the facilities.
2. A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the storm water
management system consistent with the storm water management plan.
3. Identification of the responsible party, organization or municipality
responsible for long-term maintenance of the storm water management
practices.
4. Requirement that the responsible party, organization or municipality
shall maintain storm water management practices in accordance with the
schedule included in the agreement.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 60 July 2010
5. Authorization for the City to access the property to conduct inspections
of storm water practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are
being maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement. The
City shall have the right to enter the amount due for such inspections on
the tax rolls and collect the money as a special charge against the
property pursuant to s. 66.0627, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to
time.
6. A requirement that the City: maintain public records of the results of the
site inspections; inform the responsible party responsible for
maintenance of the inspection results; and specifically indicate any
corrective actions required to bring the storm water management practice
into proper working condition.
7. Agreement that if the City Engineer notifies the party designated under
Section 18.15.080 B. 3. of maintenance problems that require correction,
the specific corrective actions shall be taken within a reasonable time
frame as determined by the City.
8. Authorization for the City to perform, or engage outside contractors to
perform, the corrective actions identified in the inspection report if the
responsible party does not make the required corrections in the specified
time period. The City shall enter the amount due for such corrective
actions on the tax rolls and collect the money as a special charge against
the property pursuant to s. 66.0627, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to
time.
18.15.090 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
A. Establishment of the Guarantee. The City may require the submittal of a
financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be acceptable to the City.
The financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the City to be the
estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of maintenance during the
period which the designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance
responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give the City the authorization to
use the funds to complete the project or storm water management practices if the
responsible party defaults or does not properly implement the approved storm
water management plan, upon written notice to the responsible party by the City
that the requirements of the ordinance have not been met.
B. Conditions for Release. Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are
as follows:
1. The City shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established
to assure installation of storm water practices, minus any costs incurred
by the City to complete installation and/or inspection of such practices,
upon submission of "as built plans” by a licensed professional engineer.
The City may make provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the
financial guarantee based on the completion of various development
stages.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 61 July 2010
2. The City shall release the portion of the financial guarantee established
to assure maintenance of storm water practices, minus any costs incurred
by the City, at such time that the responsibility for practice maintenance
is passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance agreement.
18.15.100 FEE SCHEDULE.
A. Basis. The fees referred to in this ordinance shall be determined by the Common
Council, and may be modified from time to time by resolution. Such fees shall
be related to the costs involved in handling permit applications, reviewing plans,
conducting site inspections, and administering the storm water management
program. A schedule of such fees shall be available for review in the office of
the City Clerk.
18.15.110 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS.
A. Discharges Prohibited. No person may discharge, spill or dump substances or
materials which are not entirely composed of storm water into receiving bodies
of water, storm sewers or drainage facilities, or onto driveways, sidewalks,
parking lots or other areas that discharge into the City drainage system.
B. Connections Prohibited. It shall be a violation of this ordinance to connect a
sanitary sewer pipe or drain, connect a pipe or drain that contributes pollutants
associated with industrial activity, or connect any other hydraulic conveyance
facility that introduces non-storm water discharges to or into the City storm water
drainage system and facilities. All such non-storm water discharges to or into the
City storm water system and facilities shall be defined as “illicit discharges.”
Illicit discharges shall cease, desist and be abated by the person or entity
responsible immediately upon notice from the City Engineer. If the person or
entity responsible fails to cease, desist and abate the illicit discharge, the City
may take such action itself and seek reimbursement in municipal or circuit court,
or as a special charge against the property as authorized under s. 66.0627, Wis.
Stats., as amended from time to time.
C. Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this
Section 18.15.110, unless found to have an adverse impact on the storm water:
1. Discharges authorized by a permit issued by the state Department of
Natural Resources.
2. Discharges resulting from fire fighting activities.
3. Discharges in compliance with construction site erosion controls or
storm water management regulations contained in this ordinance.
4. Facility maintenance activities undertaken by any federal, state, county
or municipal agency, such activities, however, being subject to
construction erosion control measures.
5. Discharges from uncontaminated pumped ground water, potable water
source, roof drains, foundation drain and sump pump, air conditioning
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 62 July 2010
D. Penalty. Violations of this Section 18.15.110 shall be subject to enforcement
action and penalties as set forth in this ordinance.
18.15.120 INSPECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
A. Inspection. City personnel or authorized personnel shall carry out inspections,
investigations and monitoring to assess and confirm compliance with this
ordinance.
1. City Personnel shall inspect, conduct surveillance and/or monitor the
municipal drainage system and discharge outfalls on at least an annual
basis to assess system performance and water quality. Findings of noncompliance
with this ordinance during such inspection, surveillance
and/or monitoring of the City drainage system shall result in further
investigation to identify the source of the pollution discharge to or into
the drainage system.
2. City Personnel or authorized personnel shall inspect and monitor land
development activity for compliance with permit conditions as provided
in this ordinance.
B. Public Nuisance. The following shall be deemed to constitute public nuisances,
and may be prosecuted as such by the City or by aggrieved property owners:
1. Any development, redevelopment or property land division that is
commenced without an approved storm water management plan as
required by this ordinance.
2. Any land development activity initiated after the effective date of this
ordinance by any person, firm, association or entity subject to the
provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed a violation unless conducted
in accordance with said provisions.
3. Any drainage facility not maintained in accordance with this ordinance.
4. Any illicit discharge, as defined in this ordinance, to the City storm water
drainage system and facilities.
5. Any activity that adversely impacts on surface or ground water quality or
endangers the health and safety of the public.
C. Compliance Order. The City Engineer shall notify the responsible party by
certified mail of any non-complying activity or property. The notice shall
describe the nature of the violation, order any remedial action to be taken,
include a schedule for remedial action, and indicate additional enforcement
action that may be taken.
1. Upon receipt of written notification from the City Engineer, the
responsible party of the non-complying activity or property shall make
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 63 July 2010
2. If the responsible party or person or entity in violation of this ordinance
continues the non-compliant activities or practices, City personnel or
authorized personnel may enter upon the land and perform the work or
other operations necessary to bring said activity or property into
conformance with requirements of this ordinance. The City shall keep a
detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this work. If
applicable, these costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial
guarantee posted pursuant to this ordinance. Where such financial
guarantee has not been established, or where such guarantee is
insufficient to cover the costs, the City shall enter said costs and
expenses on the tax roll as a special charge against the property, to be
collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the
work is completed.
3. The City Engineer is authorized to post a stop order on all activity in
violation of this ordinance, or to request the City Attorney to obtain a
cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
4. If the violations of this ordinance are likely to result in damage to private
properties, public facilities, or waters of the state, City personnel or
authorized personnel may enter upon the property and take emergency
actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the
City, plus interest and attorneys’ fees, shall be billed to the landowner of
the property and/or the responsible party.
5. The City Engineer may suspend or revoke a permit issued under this
ordinance for non-compliance with this ordinance, or for non-compliance
with the notice and order issued under Section 18.15.120 C.
6. Any person who, or any firm, association or entity which, does not
comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $50.00 or more than $1,000.00 per offense,
together with the costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense.
7. Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance may also be enforced
by injunction, citation, and abatement of nuisance or other appropriate
and available remedy. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for
forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to injunction
proceedings.
18.15.130 APPEALS.
A. Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals created pursuant to Section 20.08.020
of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Port Washington as authorized by ss.
62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time:
1. Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any
order, decision or determination made by the City in administering this
ordinance.
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 64 July 2010
2. Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this
ordinance that are not contrary to the public interest, and where owing to
special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship.
3. Shall use the rules, procedures, duies and powers authorized by statute
and Wisconsin case law in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing
variances.
4. Shall be authorized to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of
this ordinance, pursuant to Section 20.08.020 of the City’s Zoning
Ordinance.
B. Who May Appeal. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any
aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the City
affected by any decision of the City Engineer in the administration of this
ordinance.
18.16.000 APPLICATION FEES AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW FEES.
18.16.010 Application Review and Development Fees
EFFECTIVE 2001 APPLICATION FEES AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW FEES SCHEDULE
Consultation No Charge for initial consultation on a project.
Annexation Petition $300 plus the actual cost of the public hearing
notice. (Includes meeting with applicant, assistance in
preparing the petition, preparation of public hearing notice,
coordinating mapping of territory, staff review time in
preparation for Plan Commission and Common Council
meetings.)
Rezoning Petition $250 plus the actual cost of the public hearing
notices and cost of mailing notices. (Includes
meetings with applicant, staff research and review of request and
preparation time for Plan Commission and Common Council
meetings, preparation of public hearing notice, preparing notice
to neighbors and address list, and map changes.)
Conditional Use Grant Review $300 plus the actual cost of the public hearing
notice and the cost of mailing notices. (Includes
meeting with applicant, staff review time in preparation for Plan
Commission and Common Council meetings, draft documents
and prepare for recording, preparation of public hearing notice,
review at one (1) year, and mapping.)
Certified Survey Map Review (CSM) Without
Dedication
$250 (Includes staff review time in preparation for Plan
Commission meeting.)
Certified Survey Map Review (CSM) With
Dedication
$275 (Includes staff review time in preparation for Plan
Commission and Common Council Meetings.)
Concept Plan Review $75
Minor Requests $100 (For small site plan changes such as minor landscaping,
new driveways, additions to parking etc.)
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 65 July 2010
City of Port Washington Chapter 18 - 66 July 2010
Business Site and Operational Plan Review $450 (Includes meetings with applicant, detailed engineering
and planning review, Design Review Board meeting prep. and
reports to Plan Commission.)
Subdivision Concept Review $300 (Includes meetings with the developer and engineering
and planning review.)
Preliminary Plat Review $550 (Includes detailed planning and engineering review, and
preparation of report to Plan Commission.)
Final Plat Review $250 (Includes detailed engineering and planning review,
preparation of Developer’s Agreement, prepare reports for Plan
Commission and Common Council meetings.) (Also requires
digital copy of plat on CD.)
Overlay Planned Development (OPD) Review $300 plus the actual cost of the public hearing
notice and mailing costs. (Includes staff review time
and preparation for Plan Commission and Common Council
meetings and preparation of OPD agreement and documents for
recording.)
CHAPTER 23
Cable Franchise Ordinance
Table Of Contents
23.01.000 SHORT TITLE
23.02.000 REQUIREMENT OF A FRANCHISE
23.03.000 DEFINITIONS
23.04.000 USE OF CITY STREETS
23.04.010 Grant of Authority
23.04.020 Expiration of the Grant
23.04.030 Conditions Regarding Street Use
23.04.040 Removal of Equipment
23.04.050 Joint Use by City and Utilities
23.05.000 INITIAL SYSTEM INSTALLATION SCHEDULE
23.05.010 Obligations of the Grantee
23.05.020 Right of Inspection
23.06.000 FINANCIAL CONSIDERATION
23.06.010 Franchise Payments
23.06.020 Payments to Support the Multiple Access Channel and Public
Access Channel
23.06.030 Insurance and Indemnity
23.06.040 Surety Bond
23.06.050 Acceptance of This Ordinance
23.07.000 SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED
23.07.010 General Requirements
23.07.020 Channel Allocations
23.07.030 Programming Facilities
23.07.040 Emergency Disaster
23.07.050 Customer Service
23.08.000 TECHNICAL CONFIGURATION AND CAPACITY
23.09.000 RATES
23.09.010 Rate Schedule
23.09.020 Rate Supervision
23.09.030 Advance Charges
23.09.040 Termination of Service
23.09.050 Refunds to Subscribers and Programmers
23.10.000 PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS
23.10.010 Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
23.10.020 Employment Practices of the Grantee
23.10.030 Cable Monitoring
23.10.040 Right of Privacy
23.10.050 Rights of Residents
23.10.060 Sale of Subscriber List Prohibited
23.11.000 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY
23.12.000 PROTECTIONS AFFORDED THE GRANTEE
23.12.010 Tampering with Cable Equipment
23.12.020 Liability of the Grantee in Libel Action
23.13.000 SUPERVISION OF THE GRANTEE
23.13.010 Cable Review Committee
23.13.020 Books and Records of the Grantee
23.13.030 Revocation of This Franchise
23.13.040 Restrictions Against Assignment
23.14.000 INTENDED SCOPE OF THIS ORDINANCE
23.14.010 Compliance with Local, State and Federal Laws
23.14.020 Failure of the City to Enforce This Franchise, No Waiver of the
Terms Thereof
23.14.030 Captions
23.14.040 Severability
23.15.000 LIMITATIONS OF THE GRANTEE’S RECOURSE
23.16.000 APPLICATION AND GRANTING
23.17.000 INCORPORATION OF THE GRANTEE’S PROPOSAL
23.18.000 VARIANCE IN PROPOSALS
CHAPTER 23
Cable Franchise Ordinance
23.01.000 SHORT TITLE. This ordinance shall be known, and may be cited as the
“Port Washington Cable Franchise Ordinance.
23.02.000 REQUIREMENT OF A FRANCHISE. No individual, partnership,
corporation or association shall install, maintain or operate a Cable Communication
System, or solicit subscriptions for the same, without first having applied for and
obtained a franchise from the City in accordance with this Section: and any failure to
secure such a franchise prior to the commencement of operations or the soliciting of any
subscription from any subscriber for such service shall be deemed a violation of this
Section and shall subject the violator to the penalties prescribed.
23.03.000 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include
the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
1. “Applicant” shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation or association
which shall have filed a written application for a franchise under this Section as
herein provided.
2. “City” means the City of Port Washington, Wisconsin, or any duly appointed
designate thereof, including, but not limited to, the cable review committee and
the Common Council.
3. “Common Council” or “Council” means the present governing body of the City or
any successors to the legislative powers of said body, or any duly appointed
designate thereof.
4. “Cable Review Committee” means the cable review committee or Port
Washington Common Council, established under Section 13.1 of this Ordinance,
or any duly appointed designate thereof.
5. “Cable system” “cable communication system”, or “CATV system” means a
system, located within the City of Port Washington only, of antennas, coaxial
cables, wires, wave guides, or other conductors, electronic equipment or facilities
designed, constructed or used for the production of television signals, interception
and receipt of television or radio signals directly or indirectly off the air, and the
distribution or transmission of such signals and other communications services by
means of cable or other similar devices to subscribers.
6. “Subscribers” means any person or entity receiving for any purpose the cable
service of the Grantee.
7. “Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
8. “Grantee” shall mean any applicant receiving the grant of any franchise hereunder
and shall include any lawful successor to the interest of a Grantee when consent to
such succession has been granted by the Council.
9. “Gross receipts” means total receipts of the Grantee of money or its equivalent
which the Grantee has received for providing basic service to its subscribers;
provided that installation charges actually paid by subscribers and received by the
Grantee shall be excluded from gross receipts in determining payments due to the
City.
10. “Channels” means a group of frequencies in the electro-magnetic spectrum
capable of carrying an audio-date or an audio-visual television signal. Each
channel is a block of frequencies containing 6 Milz bandwidth.
11. “Converter” means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not
susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber to view all
signals delivered at designated dial locations.
12. “Basic service” means the simultaneous delivery by the Grantee to television
receivers, of those broadcast and non-broadcast television channels which are
required to be provided by 23.07.020 A, B, C, D, E and F of this ordinance.
13. “Additional service” means service provided by the Grantee other than a basic
service.
14. “Franchise” means the right, privilege and authority granted by this Ordinance to
construct, maintain and operate through use of public streets of the City.
15. “Street” means any street, alley or other public right-of-way in the City.
16. “User” means a person utilizing a channel for purposes of production or
transmission of material, as contrasted with receipts thereof, in a subscriber
capacity.
17. “The Grantee’s system” or “the system” or “the cable system” or “the CATV
system” means the CATV system constructed or operated by a Grantee pursuant
to a franchise granted hereunder.
18. “Access channels” means the channels which the Grantee is required to provide
by 23.07.020 C, D, E and F of this Ordinance.
19. “Public access channel” means that channel which the Grantee is required to
provide by 23.07.020 C of this ordinance.
20. “Educational access channel” means that channel which the Grantee is required to
provide by 23.07.020 D of this Ordinance.
21. “Municipal access channel” or “government access channel” means that channel
which the Grantee is required to provide by 23.07.020 E of this Ordinance.
22. “Leased access channel” means that channel which the Grantee is required to
provide by 23.07.020 F of this Ordinance.
23. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.
24. “To monitor” means to observe a one-way or two-way communications signal
without the express prior consent of the subscriber receiving or sending said
communication signal, whether said signal is observed by visual or electronic
means, for any purpose whatsoever.
25. “Grantee’s proposal” means and encompasses the document entitled “An
Application for the Construction and Operation of a Cable Television System to
Serve the City of Port Washington, submitted to the office of the City Clerk of
Port Washington.”
23.04.000 USE OF CITY STREETS.
23.04.010 Grant of Authority.
A. There is hereby granted by the City to any successful applicant the right, privilege
and franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the streets of
the City for a period of fifteen (15) years, subject to the rights, obligations,
conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided.
B. The right to use and occupy said streets for the purposes herein set forth shall not
be exclusive and the City reserves the right to grant a similar use of said streets to
any person at any time during the period of this franchise.
C. This Ordinance and the franchise awarded pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance
shall relate to and cover the entire present territorial limits of the City and any
area hereafter annexed thereto during the term of the franchise. The Grantee
agrees to and shall install and furnish CATV service to all residents of the City,
including all residents in any territory subsequently annexed to theCity, pursuant
to the terms of Section 13.3(1)(f) of this Ordinance.
23.04.020 Expiration of the Grant.
A. Two years prior to the expiration of the franchise granted hereunder, the City and
Grantee shall meet to review the development and operation of Grantee. Within
sixty (60) days thereof, the City shall extend to Grantee an option to renew this
franchise upon the same conditions if the Grantee has been in substantial
compliance with the following (not eliminating by such enumeration other
factors deemed proper for consideration by the City):
1. Performance pursuant to obligations under this ordinance.
2. Reaction to and implementation of new developments in cable television
technology and the furnishing of such developments to subscribers.
3. Reasonableness of charges made by Grantee to subscribers.
B. In the event City agrees that Grantee has substantially complied with the
conditions set forth above, Grantee shall extend the franchise for an additional
period of fifteen (15) years.
C. In the event City determines that Grantee has not substantially complied, Grantee
may submit such decision to arbitration within 60 days pursuant to rules and
conditions of the American Arbitration Association. Such decision shall be
binding upon both parties.
D. Upon the expiration of a franchise, the City shall have the right to purchase the
Grantee’s cable system. Should the City decide to purchase said cable system, it
shall do so at a price not to exceed its then fair value. In determining the fair
value of the system, the original cost of all tangible and intangible property, as
well as the salvage value, the book value, the replacement cost, cash flow, and
other factors may be considered. Under no circumstances shall any valuation be
made for “good will” or for any right or privilege granted by a franchise.
Payment for the cable system shall be tendered to the Grantee within 120 days
after the City has exercised its right in this case.
E. In the event that the City elects to purchase said cable system, or the franchise to
operate said cable system is awarded to a new Grantee, upon expiration of this
franchise the Grantee shall sell the system to the City or to the new Grantee,
whichever is applicable. The price for such sale shall be the fair value of the
system, as defined in 23.07.020 D.
F. In order to assure necessary or required investment in the system during the later
years of the permit, and provided that all terms and provisions of this Ordinance
are followed by the Grantee throughout the term of this Ordinance, and as
feasible, the City shall make all reasonable efforts to assist the Grantee in finding
a buyer for its cable system upon expiration of this franchise in the case that this
franchise is not extended or renewed for the current Grantee.
23.04.030 Conditions Regarding Street Use.
A. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the
Grantee within the City shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use
of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum
interferences with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places, and not to
interfere with existing public utility installations. All installations shall be
underground in those areas of the City where either of the public utilities
providing telephone or electric service are underground at the time of
installation. In areas where both telephone and electric utility distribution
facilities are above ground at the time of installation the Grantee may install its
facilities above ground; but in such case the Grantee, to the maximum extent
possible and subject to approval by the affected public utility, shall place its
facilities on the poles of said public utilities. If, subsequently, said telephone or
electric utility facilities go underground, the facilities of the Grantee of any
facilities or installations of a telephone or electric utility and the conditions of
said uses shall be determined by negotiations between the Grantee and said
utility.
B. In case of any disturbance of pavements, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing,
the Grantee shall, at its own expense, and in the manner provided by the City
replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, or other surface of any street
or alley disturbed.
C. If at any time during the period of the franchise the City shall lawfully elect to
alter or change the grade or location of any street, alley or other public way, the
Grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by the City, remove, rely and relocate its
poles, wires, cables, and underground fixtures at its own expense, and in each
instance comply with the requirements of the City.
D. The Grantee shall not place poles, conduits, wires or other facilities above or
below ground where the same will interfere with or endanger any gas, electric or
telephone facilities, water hydrant or other utility, nor shall the Grantee place
poles, conduits, wires or other facilities above or below ground where the same
will interfere with or endanger any gas, electric or telephone facilities, water
hydrant or other utility, nor shall the Grantee place poles, conduits, wires or
other facilities above or below ground in a manner which results in the public
utility facility violating any applicable safety statute, ordinance or
administrative.
E. The grantee shall, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by
the City, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of
buildings, the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the person
requesting the same, and the Grantee shall be given not less than seventy-two
(72) hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes.
F. The Grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees upon and overhanging the
streets, alley, sidewalks and public places of the City so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the
Grantee, except that at the options of the City, such trimming may be done by it,
or under its supervision and direction, at the expense and liability of the Grantee.
23.04.040 Removal of Equipment.
A. Following the Grantee’s commencement of service through and over its CATV
system, the Grantee, upon request of the Council, shall, following a public
hearing held pursuant to 23.13.010 B, number 2 of this Ordinance, promptly
remove from the public streets where its properties are located all or any part of
the facilities so located when one or more of the following enumerated
conditions occur:
1. The Grantee ceased to provide a substantial amount of the services
required in this Ordinance for a continuous period of six months.
2. The Grantee fails to construct said system as provided herein.
3. The franchise expires, or is revoked pursuant to notice, as provided herein.
B. Provided that the Grantee shall be entitled to receive notices in writing from the
City delivered to the local office of the Grantee setting forth one or more of the
occurrences hereinabove enumerated.
23.04.050 Joint Use by City and Utilities.
A. The Grantee may be required by the City to permit joint use of its property and
appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, or other public ways of the City, by
other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon
payment of reasonable rental therefore; provided that in the absence of agreement
regarding such joint use, the cable review committee shall provide for arbitration
of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid
therefrom, which award shall be final.
B. The City shall have the right, during the term of this franchise, to install and
maintain free of charge upon the property of the Grantee its own equipment,
including, but not limited to, a police alarm system, on the condition that such
equipment does not unreasonably interfere with the CATV operations of the
Grantee.
23.05.000 INITIAL SYSTEM INSTALLATION SCHEDULE.
23.05.010 Obligations of the Grantee.
A. A Grantee shall, within thirty (30) days from the granting of a franchise, make
application to the Federal Communications Commission for a certificate of
compliance for the establishment of a cable television system in the City and, if
necessary, for the utilization of a microwave facility to import permissible
signals, and the Grantee shall prosecute such application diligently and faithfully
in order that necessary approvals can be obtained in the shortest possible time.
The City reserves the right to intervene in said application for a certificate of
compliance, and the Grantee shall pay all expenses incurred by the City in
connection with the submission and defense of an application for a certificate of
compliance filed with the FCC by the Grantee.
B. The Grantee shall, within thirty (30) days from the granting of a franchise begin
negotiations with utility companies for facility lease agreements.
C. Prior to the commencement of construction and prior to receipt of final approvals
from the Federal Communications Commission for establishment of the system,
the Grantee shall conduct the necessary engineering studies so that the
construction can commence immediately upon final approval of the Federal
Communications Commission.
D. The Grantee shall, within sixty (60) days from the granting of a franchise begin
preliminary engineering of the pole line route and electronic layouts, begin
negotiations for common carrier microwave contracts, and initiate engineering
surveys for the receiving site and building locations of the Grantee’s CATV
system.
E. The Grantee shall commence construction of the cable television system no later
than thirty (30) days after the execution of pole attachment agreements and
receipt of final approval from the Federal Communications Commission to
establish a cable television system and utilized a microwave facility to import
permissible signals.
F. There shall be significant construction for the first year and a substantial
percentage extension of energized trunk cable for each ensuing year. The
Grantee shall extend energized trunk cable to 25% of the franchise area per year
for its first four (4) years of operation as a minimum standard. If possible, the
Grantee shall complete construction of the system within the City within twentyfour
(24) months after construction commences. Once energized cable has been
extended to 25% of the franchise area, the Grantee shall commence providing
basic service to subscribers residing in said 25% of the franchise area. The
Grantee shall provide basic service to other portions of the franchise area as soon
as feasible after the laying of energized trunk cable in any of said other portions.
G. Within six (6) months from the grant of permission by the Federal
Communications Commission, the Grantee shall submit to the cable review
committee an installation plan for the entire City, indicating the date on which
the Grantee expects the installation of the CATV system to be completed and
available for service to subscribers in the various areas of the City.
H. The Grantee shall furnish the cable review committee with progress reports
indicating in detail the area of construction of the CATV system. Such periodic
reports shall be furnished at six (6) month intervals, with the first report to be
made three months after the construction commencement date.
I. The requirements established in 23.05.010 A through H above area maximums,
and the Grantee may at any time proceed at a rate speedier than required by said
subsections.
J. All portions of the Grantee’s proposal dealing with the Grantee’s construction
and installation timetable shall be controlling when in conflict with or when
more stringent than the requirements established in 23.0-5.010 A through H
above.
23.05.020 Right of Inspection.
The cable review committee shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation
work performed pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
23.06.000 FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS.
23.06.010 Franchise Payments.
A. The Grantee shall pay to the City for the use of the streets and other facilities of
the City in the operation of the CATV system and for the municipal supervision
thereof a fee in the amount of 3% of the annual gross receipts of the Grantee. The
Grantee shall file with the cable review committee within thirty (30) days after
the expiration of each half year ending on January 1 and July 1, during the period
this franchise shall be in force, a financial statement showing in detail the annual
gross receipts of the Grantee during the preceding semi-annual period. It shall be
the duty of the Grantee to pay to the City at the time of filing such statement the
franchise fee prescribed. The Grantee shall also file within ninety (90) days
following the conclusion of each fiscal year of the Grantee an annual report
prepared and audited by an Independent Certified Public Accountant, showing the
yearly total gross receipts and payments to the City and any further relevant
financial information in regard to the company as may be required by the cable
review committee.
B. In the event a franchise should be terminated or forfeited prior to the end of the
basic fifteen year term, the Grantee, shall within thirty (30) days submit to the
cable review committee a financial statement prepared as before required,
showing the gross receipts of the Grantee for the time elapsed since the last period
for which the Grantee has paid to the City the required percentage of gross annual
receipts, and the Grantee shall pay to the City not later than thirty (30) days
following the termination of the franchise, a like percentage of such gross
receipts.
C. In the event that any payment is not made on or before the applicable date fixed in
23.06.010 A and B hereof, interest in such payments shall apply from such date at
the yearly rate of 12% plus cost of collection.
D. Pursuant to 23.13.010 D of this Ordinance, the cable review committee shall have
the right to inspect the Grantee’s records showing the gross receipts from which
its franchise payments are computed. The right of audit and re-computation of
any and all amounts paid under this franchise shall be always accorded to the
cable review committee. No acceptance of any payments by the City shall be
construed as a release of or an accord or satisfaction of any claim the City might
have for further or additional sums payable under the terms this Ordinance or for
any other performance or obligation of the Grantee hereunder.
E. Payments of compensation made by the Grantee to the City pursuant to the
provisions of this Ordinance shall not be considered in the nature of a tax but
shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or hereafter required to be
paid by any law of the United States, the State of Wisconsin or the City.
23.06.020 Payments to Support the Municipal Access Channel and Public Access
Channel.
A. In the event the FCC hereafter approves of fees for Municipal Access Channels
and Public Access Channels, franchise fees shall be charged to franchisee upon
such terms as may be agreed upon or, in the event of failure to do so, upon such
terms and in such amount as may be determined upon submission to the
American Arbitration Association.
B. Fees obtained by the City shall be used solely to finance the operation of such
channels.
23.06.030 Insurance and Indemnity.
A. At all times during the term of the franchise, the Grantee shall obtain, pay all
premiums for and file with the cable review committee at least ten (10) days
before construction of the system commences a certificate of insurance or other
proof evidencing the payment6 of premiums for the following:
1. A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy indemnifying,
defending and saving harmless the City, its officers, boards, committees,
commissions, agents, or employees, from any and all claims by any person
whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or persons
occasioned by the operations of the Grantee under the franchise herein
granted or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum
liability of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death of any one or more
persons in any one occurrence. Said policies are to include personal injury
coverage.
2. Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and saving harmless
the City, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, agents and
employees from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for
property damage occasioned by the operation of the Grantee under the
franchise herein granted or alleged to have been so caused or occurred
with a minimum liability of $500,000 for property damage in any one
occurrence.
B. All of the foregoing insurance contracts shall be in a form satisfactory to the City
Attorney, shall be accepted by companies authorized to do business in the State
of Wisconsin acceptable to the City Attorney. Said insurance contracts shall
require 30 days written notice of any cancellation to both the City and the
Grantee.
C. The Grantee shall also, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the City, its officers, boards, committees, commissions and
employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for
damages (including but not limited to expenses for reasonable legal fees and
disbursements and liabilities assumed by the City in connection therewith):
1. Arising out of any claim for invasions of the right of privacy, for
defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or for the violation or
infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or
patent or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation (excluding
claims arising out of or relating to City programming); and
2. Arising out of the Grantee’s failure to comply with the provisions of any
Federal, State, or local statute, ordinance or regulation applicable to the
Grantee in its business hereunder.
D. The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following: The City shall give
the Grantee prompt notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of
any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this Section.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the City from cooperating with the
Grantee and participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel at its
sole cost and expense.
23.06.040 Surety Bond.
A. The Grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a franchise, specifically
agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of this franchise, a faithful
performance bond running to the City, with a good and sufficient surety approved
by the City in the sum of $50,000 conditioned that the Grantee shall well and
truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of this franchise and of
the Grantee’s proposal and that in case of any breach, the City shall be entitled to
recover from the principal and sureties thereof the amount of all damages
including all costs and attorney’s fees incurred by the City approximately
resulting from the failure of the Grantee to well and faithfully observe and
perform any and all of the provisions of this franchise.
B. No recovery by the City of any sum by reason of the bond required herein shall
be any limitation upon the liability of the Grantee to the City, except that any sum
received by the City be reason of the bond required herein shall be deducted from
any recovery which the City might have against the Grantee.
23.06.050 Acceptance of this Ordinance.
A. This Ordinance and its terms and provisions shall be accepted by the Grantee by
written instrument executed and acknowledged by it as a deed is required to be,
and filed with the City Clerk within twenty (20) days after the award of a
franchise. Such written instrument shall state and express the acceptance of this
Ordinance and its terms, conditions and provisions; and said Grantee shall agree
in said instrument to abide by, to observe and perform same, and declare that
statements and recitals herein are correct and that it has made and does make this
agreement, statements and admissions in this Ordinance recited to have been or
to be made.
23.07.000 SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED.
23.07.010 General Requirements.
A. The Grantee shall install, maintain and operate its system in accordance with the
highest standards of the art of cable communications and in accordance with any
Code of Conduct which has been adopted or shall be adopted by the National
Cable Television Association.
B. The Grantee shall render efficient service in accordance with such rules and
regulations as have been promulgated and will be promulgated by the Federal
Communications Commission and other federal and state regulatory agencies.
C. The Grantee shall provide a uniform, strong signal, free from distortion and
interference, and shall not interrupt services unless absolutely necessary.
D. The Grantee shall provide cable television services which are identical to those
services which the Grantee described in the Grantee’s proposal; provided, that
said Grantee shall not have to provide any proposed services which have been
disapproved by the Federal Communications Commission; provided further that
the Grantee shall, upon petitioning the Federal Communications Commission for
a certificate of compliance, request that said Grantee be allowed to provide all of
those services which said Grantee has formally proposed to the City.
E. Except where specifically stated otherwise in this Ordinance, the Grantee shall
arrange to provide all feasible services requested by potential users of said
services, including the Council. If no rate has been established for a particular
service, a rate may be established pursuant to Section 9 of this Ordinance;
provided that if the cable review committee finds that fairness and equity require
that said service be provided free of charge, the cable review committee may
require that said service be provided free of charge.
F. It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services insofar as
their financial and other obligations to the Grantee are honored. In the event that
the Grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the City
revokes or fails to renew this permit, or the City elects to purchase the system,
the Grantee shall do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive
continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. In the event of
purchase by the City, or a change of Grantee, the current Grantee shall cooperate
with the City, or with a representative appointed by the City to operate the
system for a temporary period, in maintaining continuity of service to all
subscribers.
23.07.020 Channel Allocations.
A. Off the Air Programming:
1. The Grantee shall carry the signals of the following television stations:
(i) WTMJ-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Channel 4;
(ii) WITI-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Channel 6;
(iii) WISN-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Channel 12;
(iv) WVTV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Channel 18;
(v) WMVS, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Channel 10;
(vi) WMVT, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Channel 36;
and all other Milwaukee, Wisconsin, television stations
hereinafter in operation.
2. The Grantee shall carry the signals of other TV stations pursuant to the
present and future regulations of the FCC.
3. The Grantee shall provide radio channels which may be received on
conventional FM receivers, connected to the Grantee’s cable system.
4. Such additional channels, signals, programs and production equipment as
the Grantee may include in his proposal for obtaining the franchise.
B. Local Origination: The Grantee shall devote at least one channel to locally
originated programming pursuant to the regulations of the FCC. The Grantee shall
also submit a plan, subject to the approval of the cable review committee, stating the
proposed number of channels which will be provided for additional services
including channels to be devoted to locally originated programs. Said plan shall
contain an estimate of the total number of broadcast hours per week per channel
which the Grantee proposes to devote to local programming, the types of local
programs it proposes to originate, and a provision that the Grantee shall submit to
both the cable review committee and CACPW each year a proposed programming
schedule for locally originated channels.
C. Public Access Channel:
1. Upon inauguration of the cable system’s subscriber service, the Grantee shall
provide one fully operational channel, as a non-commercial public access
channel available to the public on a first-come, non-discriminatory basis.
Production facilities on this channel shall be made available without cost for
live studio presentations of five (5) minutes or less. If such presentation
exceeds five (5) minutes, fees for the use of the public access channel shall be
limited to production costs attributed solely to personnel and equipment
utilized in live studio presentations. This channel shall also be made
available on a first-come, non-discriminatory basis, without fee, to the public
for cable-casting of programs prepared on video tape or film for presentation.
The Grantee shall provide, at no cost to the public access users, equipment
and personnel for cable-casting one-half (1/2) and one (1) inch color video
tape and sixteen millimeter (16mm) sound movie film.
2. Within twelve (12) months, after the date of granting a franchise, the Grantee
shall complete a set of rules for the use of the public access channel which
shall be promptly forwarded to the cable review committee and to the FCC.
The rules shall be prepared, to the greatest extent possible, in cooperation
with the CACPW. The rules shall, at a minimum, provide for:
(i) access on a first-come, first-served, non-discriminatory basis
for all residents of the City;
(ii) prohibition of advertising for commercial or political
purposes, as defined by the FCC;
(iii) prohibition of any presentation or lottery information, or
obscene or indecent material; provided that in said rules the
definition of obscene or indecent material shall conform to
any such definition contained in any Ordinance of the City
which is currently in effect or which is subsequently passed
by the Council;
(iv) public inspection of the log of requests for access time, which
shall be retained for the duration of this franchise;
(v) procedure by which individuals or groups who violate any
rule may be prevented from further access to the channel; and
(vi) free use of such reasonable amounts of channel time,
negotiated equipment, negotiated technical support as are
provided for in this franchise and in the Grantee’s proposal.
D. Educational Access Channel: Upon the inauguration of the cable system’s subscriber
service the Grantee shall provide one fully operational channel for educational use
without charge.
E. Municipal Access Channel: Upon inauguration of the cable system subscriber
service, the Grantee shall provide one fully operational channel for government use
without charge.
F. Leased Access Channel: Said cable system shall provide at least one channel which
is reserved for leasing purposes. When not in use, said channel is to be used as an
additional public access, education, or government channel, if the demand for such
an additional channel exists.
G. Whenever all public channels or all educational access channels or all government
access channels are in use during the eighty percent (80%) of the weekdays (Monday
through Friday) for eighty percent (80%) of the time during any consecutive threehour
period for six (6) consecutive weeks, the Grantee shall make an additional
channel of like type available within six (6) months. The Grantee may make a onetime
charge for time and materials for this service. Such additional channel shall be
operated on the same basis and in accordance with the same rule at all other access
channels.
23.07.030 Programming Facilities.
A. The Grantee shall provide one full color mobile unit for local origination
purposes.
B. The Grantee shall provide a studio with two black and white cameras for users of
the public access channel.
C. The Grantee shall, upon the request of the Common Council, provide the
necessary equipment for transmitting a signal from City Hall.
D. The Grantee shall make its local origination studio mobile unit facilities,
including color cameras and other equipment, available for use by those persons
and organizations utilizing the public access, educational and government
channels on the Grantee’s cable system, subject to reasonable rules and
regulations established by the cable review committee pursuant to 23.13.010 B,
number 6 of this Ordinance.
E. The Grantee shall provide all reasonable technical and programming assistance to
all parties programming on the Grantee’s cable system.
F. The Grantee shall make all reasonable efforts to encourage the use of its nonbroadcast
channels.
23.07.040 Emergency or Disaster. In the event of an emergency or disaster, the Grantee
shall, upon request of the Mayor or his duly authorized representatives, make available its
facilities to the City at no charge for emergency use during the period of such emergency
or disaster and shall provide such personnel as necessary to properly operate under the
circumstances.
23.07.050 Customer Service.
A. The Grantee shall maintain an office in the City in a location convenient to the
public which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a listed
telephone, and be so operated that complaints and request for repairs or
adjustments may be received at any time.
B. The Grantee shall respond to all service calls and complaints, and shall correct
malfunctions in its equipment as promptly as possible. The Grantee shall respond
to requests for service within 24 hours after its receptions of said requests. If the
Grantee does not respond to a request within said 24 hours, the Grantee shall
refund 1/30 of its monthly charge to a subscriber for each 24 hours or fraction
thereof following a request for service, except to the extent that the Grantee is
prevented from responding to said request for service by strike, injunction or
other cause beyond the control of the Grantee.
C. The Grantee shall comply with the method for settling consumer complaints
established pursuant to 23.13.010 B, number 3, of this Ordinance.
D. The Grantee shall not engage in the business of selling, servicing, installing, or
leasing televisions or radio receivers, converters or antennae.
23.08.000 TECHNICAL CONFIGURATION AND CAPACITY.
A. The cable system shall be engineered, installed, maintained, operated and
equipped so as to at all times meet the technical standards which are the current
“state of the art” of the cable communications industry. The Grantee shall also at
all times meet the technical standards established by the FCC, including
specifications for frequency levels, channel frequency response, terminal
isolation, and system radiation, and all other standards which the FCC may set.
B. The cable system shall be engineered and equipped so as to possess an initial
capacity of thirty (30) channels. The system shall also be capable of providing, if
need and market demand so require, sixty (60) channels without having to lay
additional cable.
C. The facilities used by the Grantee, including studio, mobile and local origination
programming equipment, shall be capable of producing and distributing color TV
signals, and when the signals the Grantee distributes are received in color, they
shall be distributed in color unless technically unfeasible.
D. The cable system shall be engineered and installed with the capacity for two-way
communications in accordance with the regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission now in effect or which may be promulgated.
E. The cable system shall utilize a dual trunk with a “mid-band split”, providing a
frequency range of 54 to 200 MHz in the main trunk and of 168 to 300 MHz in
the second trunk.
F. The Grantee shall utilize microwave distribution systems where necessary to
fulfill all of the representations made to the City in the Grantee’s proposal.
G. The converters utilized in the cable system shall be capable of delivering thirtysix
(36) television channels or such lesser number as the City may agree to.
H. At the option of any individual subscriber, the Grantee shall install a switching
device upon said subscriber’s television receiver whereby said subscriber may
disconnect his television receiver from the Grantee’s cable system in order to
receive over-the-air television signals. The price of this device to said subscriber
shall be the cost of said device to the Grantee, or less at the options of the
Grantee, and the Grantee shall not charge the subscriber any fee for the
installation of said device. The Grantee shall make all reasonable efforts to obtain
said devices at the lowest possible cost to him.
I. At the option of any individual subscriber, the Grantee shall provide a device
which allows said individual subscriber to utilize a key to disconnect those
channels providing additional services to the subscriber, such as pay-TV channels.
The price of said device shall be the cost of said device to the Grantee, or less at
the option of the Grantee, and the Grantee shall not charge the subscriber any fee
for the installation of said device. The Grantee shall make all reasonable efforts
to obtain said devices at the lowest possible cost to him.
23.09.000 RATES.
23.09.010 Rate Schedule.
A. The rates charged to subscribers shall be fair and reasonable. Said rates shall also
be nondiscriminatory, except as provided in 23.09.010 B, C, D, E and F below.
B. Initial Rate Schedule:
1. The Grantee shall be permitted to charge rates not exceeding those set forth in
their application. No charge for disconnection will be permitted at any time.
C. The Grantee shall provide, without charge, one outlet to each municipally owned
building, fire station, police station, library, public and parochial school, and
institution of higher learning that is passed by its cable. If more than one outlet is
required at any of said locations, the Grantee shall install same at the cost of time
and materials only, and in no event will there be a monthly service charge at said
locations.
D. Rates for all other services to be provided over the CATV system by the Grantee
shall be as set forth in the Grantee’s proposal.
E. If the Grantee desires to provide new services not set forth in the Grantee’s
proposal, the rates for such services shall be approved pursuant to 23.09.020 of
this Ordinance.
F. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the reduction or waiving of charges
in conjunction with promotional campaigns for the purpose of attracting
subscribers, nor shall this provision be interpreted to prohibit the establishment of
a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any subscriber
or programmer included within a particular classification approved by the cable
review committee and the Council pursuant to 23.09.020 of this Ordinance.
G. Nothing in 23.09.010 A above shall prohibit special rates for large institutions,
motels, multiple-family dwelling units, or any other type of dwelling or buildings;
provided that said special rates are approved by the cable review committee and
the Council, pursuant to Section 9.2 of this Ordinance.
H. The rates established in 23.09.010 B and D above shall not be subject to increase
through the first three years following commencement of service.
23.09.020 Rate Supervision.
A. The Grantee may decrease the rates to subscribers at any time. All rate increases
above maximum previously approved, advance charges for additional services
and converters, classified rate schedules, and special rates for certain dwellings
or buildings shall not go into effect until approved by both the cable review
committee and Council, pursuant to 23.09.020 B and C below.
B. The cable review committee shall approve rates, pursuant to 23.09.020, only after
a public hearing has been held on the rate change in question. Said public
hearing shall be announced by written notice published in a newspaper of general
circulation at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. At said public
hearing, the Grantee must make such showing as the cable review committee
requires to substantiate the necessity for the rate change in question.
C. Once the cable review committee has approved a rate change, the Council shall
either approve said rate change or fail to do the same through the use of a
resolution.
D. The cable review committee reserves the right to review and approve rates for
new services. If fairness and equity require that a new service be provided free
of charge, the cable review committee may require that said service be provided
free of charge.
23.09.030 Advance Charges.
A. The Grantee may require subscribers to pay for each month of basic service and
FM service in advance at the beginning of each month. No other advance
payment or deposit of any kind shall be required by the Grantee for basic
subscriber service. No deposit or advance payment of any kind shall be charged
for the provision of any converter without prior approval of the cable review
committee and Council. Additional advance payments may be made available, as
an option, by the Grantee to subscribers. Nothing in this provision shall be
construed to prohibit charges for initial installation and reconnection.
B. The Grantee may make available or require advance charges or deposits for
various additional services, provided that the cable review committee and the
Council shall have authorized such charges or deposits, pursuant to 23.09.020 of
this Ordinance.
23.09.040 Termination of Service.
A. If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee, or any other
properly due fee or charge, the Grantee may disconnect the subscriber’s service
outlet. Such disconnection shall not be effected until sixty (60) days after the due
date of said delinquent fee or charge, or until ten (10) days after adequate written
notice of the intent to disconnect has been delivered to the subscriber in question.
After disconnection, upon payment of the delinquent fee or charge and the
payment of a reconnection charge, the Grantee shall promptly reinstate the
subscriber’s cable service.
B. Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the Grantee shall promptly
remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber
upon his written request. The service will be disconnected at the poles if above
ground or at the connection box if underground so that such disconnection shall
be outside rather than inside the home. For multiple family dwellings such
disconnection shall be made in the basement or other appropriate service area
outside the living area itself. Any such removal shall be at no cost to the
subscriber.
23.09.050 Refunds to Subscribers and Programmers.
A. If the Grantee fails to provide any material service requested by a subscriber or
programmer, the Grantee shall, after adequate notification and being afforded the
opportunity to provide the service, promptly refund all deposits or advance
charges paid for the service in question by said subscriber or programmer.
B. B. If any subscriber terminates any monthly service during the first twelve (12)
months of said service because of the failure of the Grantee to render the service
in accordance with the standards set forth in this franchise, the Grantee shall
refund to such subscriber an amount equal to the installation or reconnection
charges paid by the subscriber multiplied by the fraction of the twelve (12)
month period for which the subscriber will not be receiving service.
C. The Grantee shall make refunds to subscriber pursuant to 23.07.050 B of this
Ordinance.
23.10.000 PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS.
23.10.010 Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. The Grantee shall not deny service,
deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, programmers, or general
citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, creed or sex. Nothing in this
provision shall be construed to prohibit the reduction of waiving of charges in
conjunction with promotional campaigns for the purpose of attracting subscribers, nor
shall this provision be interpreted to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of
charges and classified rate schedules to which any subscriber or programmer included
within a particular classification shall be entitled.
23.10.020 Employment Practices of the Grantee. In the carrying out of the
construction, maintenance and operation of its CATV system, the Grantee will not
discriminate against any employee or applicant because of race, creed, color, religion,
sex, or national origin. The Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment
opportunity requirements of the FCC, as expressed in Section 76.13 (2)(8) and 76.311 of
Chapter 1 Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The Grantee shall comply at all
times with all other applicable Federal, State, City, and County laws, and all executive
and administrative orders relating to non-discrimination in employment. The Grantee
will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees
are treated during employment, without regard to their race, creed, color, sex, religion or
national origin. Such action shall include, but not be limited to the following:
employment upgrading, demotion or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising,
layoff or termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for
training including apprenticeship. The Grantee shall post in conspicuous places,
available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the
provisions of this non-discrimination clause. The Grantee shall in all solicitations or
advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the Grantee, state that all
qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race,
creed, color, sex, religion or national origin. The Grantee will incorporate the foregoing
requirements of this paragraph in all of its contracts for work relative to construction,
maintenance and operation of the CATV system, other than contracts for standard
commercial supplies or raw materials, and will require all of its contractors for such work
to incorporate such requirements in all subcontracts for such work.
23.10.030 Cable Monitoring. Neither the Grantee, nor any governmental bureau,
department, unit, agency or entity, at the federal, state, county or local level, nor any
other person or entity, shall monitor, or arrange for the monitoring of, any cable, line,
signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose whatsoever.
23.10.040 Right of Privacy.
A. The Grantee shall not transmit any signal to or from any dwelling or any other
building without the express authorization of the owner of said dwelling or other
building; provided that where said owner has leased said dwelling or other
building or a portion thereof, said express authorization shall be obtained from
the lessee and not from the owner.
B. Nothing in this section shall diminish any rights of residents of dwelling or other
buildings protected by 23.10.050 of this Ordinance.
23.10.050 Rights of Residents.
A. An owner or operator of an apartment building, condominium, nursing home, or
any other rental facility may not interfere with or charge a fee for the installation
of cable facilities for the use of a lessee of said property or premises, except that
such owner or operator may require:
1. Installation to conform to reasonable conditions necessary to protect the
safety, appearance and functioning of the premises;
2. The Grantee, occupant or tenant to pay for the installation, operation or
removal of such facilities; or
3. The Grantee, occupant or tenant to agree to indemnify the owner or
operator for any damages caused by the installation, operation or removal
of such facilities.
B. It shall be unlawful for the Grantee to reimburse or offer to reimburse any person,
or for any person to demand or receive reimbursement from the Grantee, for the
placement upon the premises of such person of Grantee’s facilities necessary to
connect such person’s premises to the distribution lines of Grantee to provide
CATV service to said premises.
C. A landlord may not discriminate in the amount of rent charged to tenants or
occupants who receive cable services and to those who do not.
D. The Grantee may not take actions which would diminish or interfere with the
privilege of any tenant or owner occupant of any such building to use or avail
himself of master or individual antenna equipment.
23.10.060 Sale of Subscriber Lists Prohibited. The Grantee shall not sell, or otherwise
make available, lists of the names and addressed of its subscribers, or any list which
identifies, byname, subscriber viewing habits, to any person, agency, or entity, for any
purpose whatsoever.
23.11.000 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY.
A. The right is hereby reserved to the City to adopt, in addition to the provisions
contained herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such additional
regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the police powers;
provided, that such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable
and not in conflict with the rights herein granted.
B. Nothing in this Ordinance shall limit the right of the City to acquire the cable
system of the Grantee through the exercise of eminent domain, condemnation
proceedings or otherwise.
C. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to limit or in any other
way impair the powers and authorities of the City of Port Washington, except as
expressly stated in this Ordinance.
23.12.000 PROTECTIONS AFFORDED THE GRANTEE.
23.12.010 Tampering With Cable Equipment. A person who willfully or maliciously
damages, or causes to be damaged, any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus, or equipment of
the Grantee, or who commits any act with intent to cause damage to any wire, cable,
conduit, apparatus or equipment of the Grantee, or who taps, tampers with, or connects
any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit or equipment of the Grantee with intent to
obtain a signal or impulse therefrom without authorization of the Grantee, shall be subject
to a forfeiture of not more than $200.00 as determined by the court and shall be liable in a
civil action for three times the actual amount of damages sustained thereby, but this
section shall not prevent a public utility from removing, disconnecting or otherwise
rendering, inoperable any of Grantee’s apparatus or equipment attached or in any way
connected to such public utility’s facilities, if done for reasonable cause.
23.12.020 Liability of the Grantee in Libel Action. The Grantee of its agents shall not,
in an action for slander or for publishing a libel, be held liable in damages for or on
account of any defamatory matter uttered, telecast, cablecast, or published over the
facilities of the Grantee by any person whose utterance, telecast, cablecast, or publication
is not, under the provision of any law of the United States or any regulation, ruling or
order of the Federal Communications Commission, subject to censorship or control by
the Grantee.
23.13.000 SUPERVISION OF THE GRANTEE.
23.13.010 Cable Review Committee.
A. The Cable Review Committee shall consist of three aldermen and two citizen
members. For elected officials appointed to the Board, the term of office shall
be one year commencing at the regular meeting on the third Tuesday in April.
For non-elected officials, the term of office shall be three years commencing at
the regular meeting on the third Tuesday in April. Commencing with April of
1994,one citizen member shall be appointed for two years; and one citizen
member appointed for three years. Thereafter, all appointments of non-elected
officials shall be for three years. All appointments to the Committee shall be
made by the Mayor; citizen member appointments shall be subject to
confirmation by Council.
B. The cable review committee shall perform the following functions:
1. The cable review committee shall perform all tasks necessary to insure
that the terms of this Ordinance and the terms of the Grantee’s proposal
are carried out.
2. The cable review committee shall conduct all public hearings required by
this Ordinance. Notice of all such public hearings shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing. Written notice of all public hearings shall also be mailed to the
Grantee at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. Following a
public hearing, the cable review committee shall draft a summary of said
hearing, which will include any grants of approval or recommendations of
the cable review committee regarding the subject matter of the hearing for
submissions to the Council.
3. Within twelve months of the date of enaction of this Ordinance, the cable
review committee shall devise a system for handling and settling
consumer complaints; provided that said system for handling and settling
complaints shall not unreasonably burden the Grantee and shall conform
to 23.07.050 B of this Ordinance.
4. The cable review committee shall examine the need for amendments to the
Ordinance and shall approve and recommend to the Council any
amendments which the cable review committee deems desirable. Before
approving an amendment and recommending an amendment to the
Council, the cable review committee shall hold a public hearing on the
amendment, pursuant to number 2 above. Said amendment shall come
into force only upon approval of both a majority of the cable review
committee and the Council.
5. The cable review committee shall study the ways in which the government
of Port Washington may utilize the municipal access channel provided by
the Grantee. The cable review committee shall possess the power of
overall supervision of the municipal access channel, shall establish
regulations and guidelines for the utilization of this channel by
governmental entities, and shall promote the use of this channel by
governmental entities. To achieve these ends, the cable review committee
shall recommend the manner of utilization of the fee established in
23.06.020 of this Ordinance. The manner of utilization of said fee shall be
subject to the approval of the Finance Committee and the Council itself.
6. Within twelve months of the date of enaction of this Ordinance, the cable
review committee shall promulgate a set of rules which will supervise the
sharing of equipment by the Grantee, pursuant to 23.07.030 of this
Ordinance, between users of the public access channel, municipal access
channel, educational access channel and leased access channel; provided
that said set of rules shall not create procedures which unduly interfere
with the activities of the Grantee.
7. Within twelve months after the date of final adoption of this Ordinance,
the cable review committee shall complete a set of rules for the use of the
educational channel and the sharing of equipment provided by the Grantee
between educational users on the Grantee’s cable system. The rules shall
be prepared, to the greatest extent possible, in cooperation with the
Grantee, the CACPW and all educational authorities within the City.
8. If grounds for revocation of this franchise exist, the cable review
committee shall explore the desirability of penalties and sanctions not
amounting to revocations, shall discuss said penalties and sanction to the
Council, pursuant to 23.13.030 E of this Ordinance.
9. The cable review committee may intervene in the Grantee’s application to
the FCC for a certificate of compliance, pursuant to 23.05.010 A of this
Ordinance, if the cable review committee deems such intervention to be
advisable.
10. The cable review committee shall oversee the construction of the
Grantee’s cable system to ensure technical compliance with the
requirements placed on the Grantee by the Grantee’s proposal and by this
Ordinance, and to insure compliance within the time schedule established
in 23.05.000 of this Ordinance.
11. The cable review committee shall conduct hearings upon proposed rate
increases and shall approve or disapprove of said proposed rate increases,
pursuant to 23.09.000 B of this Ordinance.
C. The cable review committee shall make recommendations to the Council
regarding the hiring of any consultants, counselors, staff or other personnel
functions. The actual hiring of any personnel shall be subject to the approval of
the Council.
D. The cable review committee shall have the right to inspect books and records of
the Grantee which the Grantee is required to keep, pursuant to 23.13.020 of this
Ordinance.
E. In addition to the specific rights of inspection contained in this Ordinance, the
cable review committee shall also have the right to make such inspections as it
shall find necessary to insure compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and
other pertinent provisions of law.
F. The cable review committee shall work with departments of the City
government, as circumstances require.
G. The cable review committee shall provide general supervision over the public
access channel on the Grantee’s cable system. Specifically, the cable review
committee shall:
(i) Ensure that the public access channel is made available to all
residents of the City, on a non-discriminatory, first-come,
first-served basis;
(ii) Ensure that the public access channel is free of all control
over program contents, except for that control over program
content need to insure conformity with the operational rules
established by the Grantee pursuant to 23.07.020 C, number
2 of this Ordinance.
(iii) Manage all financial and budget matters pertaining to the
public access channel;
(iv) Make suggestions to the Grantee and aid the Grantee in
devising, promulgating and administering all rules and
regulations, and procedures pertaining to the use and
scheduling of the public access channel;
(v) Aid the Grantee in preparing such regular or special reports
concerning the public access channel that are required or
desirable;
(vi) Promulgate rules for the non-discriminatory sharing of any
cameras and other equipment, purchased by the cable review
committee or access channel users pursuant to 23.13.050 C,
number 4 of this Ordinance.
(vii) Inform the citizenry of Port Washington regarding the
existence, purpose, utilization possibilities, and rules of the
public access channel, in order to facilitate the widespread
use of the public access channel;
(viii) Conduct laboratories and clinics, in order to teach program
production techniques to users of the public access channel;
and
(ix) Generally promote the use of the public access channel by a
multiplicity of users.
2. The cable review committee shall examine the programming offered of the
Grantee’s cable system and the Grantee shall periodically meet the cable
review committee to discuss said programming. Said meetings shall be
held at least once every three months, and at such meetings the cable
review committee may make suggestions about programming to the
Grantee. These suggestions shall in no way compel any action on the part
of the Grantee.
3. The cable review committee shall receive and administer the payment
made by the Grantee pursuant to 23.06.030 of this Ordinance. This
payment may be utilized by the cable review committee to employ all staff
and personnel who may be needed to aid the cable review committee in
performing its functions, and to make all purchases of materials,
equipment and services that are needed by the cable review committee to
perform its functions, including, but not limited to, cameras and other
equipment to be utilized by access channel users. Said payment may also
be utilized by the cable review committee in any other manner consistent
with the terms of this Ordinance; provided that said payment shall not be
utilized to pay for or subsidize the purchase of any item, for which a fee is
charged by the Grantee, on the public access channel by any user or group
of users of the public access channel.
4. The cable review committee may develop additional sources of revenue,
such as grants, fund-raising activities, and the like.
5. The cable review committee may perform all other functions consistent
with the above as may be appropriate.
H. The City Clerk shall keep on file all applications, proposals, or other documents
which have been or will be submitted to the City by persons requesting the
franchise to operate a CATV system in the City.
23.13.020 Book and Records of the Grantee.
A. The Grantee shall file with the Board of Public Works accurate copies of maps
and/or plats of the location and character of all existing and proposed installation
over, upon, or under the streets. These maps and plats shall conform to the
requirements of the Board of Public Works, shall be kept continuously up-to-date,
and shall be filed at least quarterly.
B. The Grantee shall continually keep on file with the cable review committee a
current list of its shareholders, holding 5% or more of the outstanding stock, and
officers, with their current addresses. These lists must also be included in the
annual reports of the Grantee required in 23.06.010 A of this ordinance.
C. All books and records of the Grantee concerning its operations within the City,
including but not limited to all income tax returns and financial records of the
Grantee, shall be made available for inspection and audit by the cable review
committee or its designate within thirty (30) days after any request for such
inspection or audit shall be made.
D. The Grantee shall keep and main all records required by the FCC. Copies of said
records and all other rules, regulations, terms and conditions established by the
Grantee for the conduct of his business shall be filed with the cable review
committee and at the local office of the Grantee.
E. Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the
Grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange
Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency
having jurisdiction in respect to any matter affecting cable operation shall also be
submitted simultaneously to the City by filing the same with the cable review
committee.
F. The Grantee shall maintain records of those subscriber complaints and requests
for service which it has received, the time of such reception, and the time at which
it responded to said subscriber complaints and requests for service. Every two
months, copies of said records shall be submitted to the cable review committee.
The Grantee shall also keep a copy of said records at its local office.
G. The Grantee shall keep and maintain a complete record of all persons or groups
requesting time on its access channels. Said record shall be made available for
public inspection and a copy of said record shall be submitted to the cable review
committee.
H. All records required by this 23.13.020 shall be kept on file by the Grantee for the
duration of this franchise.
23.13.030 Revocation of This Franchise.
A. In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the City by virtue of this
Ordinance or otherwise, the City reserves the right to revoke, terminate and
cancel the franchise and all rights and privileges of the Grantee hereunder in the
event that:
1. The Grantee violates any material provision of this Ordinance, any
material provision of the Grantee’s proposal, or any rule, order or
determination of the City made pursuant to this Ordinance, except where
such violation, other than of number 2 below, is without fault or through
excusable neglect; or
2. The Grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is
adjudged a bankrupt; or
3. A receiver or trustee has, at least one hundred and twenty (120) days
beforehand been appointed to take over and conduct the business of the
Grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other
action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have
been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred and twenty (120)
days, or unless:
(i) Within one hundred and twenty (120) days after his election
or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully
complied with all the provisions of this Ordinance and
remedied all defaults thereunder; and
(ii) Such receiver or trustee, within said one hundred and twenty
(120) days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved
by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby
such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by
each and every provision of this Ordinance; or
4. There has been a change in the control of the Grantee requiring the
consent of the cable review committee and Council, pursuant to 23.13.040
of this Ordinance, and such consent has been denied or not given; or
5. The Grantee attempts to evade any of the material provisions of this
Ordinance or practices any fraud or deceit upon the City; or
6. The Grantee fails to have service available to ninety percent (90%) of the
residential structures in all areas of the City where there are at least fifty
(50) residential structures per line mile within four (40 years after receipt
of authorization from all required governmental agencies and acceptable
pole attachment agreements have been obtained by the Grantee; provided
that this period may be extended by the cable review committee if the
Grantee is diligently pursuing such authorization and pole attachment
agreements and the delay is not caused by any fault of the Grantee or
results from strikes, natural disaster or other occurrences over which the
Grantee would have no control.
7. The Grantee intentionally violates or permits the violation of 23.10.030,
23.10.040 or 23.10.060 of this Ordinance.
8. The Grantee intentionally violates or permits the violation of 23.13.020 C
of this Ordinance.
B. Such revocation, termination and cancellation shall occur only after a public
hearing has been conducted by the cable review committee pursuant to 23.13.010
B, number 2 of this Ordinance. If as a result of said public hearing, the cable
review committee approves and recommends revocation, termination and
cancellation, the Council may put such revocation, termination and cancellation
into effect by ordinance duly adopted after thirty (30) days’ notice to the Grantee.
Such revocation, termination, and cancellation shall in no way affect any of the
City’s rights under this Ordinance or any provision of law. In the event that such
revocation, termination and cancellation depends upon a finding of fact, such
finding of fact, as made by the cable review committee or the Council shall be
conclusive; provided, however, that under this Section, the Grantee must be
provided with an opportunity to be heard before the Council as well as before the
cable review committee.
C. In the event that the City revokes, terminates and cancels this permit, pursuant to
appropriate provisions of this Ordinance, the City shall have the right to purchase
the Grantee’s cable system at a price not to exceed its then book value (that is,
original cost of property less accumulated depreciation). The book value shall be
determined by the City in accordance with generally accepted appraisal and
accounting principles. Under no circumstances shall any valuation be made for
“good will” or any right or privilege granted by this Ordinance. After purchasing
the Grantee’s cable system, the City shall have the right to sell said cable system
to another operator if the City so chooses.
D. Whenever this franchise shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or
on behalf of the Grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and any
failure of the Grantee to perform within time allotted shall always be sufficient
grounds for the City to revoke this franchise.
E. If grounds for the revocation of this franchise exist, the Council may, upon the
recommendation of the cable review committee, pass a resolution imposing any
penalty or sanction, not amounting to revocation, upon the Grantee; provided that
said penalty or sanction not amounting to revocation, is agreed upon by both the
Grantee and the cable review committee. If no agreement is reached between the
Grantee and the cable review committee, the City shall decide whether or not to
revoke the Grantee’s franchise.
23.13.040 Restrictions Against Assignment.
A. This franchise shall not be assigned or transferred either in whole or in part or
leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto either legal or
equitable, or any right, interest, or property therein, pass to or vest in any person
either by the act of the Grantee or by operation of law without the express consent
of the cable review committee and the Council. The granting, giving or waiving
of any one or more of such consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent
consent or consents.
B. The Grantee shall promptly notify the cable review committee of any actual or
proposed change in, or transfer, or acquisition by, any other party of control of the
Grantee. Within sixty (60) days after receiving said notice, the cable review
committee shall hold a public hearing on this matter and within ninety (90) days
shall make its recommendations to the Council on this matter. For the purpose of
determining whether it will consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of
control, the cable review committee may inquire into the qualifications of the
prospective controlling party, and the Grantee shall assist the cable review
committee in any such inquiry.
C. Every change, transfer or acquisition of control of the Grantee with respect to
which the consent of the cable review committee and Council is required,
pursuant to 23.13.040 A above, shall make this franchise subject to revocation
unless and until the cable review committee and Council shall have consented
thereto. In the event that the cable review committee or Council denies consent,
and such change, transfer, or acquisition of control has been effected, the City
may revoke this permit unless control of the Grantee is restored to its status prior
to the change, or to a status acceptable to the cable review committee and
Council.
D. Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the
Grantee’s cable system, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a
substantial part of said system, the Grantee shall notify the cable review
committee of such fact, and such notification shall be treated as a notification that
a change in control of the Grantee has taken place, and the provisions of
23.13.040 A, B, and C above shall apply.
E. The consent or approval of the Board to any assignment, lease, transfer, sublease
or mortgage of this franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights
of the City in and to the streets.
F. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or pledge of the
cable system equipment or any part thereof or a leasing by the Grantee from
another person of said cable system equipment or part thereof for financing
purposes or otherwise. Any such mortgage, pledge or lease shall be subject and
subordinate to the rights of the City under this contract or applicable law.
23.14.000 INTENDED SCOPE OF THIS ORDINANCE.
23.14.010 Compliance with Local, State and Federal Law.
A. The Grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the CATV system subject to
the supervision of all of the authorities of the City who have jurisdiction in such
matters and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances, and department rules
and regulations.
B. If at any time the powers of the Common Council or any agency or official of the
City are transferred by law to any other board, authority, agency or official, this
board, authority, agency or official shall have the power, rights and duties
previously vested under this Ordinance or by law in the Council or any agency or
official of the City.
C. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this franchise, the Grantee shall at all
times comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal government of
any administrative agency thereof; provided, however, if any such state or federal
law or regulation shall require the Grantee to perform any service or shall permit
the Grantee to perform any service in conflict with the terms of this Ordinance or
of any law or regulation of the City, then as soon as possible following
knowledge thereof, the Grantee shall notify the cable review committee of
conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or
regulation of the City or this Ordinance. If the cable review committee
determines that a material provision of this Ordinance is affected by such
subsequent action, the cable review committee and the Council shall have the
right to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be
necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
23.14.020 Failure of City to Enforce This Franchise, No Waiver of the Terms
Thereof. The Grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and
conditions of this franchise by any failure of the City upon any one or more occasions to
insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions.
23.14.030 Captions. The captions to sections throughout this Ordinance are intended
solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this Ordinance.
Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this Ordinance.
23.14.040 Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance or the application of such
provision to any circumstance is held invalid for any reason whatsoever, the remainder of
this Ordinance or the application of the provision to other circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
23.15.000 LIMITATIONS ON THE GRANTEE’S RECOURSE.
A. Except as expressly provided in this franchise, the Grantee herein shall have no
recourse whatsoever against the City for any loss, cost, or expense or damage
arising out of the provisions or requirements of this Ordinance or because of the
enforcement thereof by the City.
B. The Grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting this franchise, it did so
replying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and
authority of the City to grant this franchise. By the acceptance of this franchise
the Grantee agrees that it will not at any time set up against the City in any claim
or proceeding any condition or term of this franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary
or void or that the City had not power or authority to make such term or
condition of this franchise in their entirety.
C. The Grantee by acceptance of this franchise acknowledges that it has not been
induced to enter into this franchise by any understanding or promise or other
statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the City or by any other
third person concerning any term or condition of this franchise not expressed
herein.
D. The Grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of this franchise that it has
carefully read the terms and conditions hereof and is willing to and does accept
all reasonable risks of the meaning of such terms and conditions and agrees that
in the event of any ambiguity thereon or in the event of any other dispute over
the meaning thereof, the same shall be construed strictly against the Grantee and
in favor of the City.
23.16.000 APPLICATION AND GRANTING.
A. The application for a franchise shall be submitted to the cable review committee
in writing, and shall contain the following:
1. For individuals: The applicant’s name, address, occupation and principal
place of business.
2. For partnerships: The applicant partnership’s name, business and
principal place of business; along with the names and addresses,
occupations and principal place of business of each of the partners.
3. For corporations (or associations): The applicant corporation’s name,
principal business and principal place of business; the state of
incorporation; the names and addresses of the officers and directors; the
name and address of its registered agent; the number of shareholders,
including the names and residence of shareholders holding, controlling, or
having a beneficial interest in more than ten (10) percent of the
outstanding shares, identifying their interest, along with a statement
indicating any intention on change of said interests during the term of the
franchise. If the corporation is a foreign corporation, a certificate of
authority to transact business in this state shall accompany the application.
4. A statement as to any other Cable Communication Systems owned or
operated by or in which the applicant has any interest.
5. A detailed explanation of the nature, extent and scope of operation of the
proposed system (including any present legal, financial, technical or other
qualifying matter which may relate to the inability of the applicant to
perform the proposed system).
6. A complete, sworn financial statement of the applicant.
7. The estimated cost of installing the system.
8. The method of financing the system.
9. A listing of channels which the applicant will provide and the type of
program or service to be provided on each channel.
10. A schedule of the applicant’s rates for installation, monthly service
charges and any other charges to subscribers, together with a proposed
rental or service agreement with subscribers which details the rights and
obligation of subscribers to the system. The schedule of proposed rates
shall also indicate whether or not a charge will be made to a subscriber for
the removal of service.
11. A list of equipment to be used in the total system together with
specifications therefore. The applicant will agree that the cable review
committee may require a review of adequacy of equipment by a thirdparty
qualified consultant whose fee shall be paid by the applicant.
12. The estimated construction schedule.
13. A statement that the applicant will abide by and conform to all of the
provisions of this section and amendments thereto, and that the applicant
will pay at the time required any franchise fees herein prescribed.
14. Such additional detailed information which the cable review committee
may require.
15. An application fee of $500.00 shall accompany the application. Said
application fee shall be non-refundable.
B. The Common Council may grant a franchise upon the following conditions:
1. The Council may grant a non-exclusive franchise to an applicant,
thereafter referred to as Grantee, for a period of fifteen (15) years from the
date the franchise is awarded for the right and privilege to install, operate
and maintain a system in the City under the restrictions and conditions of
this Ordinance. Prior to the granting of said franchise, the Council shall
consider all applications at a public hearing with prior notice of the
hearing having been given to all applicants. No property right in this
franchise shall vest in the Grantee, and such franchise shall not be
construed to create any right beyond that set forth in this Ordinance.
2. An application approval fee of $500.00 shall be paid by the Grantee to the
City within ten (10 days after the granting of the franchise to the Grantee.
23.17.000 INCORPORATION OF THE GRANTEE’S PROPOSAL. All
representations made by the Grantee in the Grantee’s proposal shall be required to be
performed or provided by the Grantee, and any failure by the Grantee to perform any act
or provide any service or equipment proposed in the Grantee’s proposal shall be a
violation of this Ordinance.
23.18.000 VARIANCE IN PROPOSALS. In any event of variance between the
proposal of the applicant where such proposal is determined of more benefit to the City
of Port Washington, and acceptance of such proposal is conclusively determined to by
such termination, then the proposal of the applicant shall be binding. Nothing contained
in this Ordinance shall prohibit the Common Council from making such determination as
to the applicants for a franchise which they shall deem most beneficial to the City.
CHAPTER 25
Construction and Effect of Ordinances
Table of Contents
25.01.000 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
25.02.000 CONFLICT AND SEPERABILITY
25.02.010 Conflict of Provisions
25.02.020 Seperability of Code Provisions
25.03.000 CLERK TO FILE DOCUMENTS INCORPOATED BY
REFERENCE
25.04.000 PENALTY PROVISIONS
25.04.010 General Penalty
25.04.020 Execution Against Defendants Property
25.05.000 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES
25.06.000 EFFECT OF REPEALS
25.07.000 TITLE: EFFECTIVE DATE: CITATION
CHAPTER 25
Construction and Effect of Ordinances
25.01.000 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. In the construction of this Code of general
ordinances, the following shall be observed unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the ordinance.
1. Wisconsin Statutes. The term “Wisconsin Statutes” whenever used in this code
shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes then in effect and shall include session laws
enacted by the Legislature.
2. Gender: Singular and Plural. Every word in this Code and in any ordinance
importing the masculine gender may extend and be applied to females as well as
males, and every work importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; provided
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any provisions which shall
contain any express language excluding such construction or when the subject
matter or context of such provisions may be repugnant thereto.
3. Person. The word “person” extends and applies to natural persons, firms,
corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic and all entities of
any kind capable of being sued unless plainly inapplicable.
4. Acts by Agents. When a provision requires an act to be done, which may be law
as well as be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
25.02.000 CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY.
25.02.010 Conflict of Provisions. If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code
conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to
all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter.
25.02.020 Separability of Code Provisions. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause
or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of
any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof.
The Mayor and Common Council of the City hereby declare that they would have passed
this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses,
phrases or portions thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
25.03.000 CLERK TO FILE DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written or printed
matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set
forth herein and the City Clerk is hereby directed and required to file, deposit and keep in
his office a copy of the Code, standard, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter
as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept shall be public records open for
examination with proper care by any person during the City Clerk’s office hours, subject
to such orders or regulations, which the City Clerk may prescribe for their preservation.
25.04.000 PENALTY PROVISIONS.
25.04.010 General Penalty. Whenever so provided in this Code, any person who shall
violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of each violation, be
subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows:
A. First Offense. A forfeiture of not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00 in
addition to any applicable fees, assessments and restitution and the costs of
prosecution and, in the event of nonpayment of any of the foregoing amounts,
imprisonment in the county jail until the forfeiture, fees, assessments, restitution
and costs are paid, except that the amount owed is reduced at the rate of $25.00
for each day of imprisonment and the maximum period of imprisonment is 90
days.
B. Second and Subsequent Offenses. For any person who previously has been
convicted of a violation of the same provision, rule or regulation, a forfeiture of
not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 in addition to any applicable fees,
assessments and restitution and the costs of prosecution and, in the event of
nonpayment of any of the foregoing amounts, imprisonment in the county jail
until the forfeiture, fees, assessments, restitution and costs are paid, except that
the amount owed is reduced at the rate of $25.00 for each day of imprisonment
and the maximum period of imprisonment is 90 days.
C. Civil Remedy. In the event of nonpayment of any forfeiture fees, assessments,
restitution and costs and in lieu of imprisonment under paragraphs A and B above,
the City may enforce the judgment in the same manner as for a judgment in an
ordinary civil action.
D. Penalty for Children.
1. Definition. “Juvenile” means a person who is less than 17 years of age.
2. Court Authority to Impose Alternative Juvenile Dispositions and
Sanctions.
a. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance, the court
is authorized to impose any of the dispositions listed in §938.343
and §938.344, Wis. Stats., as amended, in accordance with the
provisions of those statutes.
b. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who
violates a condition of a dispositional order of the court under
§938.343 or §938.344, Wis. Stats., the municipal court is
authorized to impose any of the sanctions listed in §938.355
(6)(d), Wis. Stats., as amended, in accordance with the
provisions of those statutes.
c. This section is enacted under the authority of §938.17 (2)(cm),
Wis. Stats.
E. Separate Offenses. Each violation and each day a violation occurs or exists
constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such.
F. Non-exclusivity. Nothing in this section shall preclude the City from maintaining
any appropriate action to prevent or remove any violation of any provision of this
Code.
25.04.020 Execution Against Defendant’s Property. Whenever any person fails to
pay forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of the court for violation of any
ordinance of the City, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the
defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution
against the property of the defendant for said forfeiture and costs.
25.05.000 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES. All ordinances heretofore
adopted by the Common Council of the City of Port Washington are hereby repealed,
except all ordinances or parts of ordinances relating to the following subjects and not
conflicting with any of the provisions of this Code:
1. The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the City of Port Washington of
whatever name or description.
2. The establishment of grades, curb lines and widths of sidewalks in the public
streets and alleys.
3. The fixing of salaries of public officials and employees.
4. Rights, licenses or franchises or the creation of any contract with the City of Port
Washington.
5. The lighting of streets and alleys.
6. The annexation of territory to the City of Port Washington.
7. The naming and changing of names of streets, alleys, public grounds and parks.
8. The letting of contracts without bids.
9. The establishment of wards, ward boundaries and election precincts.
10. Tax and special assessment levies.
11. Release of persons, firms or corporations from liability.
12. Construction of any public works.
13. Water, sewer and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main
construction.
14. Budget ordinances, resolutions and actions.
15. The Zoning Ordinance which is re-enacted with all amendments thereto.
25.06.000 EFFECT OF REPEALS. The repeal of amendment of any section or
provision of this Code or of any other ordinance or resolution of the Common Council
shall not:
1. By implication be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or existing at the
time at which such repeal or amendment takes effect.
2. Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or
incurred under any enactment so repealed or amended, unless the privilege of
repealing such obligation or privilege has been reserved by the City.
3. Affect any offense committed or penalty or forfeiture incurred, previous to the
time when any ordinance shall be repealed or amended, except that when any
forfeiture or penalty shall have been mitigated by the provisions of any ordinance,
such provisions shall apply to and control any judgment to be pronounced after
such ordinance takes effect for any offense committed before that time.
4. Affect any prosecution for any offense, or the levy of any penalty or forfeiture
pending at the time when any ordinance aforesaid shall be repealed or amended,
but the right of action shall continue and the offender shall be subject to the
penalty as provided in such ordinance, and such prosecution shall proceed, in all
respects, as if such ordinance or ordinances had not been repealed, except that all
such proceedings had after the time this Code shall take effect, shall be conducted
according to the provisions of this Code.
25.07.000 TITLE: EFFECTIVE DATE: CITATION. These ordinances shall be
known as the “Municipal Code of the City of Port Washington” and shall take effect from
and after passage and publication as provided in section 66.035, Wisconsin Statutes. All
references thereto shall be cited by section number (example: section 13.06, Municipal
Code of the City of Port Washington).
20.01.000 TITLE, AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, SCOPE, SEVERABILITY
1 - 1
20.01.010 TITLE. This ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Port Washington.
20.01.020 AUTHORITY. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in
§62.23 (7) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
20.01.030 PURPOSE. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum
requirements adopted to promote the health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity and general
welfare of the City of Port Washington. Among other purposes, such provisions are intended
to provide for adequate light, air, sanitary drainage, convenience of access and safety from
fire and other dangers; to promote the safety and efficiency of the public streets and
highways, to aid in conserving and stabilizing the economic values of the community; to
preserve and promote the general attractiveness and character of the community
environment; to guide the proper distribution and location of population and of the various
land uses; to conserve and protect from misuse such areas as flood plains and wetlands; and
prevent flood damage to persons and property, minimize expenditures for flood relief and
flood control projects, and otherwise provide for the healthy and prosperous growth of the
community.
20.01.040 SCOPE. It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul,
impair or interfere with any existing easement, covenants, or agreements between parties or
with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to laws;
provided however, that where this Ordinance in any way imposes greater restrictions, than
are required by other rules, regulations or permits or by easements, covenants or agreements,
the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern.
20.01.050 SEVERABILITY. The several sections, subsections and paragraphs of this
Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any section, subsection, paragraph, or subparagraph
of this Ordinance shall be declared by a decision of a Court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the other provisions
of this Ordinance, or of the section of which the invalid portion or paragraph may be a part.
20.01.060 COMPLIANCE-OTHER PERMITS. Any development within or adjacent
to floodplains and wetlands as regulated by this Ordinance may also require permits from
other agencies with jurisdiction over the same area, such as the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources or the US Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. It is the responsibility of
the applicant to secure such other permits as may be appropriate from these agencies.
20.01.070 MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED. Unless
specifically exempted by State Statute, all state, county, city or other municipal lands or
facilities within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance shall comply with this Ordinance and
obtain all of its necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if s. 13.48 (13) Wis
Stats apples. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and
bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt when s.30.1294) (a),
Wis. Stats. applies.
20.01.000 TITLE, AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, SCOPE, SEVERABILITY
1 - 2
20.01.080 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
A. ABROGATION. It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul,
impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, rules or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law nor is it the
intent of this Ordinance to abrogate, impair or interfere with the legal rights of
individuals or corporations as they may be guaranteed by the state or federal
constitutions, statutes, or administrative rules. Claims for such interference may be
processed through the appeals procedure provided for in Section 20.08 of this
ordinance.
B. GREATER RESTRICTIONS. Where this ordinance permits a property to be placed
in more than one zone, as is the case of overlay districts, or where a property is
subject to both wetland and floodplain regulations, the more restrictive regulations
shall apply. Where this Ordinance regulates the same or similar items as contained in
easements, covenants, deed restrictions, and where this Ordinance imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply.
20.02.000 INTERPRETATIONS
2 - 1
20.02.010 INTERPRETATIONS. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the City and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of this Ordinance is required
by a standard in Chapters NR 116 or NR 117 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, and
where the ordinance provision is unclear in a specific application, the provision shall be
interpreted in the light of the NR 116 and NR117 standards in effect on the date of the
adoption of the affected provision.
20.02.020 SEVERABILITY. Should any portion of this Ordinance be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Ordinance shall
continue in full force and effect.
20.02.030 WARNING AND DISCLAIMERS OF NONLIABILITY. In adopting this
Ordinance setting forth land, water and building use regulations including site development
and appearance standards, and in delegating to the Plan Commission and to the City
Engineer or to the Building Inspector certain powers of interpretation and enforcement of
this Ordinance, and to the Zoning Board of Appeals the power to grant variances to said
provisions or to the actions of the aforementioned, the Common Council does not guarantee,
warrant, or represent that if such provisions or variances are adhered to that under all
conditions persons or property will not be subject to some degree of the adverse consequence
being protected against by enforcement of the provisions. For example, floodwaters may
exceed levels defined through this Ordinance, wetlands or soils that are deemed unsuitable
for specific uses may extend farther than delineated, driveway connections to public streets
arranged under the terms of this Ordinance to reduce traffic congestion and improve safety
may still experience some levels of congestion and experience some accidents, landscape
requirements imposed to screen adverse views may still admit partial views. Therefore the
City asserts that adoption and enforcement of this Ordinance does not create liability on the
Council, its Commissions, Boards or employees that may result from reliance upon this
Ordinance.
20.02.040 SPECIFIC WORDS AND PHRASES. When used in this Ordinance the
following words and phrases shall have specific meaning as hereinafter defined:
1. Apartment: A suite of rooms or a room in a multiple dwelling which suite or room is
arranged, intended or designed to be occupied as a residence of a single-family,
individual or group of individuals.
2. Apartment House: See “Dwelling, Multiple”.
3. Base Setback Area: The land lying between the edge of the existing street right-ofway
and the Base Setback Line.
4. Base Setback Line: The line from which all required setbacks are measured, which
line corresponds to the established ultimate street right-of-way line as set forth in
Section 20.15.020 (1).
20.02.000 INTERPRETATIONS
2 - 2
5. Basement: A story partly underground which, if occupied for living purposes shall be
counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
6. Bed & Breakfast Lodging: Any place of lodging that provides 5 or fewer rooms for
rent, is the owner’s personal residence and is occupied by the owner at the time of
rental.
7. Boarding House: A building or premises where meals, or meals and lodging are
offered for compensation for 5 or more persons, but not more than 12 persons, and
having no more than 5 sleeping rooms for this purpose. An establishment where
meals are served for compensation for more than 12 persons shall be deemed a
restaurant. An establishment with more than 5 sleeping rooms shall be deemed a
hotel or motel. For purposes of this Ordinance, group homes shall be defined as
boarding houses.
8. Building: Any structure used, designed or intended for all roofed shelter, enclosure,
or protection of persons, animals or property.
9. Building, Accessory: A building or portion of a building used for a purpose
customarily incident to the permitted principal use of the lot or to a principal building
and located on the same lot as the principal use.
10. Building, Principal: The building on a lot in which is conducted the principal use as
permitted on such lot by the regulations of the district in which it is located.
11. Building, Height of: The vertical distance from the average established street grade
in front of the lot or the average finished grade at the front building line, whichever is
higher, to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard
roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a gambrel, hip or pitch roof.
12. Camping Trailer: A self propelled or towable vehicle designed to travel over public
highways and when parked to provide temporary living accommodations without
hook-up to water or sanitary sewer.
13. Channel: Those floodlands normally occupied by a stream, lakebed, or other body of
water under average annual high-water flow conditions while confined within
generally well established banks.
14. Clinic, Medical or Dental: A group of medical or dental offices organized as a
unified facility to provide medical or dental treatment as contrasted with an unrelated
group of such offices, but not including bed patient care.
15. Court: An occupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building,
which is bounded on two or more sides by the wall of such building.
20.02.000 INTERPRETATIONS
2 - 3
16. Court, Inner: A court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a building, or by
exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable.
17. Court, Outer: A court extending to a street line or opening upon any front, side or
rear yard.
18. Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to construction of or additions or substantial improvements
to buildings, other structures, or accessory uses, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations, or deposition of materials.
19. Dwelling, Single Family Attached: A residential structure designed to house a single
family unit from lowest level to roof, with private entrance, but not necessarily
occupying a private lot, and sharing a common wall between adjoining units.
20. Dwelling, Single Family Detached: A residential structure designed to house a single
family on a private lot and surrounded on all sides by a private yard.
21. Dwelling, Multiple: A building or portion thereof designed for and occupied by 2 or
more families, including 2 family “flats”, apartment houses and apartment hotels.
22. Dwelling Unit: A housekeeping unit designed and used for occupancy by a single
individual or family.
23. Equal Degree of Encroachment: The effect of any encroachment into the floodplain
must be computed by assuming an equal degree of hydraulic encroachment on the
other side of a river or stream for a significant hydraulic reach. This computation
assures that property owners up, down, or across the river or stream will have the
same right of hydraulic encroachment. Encroachments are analyzed on the basis of
the effect upon hydraulic conveyance, not upon the distance the encroachment
extends into the floodplain.
24. Extractive Operations: The removal of rock, slate, gravel, sand, topsoil or other
natural material from the earth by excavating, stripping, leveling or any other process.
25. Family: One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage or not to exceed
three persons not so related occupying the premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group of individuals occupying a boarding
house, group home, rooming house, club, fraternity-sorority, or hotel.
26. First Floor Area: In residential structures the total of all livable floor area which is
not over any other livable floor area. Liveable floor area shall be limited to that space
meeting the minimum requirements for room size, height and light and ventilation as
set forth by the Building Code or in this Ordinance.
27. Flood: A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in water overtopping its
banks and inundating areas adjacent to the channel.
20.02.000 INTERPRETATIONS
2 - 4
28. Flood Insurance Study: An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood
hazards, and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations; or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mud slide or mud flow, and/or flood
related erosion hazards. Such studies shall result in the publication of a Flood
Insurance Rate Map showing the intensity of flood hazards.
29. Flood Profile: A graph showing the relationship of the flood water surface elevation
of a flood event of a specific recurrence interval along a stream.
30. Floodproofing: Measures designed to prevent and reduce flood damage for those
uses which cannot be removed from, or which, of necessity, must be erected in the
floodplain, ranging from structural modifications through installation of special
equipment or materials to operation and management safeguards, such as the
following: reinforcement of basement walls; underpinning of floors; permanent
sealing of all exterior openings; use of masonry construction, erection of permanent
watertight bulkheads, shutters, and doors; treatment of exposed timbers; elevation of
flood, vulnerable utilities; use of waterproof cement; provision of adequate fuse
protection; sealing of basement walls; installation of sump pumps; placement of
automatic swing check valves; installation of seal tight windows and doors;
installation of wire-reinforced glass; location and elevation of valuable items;
waterproofing, disconnecting, elevation, or removal of all electric equipment;
avoidance of the use of flood-vulnerable areas; temporary removal or waterproofing
of merchandise; operation of emergency pump equipment; closing of backwater
sewer valve; placement of plugs and flood drain pipes; placement of movable
watertight bulkheads; erection of sandbag levees; and shoring of weak walls or
structures. Floodproofing of structures shall be extended at least to a point two (2)
feet above the elevation of the regional flood. Any structure that is located entirely or
partially below the flood protection elevation shall be anchored to protect it from
larger floods.
31. Floor Area Ratio: The term “Floor Area Ratio” or F.A.R. shall be used to indicate
the total floor area of buildings, exclusive of basement, allowed on a given lot,
expressed as a percentage ratio to the total area of the lot; i.e. an F.A.R. of 100%
allows a floor area equal to the total area of the lot, an F.A.R. of 50% allows a floor
area of 1/2 the total area of the lot, etc. A floor area ratio of 50% could be applied to
a one-story building occupying 50% of the lot or a two-story building occupying 25%
of the lot.
32. Garage, Private: A structure primarily intended and used for the enclosed storage or
shelter of the private motor vehicles of the families’ resident upon the premises.
33. Garage, Public or Commercial: Any garage not falling within the definition of
“private garage” as herein established, and used for storage, repair, rental or servicing
of motor vehicles.
20.02.000 INTERPRETATIONS
2 - 5
34. Garage, Private Attached: A garage, the roof of which is attached to the principal
building.
35. Gasoline Service Station: A place where gasoline, kerosene, or any other motor fuel
or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the
public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles, and including facilities
greasing, oiling, washing and minor repair or vehicles on the premises, but not
including automatic car washing or any body repair facilities, or storage of vehicles
for scrap or spare parts.
36. Grade, Established: The elevation of the finished street at the center line of curb as
fixed by the Engineer or by such authority as shall be designed by law to determine
such an elevation.
37. Height of Buildings, how measured, see Building, Height of.
38. Highway: Same as “Traffic Artery”.
39. Home Occupation: A gainful occupation conducted primarily by members of the
family, within its place of residence, where the space used is incidental to residential
use.
40. Hospital: An institution intended primarily for the medical diagnosis, treatment, and
care of patients being given medical treatment. A hospital shall be distinguished
from a clinic by virtue of providing for bed patient care.
41. Hospital, Animal: An establishment providing for medical care and treatment of
animal pets, but distinguished from a kennel in that no outdoor runs shall be
permitted for boarded animals and all indoor runs shall be sound proofed.
42. Hotel: A building in which lodging, with or without meals, is offered for
compensation and which may have more than 5 sleeping rooms for this purpose, but
not including kitchen facilities in individual rooms.
43. House Trailer, see Mobile Homes and Camping Trailer.
44. Kennel, Commercial: An establishment where dogs or other animal pets not part of
the actual household on the lot on which the facility is located, are raised, bred or
boarded.
45. Legal Non-conformity: The zoning status of a structure or parcel of land which, or
the use of which, though legal prior to the passage of this Ordinance does not comply
with one or more of the provisions of this Ordinance.
46. Lodging House: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation and
having not more than 5 sleeping rooms for this purpose.
20.02.000 INTERPRETATIONS
2 - 6
47. Lot: A single parcel of contiguous land occupied or intended to be occupied by such
structures and uses as permitted under this Ordinance together with the open spaces
required by this Ordinance, and abutting on a public street or officially approved way.
48. Lot Area: The area of contiguous land bounded by lot lines, exclusive of land
designated for public thoroughfare.
49. Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
50. Mean: A distance measurement having a value intermediate between the values of
other distances; an average obtained by adding several distance measurements
together and dividing the sum by the number of measurements. (For example: the
mean of 1, 5, 2, and 8 feet is 4 feet).
51. Mobile Home: A structure, designated to be a permanent single family residence,
which is constructed and inspected in a factory or intended by its inherent design to
be transportable from factory to site, and from its original site to possible subsequent
sites. The structure at its site may rest upon wheels, or upon a slab or pier foundation,
and to be habitable requires hook-up to water, sanitary sewer and electricity.
52. Modular Housing: A structure, designed to be a permanent residence, which is
constructed and inspected in a factory, then shipped to its site and placed together
with other modules on a permanent foundation and hooked up to utilities to form a
larger dwelling or to form a multiple dwelling structure.
53. Motel: A building or series of buildings in which lodging only is offered for
compensation and which may have more than 5 sleeping rooms or units for this
purpose and which is distinguished from a hotel primarily by reason of providing
direct independent access to, and adjoining parking for, each rental unit.
54. Non-Conforming Structure: A structure which does not conform to the Building
Location, Height, Building Size or Floor Area Regulations of the district in which it
is located.
55. Non-Conforming Use of Structure: A use carried on within any building which use
does not conform to the Use of Residential Density Regulations of the district in
which it is located.
56. Non-Conforming Lot: A lot which does not conform to the Lot Size Regulations of
the district in which it is located.
57. Non-Conforming Use of Land: A use of any land in a way which does not conform
to the Use, Residential Density or Open Space Regulations of the district in which it
is located.
20.02.000 INTERPRETATIONS
2 - 7
58. Official Letter of Map Amendment: Official notification from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), that a Flood Hazard Boundary Map of
Flood Insurance Rate Map has been amended.
59. Off Street Parking Space: The area on a lot designed to accommodate a parked motor
vehicle as an accessory service to the use of said lot and with adequate access thereto
from the public street. For purposes of satisfying parking requirements of this
Ordinance an off-street parking space shall be an area of no less than 160 square feet.
60. Offset: The shortest horizontal distance between any structure and a lot line, other
than a street line.
61. Open Space: An unoccupied space opens to the sky on the same lot with the building
and not used for parking or driveway purposes.
62. Outdoor Recreational Facilities: Land and structure, along with accessory equipment,
designed and utilized for leisure time activities of a predominantly “outdoor” nature
and for more specific purpose than passive park-like open areas, and further classified
as follows:
i. Public: Facilities owned and operated by a governmental agency for limited
or general use.
ii. Private Commercial: Facilities owned and operated by an individual or group
for profit as a business whether or not open to general public use.
iii. Private Non-Commercial Group: Facilities owned and operated by a group
for the exclusive use of the members of such a group and their guests and not
for profit as a business.
iv. Private Residential: Facilities owned by an individual, located on the same or
adjoining lot to this residence, and intended solely for the use of his family
and guests.
63. Primary Floor Area (P.R.A.): The floor area of a building for purposes of
determining required parking ratios, which area shall include only that portion of the
total floor area devoted to customer service, sales and office space and shall not
include warehouse, utility, hallways and other accessory space which does not
generate parking demand.
64. Private Club or Lodge: A structure of grounds used for regular or periodic meetings
or gatherings of a group of persons organized for a non-profit purpose, but not groups
organized to render a service customarily carried on as a business.
65. Professional Office: The office of a doctor, Christian Science practitioner, dentist,
minister, architect, landscape architect, professional engineer, lawyer, author, artist,
musician or other similar recognized profession.
20.02.000 INTERPRETATIONS
2 - 8
66. Regional Flood: A flood determined to be representative of large floods known to
have generally occurred in Wisconsin and which may be expected to occur on a
particular stream because of like physical characteristics. The flood frequency of the
regional flood is once in every 100 years, this means that in any given year there is
one (1) percent chance that the regional flood may occur or be exceeded. During a
typical 30-year mortgage period, the regional flood has a 26 percent chance of
occurrence.
67. Road: Synonymous with street.
68. Rooming Houses: Same as Lodging House.
69. Setback: The shortest horizontal distance between any structure and the base setback
line. See Section 20.15.020 (3).
70. Shorelands: Those lands which have been defined by state statute lying within the
following distances from the ordinary high water mark of navigable waters: 100 feet
from a lake, pond or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward
side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
71. Sign: Any structure or part thereof, or any device attached to a structure, or any other
form of visual communication applied by paint, illumination, embossing or other
technique to a structure for the purpose of directing, advertising, informing, warning
or otherwise conveying information visually to the viewer.
72. Sign, Directional: A sign intended solely for the purpose of directing patrons or
customers to an establishment off the main traveled road and not including
promotional advertising unnecessary to such directional purpose.
73. Sign, Non-Accessory: A sign related to commercial or similar activities other than
those actually engaged in on the site on which non-accessory sign is located.
74. Story: That portion of a building between the surface of a floor and the surface of the
floor next above it, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and
the ceiling next above it. A basement or cellar having one-half of its height above
grade shall be deemed a story for purposes of height regulation.
75. Street: A public or private right-of-way usually affording primary access to abutting
property.
76. Street, Frontage: A street contiguous and parallel to a traffic artery and affording
direct vehicular access to abutting property.
77. Street Right of Way Line: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and
contiguous street.
20.02.000 INTERPRETATIONS
2 - 9
78. Structure: A combination of materials other than natural terrain or plant growth
erected or constructed to form a shelter, enclosure, retainer, container, support, base
pavement or decoration.
79. Structure, Principal: A structure used or intended to be used for the principal use as
permitted on such lot by the regulations of the district in which it is located.
80. Structure, Accessory: A structure or portion of a structure used for a purpose
customarily incident to the permitted principal use of the lot and located on the same
lot as the principal use.
81. Structure, Permanent: A structure placed on or in the ground or attached to another
structure in a fixed and determined position, and intended to remain in place for a
period of more than 9 months.
82. Structure, Temporary: Any structure other than a permanent structure.
83. Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a building or any
substantial change in the roof structure or in the exterior walls.
84. Trailer, House: See Mobile Home.
85. Trailer Camp: Any tract or parcel of land upon which 2 or more trailers, as herein
defined are located or where trailer or camp sites are provided for the purpose of
either temporary or permanent habitation.
86. Tourist Home: A building in which lodging, with or without meals, is offered to
transient guests for compensation and having no more than 5 sleeping rooms for this
purpose with no cooking facilities in any such individual room or apartment.
87. Traffic Artery: A right-of-way, (designed on a comprehensive system) for the
principal purpose of providing a vehicular thoroughfare and not necessarily affording
direct access to an abutting property.
88. Use, Accessory: A use subordinate to and customarily incident to the permitted
principal use of the property or buildings and located upon the same lot as the
principal use.
89. Use, Permitted: The utilization of land by occupancy, activity, building or other
structure which is specifically enumerated as permissible by the regulations of the
zoning district in which said land is located.
90. Use, Principal: The main or primary use of property or structures as permitted on
such lot by the regulations of the district in which it is located.
91. Vision Setback: An unoccupied triangular space, at the street corner of a corner lot,
as established by Section 20.15.020 (6).
20.02.000 INTERPRETATIONS
2 - 10
92. Wetlands: Those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough
to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet
conditions.
93. Wetland Alterations: Any construction filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching,
tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam
construction in a wetland area.
20.03.000 ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
3 - 1
20.03.010 BUILDING INSPECTOR DESIGNATED. The Building Inspector is
hereby designated as the administrative and enforcement officer for the provisions of this
Ordinance. For such duties he may be provided with the assistance of such additional
persons as the City Council may direct.
20.03.020 DUTIES. In the enforcement of said Ordinance the Building Inspector shall
perform the following duties:
1. Issue the necessary Building Permits and Occupancy and Zoning Permits
required by the provisions of this Ordinance provided its provisions and those
of the building code have been complied with.
2. Keep an accurate record of all permits, numbered in the order of issuance, in a
record book for this purpose.
3. In case of any finding of a violation of a provision of this Ordinance, notify
the actual violator where known, or the owner of the property, or both,
indicating the nature of the violation and the action necessary to correct it
including a provision specifying a reasonable number of days to comply. The
violator or owner so affected may within 20 days of notification, request
pursuant to Section 20.08.000 of this Ordinance, a hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals, to appeal the time to correct the finding of violation. Such
request shall state the grounds for appeal. If no appeal is taken and corrective
action is not completed, issue one additional notice to comply, which contains
a date by which compliance is required.
4. Carry out such additional responsibilities as are hereinafter set forth by the
provisions of this Ordinance.
i. In conjunction with matters regulated by this Ordinance as
specified in NR 116 or NR 117 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code having to do with floodplains and wetlands protection,
respectively, insure where appropriate that flood elevations and
wetland limits are shown on any permit applications and appeal
forms.
ii. Submit to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources within
20 days after they are granted or denied, copies of decisions on
variances, conditional use permits, appeals, or petitions for map or
Ordinance text amendments, if any of these affect floodplain or
wetland areas as regulated by NR 116 or NR 117.
iii. Submit copies of floodplain text or map amendments to the
regional Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) office
which administers the National flood Insurance Program.
20.03.000 ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
3 - 2
20.03.030 AUTHORITY. In the enforcement of said Ordinance, the Building Inspector
shall have the power and authority for the following:
1. At any reasonable time and for any proper purpose to enter upon any public or
private premises and make inspection thereof.
2. Upon reasonable cause or question as to proper compliance, to remake any
building or occupancy permit and issue cease and desist orders requiring the
cessation of any building, moving, alteration or use which is in violation of
the provisions of this Ordinance, such revocation to be in effect until
reinstated by the Building Inspector or the Board of Appeals; or take any
other action as directed by the City Council to insure compliance with or to
prevent violation of its premises.
3. In the name of the City and with the authorization and assistance of the City
Attorney, commence any legal proceedings necessary to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance, or the Building Code as applicable to this
Ordinance, including the collection of forfeitures provided for herein. Where
the City Attorney is not able to provide the requested authorization or
assistance, and makes apparent such position in writing or otherwise, seeks
authorization from the Common Council for such assistance.
20.04.000 PERMITS
4 - 1
20.04.010 BUILDING PERMITS.
A. Required. No structure 6 inches or more above the surface of the ground, except
those exempted in the Building Code, nor any structure classified as a building, nor
any swimming pool, shall be erected, structurally altered, or relocated within the City
of Port Washington until a building permit has been issued by the Building Inspector
certifying that such building would be in compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance and with the Building Code of the City of Port Washington.
B. Procedure. An application for the Building Permit shall be made in conformity with
the requirements of the Building Code of the City of Port Washington.
20.04.020 OCCUPANCY AND ZONING USE PERMIT.
A. Required. No new building, and no existing building which has been remodeled to
more than 50% of its value, and no existing building which has been relocated, shall
be occupied or used until an Occupancy and Zoning Permit has been issued certifying
that any such building complies with the provisions of this Ordinance. A like permit
shall be obtained before any legal non-conforming use is resumed, changed, extended
or granted conditional use status.
B. Procedure:
1. Application for such permit shall be made to the Building Inspector prior to or
at the same time as the application for a Building Permit, or prior to the
commencement of any use not involving a Building Permit.
2. Such application shall be prepared and shall include, for the purpose of proper
enforcement of this Ordinance, the following data:
a. A statement by the applicant as to the intended use of the premises and
buildings thereon.
b. An accurate map of the property, in duplicate, drawn to reasonable
scale and properly dimensioned showing:
i. The boundaries of the property involved.
ii. The location of the center line of any abutting streets.
iii. The location of the lot of any existing buildings, additions, or
proposed new buildings, including the measured distances
between such buildings, and from the lot lines and from the
center line of any abutting street to the nearest portion of such
building.
20.04.000 PERMITS
4 - 2
iv. The proposed floor elevation of any proposed buildings in
relation to the existing and/or established grade of any abutting
streets, and the general direction of surface drainage on the lot
including the defined location of any defined drainage way.
(5) The base of regional flood level and ordinary high water line
of any stream, flowage, wetland or lake on or abutting the
property, as well as the defined boundaries of any wetlands
as shown on the Wetland Inventory Map of the WisDNR and
of any floodplains as shown on the FEMA floodplain map for
the City or where appropriate to an adjacent municipality.
(6) Where a zoning permit application includes lands within a
designated floodplain, the applicant shall provide all
computations required to show the effects, if any, of the
project on flood heights, velocities and floodplain storage.
This requirement may be waived by the Building Inspector
where there appears to be insignificant measurable effect ant
the project is minor in nature, that is, involving no building
and no earthmoving.
(7) Where a zoning permit application shows that the applicant’s
intended activity will raise the regional flood level by 0.01
foot or more on another property, the applicant shall present
flooding easements or other appropriate legal arrangements
from all such affected owners before the zoning permit shall
be issued.
iii. Where the proposed use involves human occupancy and connection is
not to be made to municipal sewer service, a plan of the proposed
system for sewage disposal, which shall be in compliance with all the
City Ordinances and other governmental laws or regulations then
applicable to such systems.
iv. Where the proposed use involves human occupancy and connection is
not to be made to municipal water service, satisfactory evidence that a
safe and adequate supply of pure water is to be provided and the
location of any well for that purpose shown on the map.
3. Within 10 days after the notification of the completion of erection, alteration
or relocation of the building or intent to commence a use, the Building
Inspector shall make an inspection of the premises and any building thereon
and if the building and the intended use thereof, and the proposed use of the
premises comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, an Occupancy and
Zoning Permit shall be issued.
20.04.000 PERMITS
4 - 3
4. For the purpose of defraying the cost of inspection and administrative
processing, such application shall be accompanied by a fee of $10.00, except
that where a building permit is also required, this fee shall not be required.
C. Expiration. If within 12 months of the date of application no Occupancy and Zoning
Use Permit has been issued, any building permit related thereto shall lapse and the
Building Inspector shall make immediate investigation to ascertain that no use or
occupancy has in fact commenced without proper authority. Upon showing of valid
cause, the Building Inspector may grant an extension of such permit for a period not
to exceed 6 months.
D. Temporary Occupancy and Use Permit. Pending the issuance of a regular permit, a
temporary permit for non-residential use may be issued for a period not exceeding 6
months during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building
pending its permanent occupation. Such temporary permit shall not be issued except
under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure the safety of the
occupants. A temporary permit shall be voided if the building fails to conform to the
provisions of this Ordinance to such a degree as to render it unsafe for the occupancy
proposed.
20.05.000 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
5 - 1
20.05.010 DISTRICTS MAPPED. The City of Port Washington is hereby divided into
Zoning Districts as shown upon a map designated as the Zoning Map of the City of Port
Washington and made part of this Ordinance, and all the notations, references and other
information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as if the matters and
information set forth by said map were all fully described herein.
20.05.020 MAP CHANGES. The Official Zoning Map shall be kept current at all
times. A change resulting from amendment to the district boundaries shall be shown on a
detailed excerpt map showing the exact area of change which references shall be a part of the
official amendatory ordinance and kept as a supplementary file record to the official map.
The Official Zoning Map shall be corrected by the City Engineer within 30 days of passage
of the amendatory ordinance.
20.05.030 EFFECTIVE DATE. Any map change, or text amendment shall become
effective upon passage and publication, except that where the amendment involves the
provisions of this Ordinance regulating floodplains or wetlands under the terms of NR 116 or
NR 117 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, no such change or amendment shall become
effective if disapproved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR),
provided said department acts within 30 days of the City’s adoption of the proposed change
or amendment. Notice of public hearing for any such change shall be sent not less than 10
days before the date of hearing to said WDNR.
20.05.040 REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. In the event that the
Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the
nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may, by resolution, adopt a new
Official Zoning Map, which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official
Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning
Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning ordinance
or any subsequent amendment thereof.
20.05.050 DETERMINATION OF BOUNDARIES. District boundaries shall be
determined by measurement from and as shown on the Official Zoning Map, and in case of
any question as to the interpretation of such boundary lines, the Plan Commission shall
interpret the map according to the reasonable intent of this Ordinance.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated or dimensioned on the map, the district boundaries
are normally lot lines; section, quarter section, or sixteenth section lines; or the centerlines of
streets, highways, railways, or alleys.
20.05.060 IDENTIFICATION OF OFFICIAL ORDINANCE AND MAP. The text
of the official zoning regulations and the corresponding Official Zoning District Map shall be
kept on file in the offices of the City and any other copies thereof shall be purely
informational and shall not have the status of law. Said text and map shall be identified by
the signature of the Major, attested by the City Clerk and bearing the seal of the City,
together with the date of the adoption of this Ordinance, under the following words: “This is
to certify that this is the Official Zoning (Ordinance) (Map) referred to in Section 20.05.050
20.05.000 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
5 - 2
of the City Zoning Ordinance, City of Port Washington, Ozaukee County, State of
Wisconsin.
20.06.000 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
6 - 1
20.06.010 AUTHORITY. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 62.23 (7) of the
Wisconsin Statutes, the City Council may, after first submitting the proposal to the Plan
Commission for report and recommendation, and after notice and public hearing as
hereinafter provided, amend the regulations of this Ordinance or change the district
boundaries.
20.06.020 PROCEDURE.
1. Initiation. A proposal to amend the text or change the district mapping of this
Ordinance may be initiated by the City Council on its own motions, by
recommendation of the Plan Commission or by petition of one or more
property owners.
2. Filing of Petition. A petition for change or amendment submitted by a private
property owner shall be prepared in triplicate on printed forms provided for
the purpose and filed with the City Clerk.
3. Data Required. In addition to all information required on the petition form,
the petitioner shall supply the following:
a. A plot map drawn in triplicate to scale no smaller than 100 feet to the inch
showing the land in questions, its location, the length and direction of each
boundary thereof, the location and existing use of all buildings on such
land and the principal use of all properties within 200 feet of such land.
b. The names and addresses of the owners of all properties within 200 feet of
any part of the land included in the proposed change.
c. Any further information which may be required by the Plan Commission
to facilitate the making of a comprehensive report to the City Council.
4. Referral.
a. The City Administrator shall transmit without delay, one copy of such
petition to the Plan Commission and one copy to the Building Inspector.
b. The Plan Commission shall conduct a study and investigation and where
deemed desirable, an informal hearing, and report its recommendation to
the City Council as promptly as possible.
5. Official Hearing. The City Council shall hold a public hearing upon the
petition in the manner provided by Section 20.07.000 of this Ordinance.
6. Notice: Notice of any proposed change in district boundaries and a copy of
the public hearing notice shall be sent by regular mail to all owners of
property within 200 feet of the property for which the change is proposed.
20.06.000 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
6 - 2
7. Action.
a. After such public hearing and no later than the second Council
meeting following receipt of the Plan Commission’s
recommendations, the City Council shall act to approve, modify and
approve, or disapprove the proposed change amendment.
b. The City Council shall not take action without having first heard the
recommendations of the Plan Commission. Should the Council not
concur in the recommendation of the Plan Commission, it shall rerefer
the matter to the Plan Commission for reconsideration before
taking final action.
c. An approved change shall be by appropriate ordinance, and necessary
changes in the Official Zoning Map or text shall be made promptly.
8. Protest. In case of protest against a change duly signed and acknowledged by
the owners of 20% or more either of the area of land included in such
proposed change, or by the owners of 20% or more of the area of land
immediately adjacent and extending 100 feet there from, or by the owners of
20% or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the
street frontage of such opposite land, and filed with the City Clerk no later
than the close of work the day preceding City Council vote on the change,
such change shall require a favorable vote of three-fourths of the City Council
for passage.
20.06.030 EFFECTIVE DATE. Any map change or text amendment shall become
effective upon passage and publication.
20.06.040 ANNEXED LANDS. A petition for a direct annexation, or a petition for
referendum on the question of annexation, shall be filed with the City Clerk pursuant to the
provisions of Section 66.0217 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
1. Temporary Zoning. Pursuant to Section 620.06.021 (7) Wis. Statutes, the
City Council shall refer to the Plan Commission for recommendation as to
temporary zoning classification, any land being considered for annexation,
and shall include in the annexing Ordinance a provision designating
temporary zoning classification for such area.
2. Permanent Zoning. As soon as practical after the annexation is final, the
zoning classification for such annexed area shall be established by amendment
according to the regular procedure outlined in this section.
20.07.000 PUBLIC HEARINGS
7 - 1
20.07.010 REQUIRED. In order that the owners of property involved and other
legitimately interested parties may have fair opportunity to be heard, adequate notice shall be
given of any public hearing required by the provisions of this Ordinance in the manner
hereinafter defined or as may be otherwise specifically designated elsewhere in this
Ordinance.
20.07.020 PROCEDURE.
A. Posting and Publishing.
1. Except as may be otherwise herein specifically provided; such notice
shall be given a Class 2 notice under Chapter 985, Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Information. Such notices shall state the time and place of such public
hearing, the purpose for which the hearing is held, and shall include in the
case of map changes, a description of the area involved and in the case of text
changes, a description of the proposed change, in sufficient detail for general
public identification. Reference shall also be made to the fact that detailed
descriptions are available for public inspection at the City Administrator’s
Office.
C. Petitions Not Involving Zoning Change. Where such hearing is required by
the provisions of this Ordinance as a result of a request for other than a zoning
change, such request shall be presented to the City Administrator in writing
and shall be accompanied by a map or description clearly identifying the
property involved.
D. Informal Hearing. Hearings not specifically required under the provisions of
this Ordinance may be noticed as deemed appropriate by the body holding the
hearing.
20.08.000 APPEAL PROVISIONS
8 - 1
20.08.010 APPEAL RIGHTS. Any person aggrieved or any officer, department, board
or bureau of the City affected by a decision of the administrative officer or of the Plan
Commission may appeal such decision to a Board of Appeals as hereinafter established,
provided such appeal to be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of said
Board of Appeals.
A. Filing Fee – Any appeal to the Board of Appeals shall be accompanied by a filing fee.
20.08.020 BOARD OF APPEALS.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Board of Appeals consisting of 5 members appointed
by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Common Council, for terms of 3 years,
except that of those members first appointed one shall serve for 1 year, two for 2
years and two for 3 years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of
members whose terms become vacant. The Mayor shall appoint, for staggered terms
of 3 years, 2 alternate members of such board, in addition to the 5 members above
provided for. Annually, the Mayor shall designate one of the alternate members as 1st
alternate and the other as 2nd alternate. The 1st alternate shall act, with full power,
only when a member of the Board refuses to vote because of interest or when a
member is absent. The 2nd alternate shall so act only when the 1st alternate so
refuses or is absent or when more than one member of the board so refuses or is
absent. The above provisions, with regard to removal and the filling of vacancies,
shall apply to such alternates.
B. General Rules.
1. The members of the Board of Appeals shall serve at such compensation as is
fixed by the Ordinance.
2. Members shall be removable by the Mayor for cause upon written charges and
after public hearing.
3. The Mayor shall designate one of the members, Chairman and the Board of
Appeals may designate such other officers and employ such employees as it
feels necessary.
4. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules governing its procedure consistent
with the terms of this Ordinance.
C. Meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at
other times as the Board may determine. Such Chairman, or in his absence the Acting
Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All
meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of
its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
20.08.000 APPEAL PROVISIONS
8 - 2
other official action, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board
and shall be a public record.
D. Powers. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers as defined by statute.
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of this Ordinance.
2. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Ordinance upon
which such Board is required to pass under the Ordinance.
3. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of
this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to
special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance
will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of
this Ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done.
E. Additional Requirements. In making its determination, the Board shall consider
whether the proposed exception or variance would result in the use being hazardous,
harmful, noxious, offensive or a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood by reason
of physical, social or economic effects; and may impose such requirements and
conditions with respect to location, construction, and maintenance and operation – in
addition to any which may be stipulated in this Ordinance – as the Board may deem
necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest and welfare.
F. Performance Standards. In order to reach a fair and objective decision, the Board may
utilize and give recognition to appropriate performance standards which are available
in model codes or ordinances or which have been developed by planning,
manufacturing, health, architectural, and engineering research organizations.
G. Enforcement of Decisions. In exercising the above mentioned powers, such Board
may, in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination appealed
from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to
be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided that no such
action shall have the effect of permitting in any district a use prohibited in that
district; of rezoning; or granting a conditional use or special exception where such
grant is not specifically assigned to the Board for determination under this Ordinance;
or of permitting, without the approval of the Plan Commission any building within
the base setback area as hereinafter established by the provisions of this Ordinance.
H. Required Vote. The concurring vote of 4 members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative
official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required
20.08.000 APPEAL PROVISIONS
8 - 3
to pass under this Ordinance, or to effect any variation there from. The grounds of
every such determination shall be stated.
1. Further Appeal. Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the
Board of Appeals, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau
of the City may appeal from a decision of the Board of Appeals within 30 days
after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board of Appeals in the
manner provided in Section 62.23 (7) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
20.08.030 PROCEDURE.
A. Filing. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and with the Board of Appeals, specifying the grounds thereof. The officer,
from whom the appeal is taken, shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. Stay. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of action appealed
from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Appeals after the notice of appeal, shall have been filed with him, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by
restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of
record on application, on notice to the office from whom the appeal is taken, and on
due cause shown.
C. Hearing. Each appeal shall be heard within 40 days from the time of filing and public
notice of such hearing shall be given as provided by Section 20.07.000 of this
Ordinance as well as to the parties of interest except that such notice to other owners
need not include the owners of any lands beyond those adjacent to the sides and rear
of the property petitioning for appeal and directly opposite thereto and extending 100
feet from the street frontage of such opposite land. The City Administrator shall mail
such notice at least 7 days before said hearing. Such notice however shall require
only one publication in the newspaper of general circulation within said City which
shall not be less than 3 days prior to the date of hearing. Any party may appear in
person, or by agent or by attorney representing him.
D. Decision. The Board of Appeals shall render its decision in writing within 15 days
after completion of the hearing thereon.
E. Special Exceptions. Requests for special exceptions upon which the Board of
Appeals is required to pass under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be presented
by petition and public hearing held thereon as provided for appeals.
20.09.000 VIOLATIONS
9 - 1
20.09.010 PENALTIES. Any person, firm, company or corporation who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any of these
provisions of the Ordinance, shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 and not to
exceed the sum of $200.00 for each offence, together with the costs of the action, and in
default of the payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail of Ozaukee County, for
the period not to exceed 6 months, or until such forfeiture and the subsequent costs have been
paid. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate violation and
be punished as such.
20.09.020 ENFORCEMENT BY INJUNCTION. Compliance with the provisions of
this Ordinance may also be enforced by injunction order at the suit of the City or one of more
owners of real estate situated within an area affected by the regulations of this Ordinance.
20.09.030 DECLARED NUISANCE. Any building erected, structurally altered, or
placed on a lot, or any use carried on in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance is
hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, and the City may apply to any court of competent
jurisdiction to restrain or abate such nuisance.
20.10.000 GENERAL APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
10 - 1
20.10.010 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS. For the purpose of this Ordinance,
the zoning district classifications listed under Section 33.010 are hereby created and
established.
20.10.020 COMPLIANCE.
A. Required. Within the City of Port Washington, the use of any land; the size, shape,
and placement of lots; the use, size, height, location and type of structure thereon;
and the provisions of open spaces shall be in compliance with the regulations
established therein and made applicable to the district or districts in which such land
or structure is located.
B. Prior Permit.
1. Construction Permitted. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in
the plans, construction, size or designed use of any structure or part thereof
for which a building permit has been issued before the effective date of this
Ordinance and the construction of which shall have been substantially started
within 6 months from the date of such permit.
2. Subsequently Non-Conforming. Any such use which does not conform to the
regulations of the districts in which it is located shall, however, subsequently
be considered a legal non-conforming use.
20.10.030 STRUCTURES OTHER THAN BUILDINGS.
A. Structures less than 6 inches in height. Structures not classified as buildings and less
than 6 inches in height from the surface of the ground shall not be subject to the
setback, offset, building size, or open space requirements of this Ordinance except as
may be specifically otherwise provided.
B. Structures 6 inches or more in height. Structures not classified as buildings and 6
inches or more in height from the surface of the ground shall be subject to the
setback, offset, height and open space requirements of this Ordinance except as may
be specifically otherwise provided, such as in Section 20.11.020 (4), (6) and (7).
20.10.040 UNDERGROUND BUILDINGS. Any structure classified as a building and
not extending more than 6 inches above the surface of the ground shall not be subject to the
setback, offset, building size, or open space requirements of this Ordinance.
20.11.000 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
11 - 1
20.11.010 GENERAL.
1. Any accessory use or structure shall conform to the applicable regulations of
the district in which it is located except as specifically otherwise provided.
2. Any accessory use or structure not identified hereafter shall not be permitted
unless approved by the Plan Commission.
3. No accessory use or structure shall be permitted that by reason of noise, dust,
odor, appearance or other objectionable factor creates a nuisance or
substantial adverse affect on the property value or interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of the surrounding properties.
4. Any permanent roofed structure serving an accessory use if attached to the
principal building shall be considered as part of such principal building for all
regulatory purposes. If such structure is a building and is not attached to the
principal building it shall conform to the building location, height, and open
space requirements of the district in which such building is located.
20.11.020 DETACHED GARAGES.
1. The primary use of the garage must be the required parking use.
2. No garage or driveway shall be used to carry on any contracting or repair
business.
3. No more than one detached garage is permitted on a lot.
4. No detached garage shall have a floor area greater than 720 sq. ft. with doors
that will accommodate no more than three (3) vehicles except that, in lieu of
a permitted accessory shed, a storage area not exceeding 150 sq. ft. may be
added on to a garage if the floor area of the garage, before such addition, does
not exceed 720 sq. ft. maximum allowed.
5. Subject to the maximum floor area limitation provided in subsec. 20.11.020
(4) hereof, no detached garage shall have a floor area greater than 60% of the
floor area of the principal building on the lot.
6. Only one (1) floor, with storage in the attic space, is permitted and the slope
of the roof shall not exceed the pitch or the height of the principal structure.
7. Carports or covered storage areas are permitted only when attached to an
approved structure and shall be included when calculating the structure’s
maximum permitted floor area. Carports and covered storage are not
permitted as stand-alone structures.
20.11.000 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
11 - 2
8. If a premises has an existing attached garage structure, no detached garage shall
be permitted except upon the following conditions, which are hereby made a part
of any permit so issued:
a. The existing driveway shall be removed and landscaped.
b. The garage door(s) shall be removed and the wall shall be
remodeled to be compatible with the existing building.
c. Subsecs. i. and ii. shall be completed within one (1) year of the date
of issuance of the garage permit.
d. Any further remodeling of the interior shall require a separate
permit.
20.11.030 SHEDS.
1. No more than two (2) accessory buildings shall be permitted on a lot.
2. The maximum height of a shed shall be 15 feet.
3. The maximum floor area of a shed shall be 150 sq. ft.
4. Covered storage areas are permitted only when attached to an approved
structure and shall be included when calculating the structure’s maximum
permitted floor area.
5. Sheds shall be constructed of solid common building materials or kits of premolded
plastic-like materials commonly found in home improvement stores.
6. Foundations are not required unless the shed is constructed of masonry
materials.
7. The shed shall be anchored to the ground to prevent uplift.
20.11040 FENCES.
1. Fences shall be constructed of masonry, wood or other common fencing
materials available from retail suppliers and fencing contractors. Materials
such as barbed wire, chicken wire, snow fencing, safety fencing, doors, etc.
shall not be permitted.
2. Structural supports of the fence shall face the interior of the lot and be capable
of supporting the fence and the wind loads imposed on it.
20.11.000 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
11 - 3
3. Except for structural supports, both sides of a fence shall be constructed of the
same materials, and shall be of the same color and appearance.
4. Fences shall be plumb and straight when fully erected.
5. Fences are permitted to be erected up to the lot line.
6. The maximum height of a fence, or any portion thereof, located within the
setback area shall be four (4) feet. Outside of the setback area, within the
offset area, and in all other areas on the lot a fence may be a maximum of six
(6) feet in height except that:
a. An additional two (2) inches of height shall be permitted to hold fencing
materials above grade and to allow for slight variation in grades.
b. An eight (8) inch step in the top of an eight (8) foot long section of
fencing shall be permitted to allow for sloped yards.
20.11.50 MISCELLANEOUS ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
1. Walks, patios, drives and purely decorative garden accessories such as
manufactured ponds, fountains, statuary, etc., that are less than four (4) feet in
height are permitted in the setback and offset areas but in no event shall they be
located closer than three (3) feet to any lot line.
2. Arbors or trellises used to cover or embellish an entry way that are less than
seven (7) feet in height shall be permitted in the setback and offset areas but in
no event shall they be located closer than three (3) feet to any lot line.
3. Decks, arbors, trellises, walls, poles, children’s play apparatus, lattice or other
screening devices and other approved structures shall conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which they are located.
4. Retaining walls shall be permitted in the setback and offset areas, except that:
a. Retaining walls shall not be closer than three (3) feet to an
abutting lot line.
b. No individual wall shall exceed six (6) feet in height, and a
terrace of at least three (3) feet in width shall be provided
between any series of such walls.
5. Attached antennas and satellite dishes six (6) feet or less in height measured
vertically from base to vertex including all mounting hardware and related
equipment, shall be permitted.
20.11.000 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
11 - 4
6. Solar devices, windmills, and all antennas and satellite dishes and similar
devices, exceeding six (6) feet in height, measured vertically from base to
vertex including mounting hardware and related equipment, shall not be
permitted unless approved by the Plan Commission.
7. Any temporary structure serving as an accessory use may be permitted with the
approval of the Plan Commission.
20.11.60 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
1. Upon submittal of a building, site, and operational plan, the Plan
Commission may grant a special exception to the setback, offset, height, and
open space requirements of the zoning district in which an accessory structure is
located if the Commission determines that granting such special exception
would not have a substantial adverse affect on surrounding properties by reason
of noise, dust, odor, appearance or other objectionable factors, nor create a
nuisance or substantial adverse affect on the property value or interfere with the
reasonable enjoyment of the surrounding properties.
2. In granting a special exception, the Plan Commission may require such
architectural treatment, screening by landscape or architectural means,
lighting requirements or limitations, or other measures which, in the
judgment and discretion of the Commission, shall be necessary conditions of
such special exception.
20.12.000 LEGAL NON-CONFORMITY
12 - 1
20.12.010 EXISTING USE PERMITTED. The existing lawful use of a building or
premises at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or any amendment applicable thereto
which is not in conformity with the provisions established by this Ordinance may be
continued in the manner and for the purposes then existent, subject to the conditions
hereinafter stated.
20.12.020 CLASSIFICATION AND REGULATION. For the purpose of
administration such non-conformity shall be classified and regulated as follows:
A. Non-Conforming Structures.
1. No such structure shall be expanded or enlarged except in conformity
with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
2. When such structure is damaged to the extent of more than 50% of its
current full market value, it shall not be restored except in conformity
with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
B. Non-Conforming Use of Structure.
1. No such use shall be expanded or enlarged.
2. Upon petition to and approval of the Plan Commission such use may
be changed to another use provided the Plan Commission determines
that the new use would result in no greater degree of non-conformity
and provided further that such new use shall thereafter determine the
degree of legal non-conformity.
3. Where any such use is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive or
for 18 accumulative months during any 3 year period, any future use of
the structure shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it
is located.
4. Where the structure in which such use is carried on is damaged to the
extent of more than 50% of its current full market value, it shall not be
restored for use except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
5. Structural repairs and alterations to a structure housing such use shall
not, as long as such use continues, exceed 50% of the full market value
of the structure at the time the use became non-conforming.
20.12.000 LEGAL NON-CONFORMITY
12 - 2
C. Non-Conforming Lots.
1. No such lot shall be conveyed to a new owner except in conformity
with the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance of
the City.
2. No Building or Occupancy Zoning Use Permit shall be issued except
in conformity with Section 20.18.000 of this Ordinance.
3. The size and shape of such lot shall not be altered in any way so as to
increase the degree of non-conformity except with the approval of the
Plan Commission.
D. Non-Conforming Use of Land
1. No such use shall be expanded or enlarged.
2. Upon petition to and approval of the Plan Commission such use may
be changed to another use provided the Plan Commission determines
that the new use would result in no greater degree of non-conformity
and provided that such new use shall thereafter determine the degree of
legal non-conformity.
3. Where any such use is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive or
for 18 accumulative months during any 3 year period, any future use of
the land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
20.12.030 CONDITIONAL USE STATUS. Subject to the provisions of Section
20.23.000 of this Ordinance any such legal non-conforming use may be reclassified as a
conditional use.
20.12.040 REMOVAL OF HAZARDS. Where, upon complaint of the Building
Inspector, any non-conforming structure or use shall be found by the Plan Commission as a
matter of fact to be a detriment to the public health, safety, or general welfare, such structure
shall be ordered to be removed or such use to be discontinued within such time as the Plan
Commission may deem reasonable. Upon failure to carry out such order, the City may take
such steps as are necessary to remove such structure or discontinue such use and assess the
cost thereof against the property owner.
20.12.050 SIGNS FOR EXISTING BUSINESSES OUTSIDE COMMERCIAL
DISTRICTS. Existing businesses not located in one of the zones listed in Table 20.29.120,
shall comply with standards for the B-1 District.
20.13.000 BASIC LOCATIONAL REGULATIONS
13 - 1
20.13.010 BUILDING MUST BE ON A LOT. Every building hereafter erected,
structurally altered, or relocated shall be placed on a lot as herein defined.
20.13.020 ONLY ONE PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE BUILDING ON A LOT. Except
as specifically otherwise provided herein for attached single family dwellings, apartments, or
planned development project only one principal residence building shall be permitted on a
lot, provided however that the Board of Appeals may grant an exception to permit more than
one principal building on a lot where such grant would not be contrary to the spirit or intent
of the Ordinance or to the regulations applicable to the specific district, and provided that a
sufficient lot area is provided and the buildings so located as to individually meet the
setback, offset, lot size, density and open space requirements of the district in which located.
20.13.030 STREET ACCESS REQUIRED. No lot shall hereafter be created or any
building placed on a lot which does not abut on a public street or approved way except as
hereinafter provided.
20.13.040 PRIVATE STREET OR WAY. Subject to the approval of the Plan
Commission, a building may be permitted on a tract of land which does not abut on a public
street or approved way, provided such tract of land is at least 40,000 square feet in area, and
provided further such tract has access by permanent easement to a public street or approved
way and does not conflict with plans for the future development of streets in the area, except
that where a future street is possible the Plan Commission may require a 60 foot street
reservation.
20.14.000 USES WITHIN DISTRICTS
14 - 1
20.14.010 USES RESTRICTED. No structure or land shall be used and no structure
shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered, or relocated except for a use as permitted and
in compliance with the regulations hereinafter established for the district in which it is
located.
20.14.020 USES CLASSIFIED. For the purpose of this Ordinance, all uses shall be
classified according to the following categories:
A. Permitted Uses By Right. Principal uses the permissibility of which is a
predetermined right anywhere in the district in which located subject only to
the regulations established governing such use.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses. Uses incidental, customary to, and commonly
associated with a permitted principal use.
C. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant. Uses, the nature, character, or
circumstances of which are so unique, or so dependent upon the specific
contemporary conditions, that predetermination of permissibility by right, or
the detailing in the ordinance of the specific standards, regulations, or
conditions necessary or appropriate to such permissibility are not practical; but
which may be permitted in the districts where listed subject to certain
conditions and requirements as hereinafter specified.
20.14.030 UNCLASSIFIED USES. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use
shall be considered to be prohibited except as may be otherwise specifically provided
hereinafter. In case of questions as to the classification of a use, the question shall be
submitted to the Plan Commission for determination.
20.14.040 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS. Any use, in any district, which
becomes hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or a nuisance to the surrounding
neighborhood may be required to be corrected or improved by such measures as are directed
by the City Council consistent with reasonable technological and economic practicality.
20.15.000 BUILDING LOCATION
15 - 1
20.15.010 LOCATION RESTRICTED. No building shall be hereafter erected,
structurally altered or relocated on a lot except in conformity with the following locational
regulations as hereinafter specified for the district in which it is located.
20.15.020 SETBACKS. The proximity of a building to a public street or way is
regulated by setback provisions as follows.
A. Base Setback Lines are hereby established parallel to the centerline of all
public streets and ways as follows:
1. On all principal traffic arteries as designated on the Traffic Artery
System Plan set forth in the General Plan for the City of Port
Washington, the Base Setback Line shall be located at a distance from
the centerline of the street equal to one-half the width of the highway
as designated on the map attached hereto as part of this Ordinance.
2. On all other streets, which shall be designated as “local streets” the
Base Setback Line shall be located 30 feet from the centerline of such
street or 60 feet from the center point of a cul-de-sac unless
specifically designated otherwise by action of the City Council
3. In the case of frontage streets along principal traffic arteries, the Base
Setback Line shall be located on the property line as established by the
frontage street.
B. Except as provided in subsections i(a) through (d) hereof, no building shall
hereafter be erected, structurally altered, or relocated so that it is closer to the
Base Setback Line than the setback distance hereinafter specified by the
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
1. Notwithstanding the minimum setback required within a zoning district,
a setback may be reduced to the mean of the setbacks of the immediately
adjacent lots on both sides of the subject lot. In calculating the mean
setback, the following rules shall apply:
a. Only the setbacks on lots that abut the subject lot and are on the
same side of the street as the subject lot may be used; and
b. When one abutting lot is vacant, the setback of the subject lot
shall be the mean of the setbacks of the non-vacant abutting lot
and the zoning district minimum setback; and
c. When the subject lot is a corner lot, the setback of the subject lot
shall be the mean of the setbacks of the abutting lot fronting on
the same side of the street as the front of the building on the
subject lot
20.15.000 BUILDING LOCATION
15 - 2
and the zoning district minimum setback.
d. In no event shall any building be erected, structurally altered or
relocated so as to be located within the Vision Setback Lines as
set forth in Sections 20.15.020 6. and 7.
2. Additions to existing structures which lack the required setback may
be allowed if the addition is setback at the distance greater than or
equal to the average of the existing building setback and required
setback of adjacent buildings. In no event shall the setback be reduced
to less than that of the existing structure. This regulation shall apply to
all property platted prior to January 1, 1970.
3. On corner lots, on record as of the adoption of this ordinance, the
effect of the setback regulation shall not reduce the buildable width of
such corner lot to less than thirty (30) feet.
C. Where the mean of the setbacks of the buildings on the immediately adjacent
lots on each side of the subject lot is greater than the minimum setback
required within a zoning district, the Building Inspector shall not issue any
building permit for the subject lot but shall promptly refer the matter to the
Plan Commission. In such event, building setback lines appropriate for the
location of the subject lot and for the type of development and use
contemplated which are more restrictive than the regulations of the zoning
district in which the subject lot is located may be required by the Plan
Commission. Examples of the application of this provision would include,
but are not limited to requiring greater setbacks on cul-de-sac lots to achieve
the necessary lot width at the setback line, requiring greater setbacks that are
compatible with setbacks of existing adjacent development, or setting special
yard requirements to protect natural resource elements. In determining
appropriate building setback lines in such cases, the Plan Commission shall
consider the following, together with such other factors as the Plan
Commission may deem relevant:
1. Compatibility. The setback, size, quality and character of existing lots
and building development in the immediate area with a view to
maintaining compatibility and protecting property values.
2. Practicability. The economic and engineering practicability of
constructing buildings on the subject lot.
3. Hardship. The degree of practical hardship which may be imposed
upon the owner of the subject lot.
D. The setback required by Sections 20.15.020 2. and 3. shall be measured from
the nearest enclosed or roofed portion of a building, provided however that the
first two feet of an overhanging eave and gutter shall not be included.
20.15.000 BUILDING LOCATION
15 - 3
E. The only structures permitted within such setback area shall be necessary
highway and traffic signs, public utility lines and poles, walls and fences as
regulated by Section 20.11.010 (4), rural mailboxes, signs as permitted under
the district regulations, structures other than buildings as regulated by Section
20.11.030, underground buildings as regulated by Section 20.10.040, and
enclosed canopies for lighting and rain protection in conjunction with such
uses as automobile sales lots of “drive-in” commercial facilities provided that
such canopy structures are approved by the Plan Commission, and those
structures included in item 2 above.
F. Additions to and replacements of existing structures lying between the Base
Setback Line and the existing street right-of-way may be made subject to
approval of the Plan Commission and provided the owner will file with the
City, and record as part of the deed for such property, an agreement in writing
to the effect that the owner will remove all new construction, additions and
replacements erected after the adoption of this Ordinance at his expense, when
necessary for the improvement of the street and will claim no damage for the
same.
G. Vision Setback Lines at the intersection of public streets and of a street with a
railroad or alley, where the grade is not separated, are hereby established as
follows:
1. Across each sector between the intersection of a street with a railroad a
Vision Setback Line shall be established by a straight line connecting
points on the Base Setback Line and the railroad right-of-way line,
which points are located 120 feet from the intersection of the Base
Setback Line and the railroad right-of-way line.
2. Across each sector between intersecting streets, one or more of which
has a designated width of 100 feet or greater, a Vision Setback Line
shall be established by a straight line connecting two points on the
intersecting Base Setback Lines, which points are located 30 feet from
the intersection of said Base Setback Lines.
3. Across each section between any other intersecting street a Vision
Setback Line shall be established by a straight line connecting two
points on the intersecting Base Setback Lines, which points are located
20 feet from the intersection of said Base Setback Lines.
4. Across each sector between an alley and intersecting street a Vision
Setback Line shall be established by a straight line connecting two
points on the intersecting Base Setback Lines, which points are located
10 feet from the intersection of said Base Setback Lines.
20.15.000 BUILDING LOCATION
15 - 4
H. In the Vision Setback Area no structure of any kind shall be permitted which
exceeds a height of 2-1/2 feet above elevation of the center of the intersection,
except for necessary highway and traffic signs, public utility lines, and open
fences through which there is clear vision; no shall any plant material or
natural growth be permitted which obscures safe vision of the approaches to
the intersections.
I. The requirements for vision setback shall not apply within the B-4 Central
Business District.
20.15.030 OFFSETS. The proximity of any portion of a building to any other lot line
than a street line is regulated by offset provision as follows:
A. No building shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, or relocated so that
any roofed or enclosed portion thereof is closer to any lot line than the offset
distance hereinafter specified by the regulations for the district in which it is
located except as follows:
1. In the case of any lot of record which has minimum average width less
than that required by the district in which it is located, the offset from a
side lot line may be reduced proportionately to the ratio between the
actual minimum average width and the required minimum average
width provided however that no offset shall in any case be less than
1/2 the required offset except that the offset for detached garages may
be reduced to 4 feet on no more than 2 sides.
2. Where a lot abuts a district boundary line, the offset from such line in
the district of less restrictive use shall not be less than that required for
the district of more restrictive use.
3. In the case of single family attached, multiple family, commercial or
industrial use structures two or more buildings on adjoining lots may
be erected with common or directly adjoining walls provided the
requirements of the State Industrial Code relative to such construction
are complied with and provided that at both ends of such “row” type
buildings the applicable offset requirements shall be complied with.
4. How measured. The offset shall be measured from the roofed or
enclosed portion of a building, including overhanging eaves, except
that the first 2 feet of an overhanging eave and gutter shall not be
included.
5. Any garage accessory to a residential use for which a building permit
was issued and which conforms to the offset in force prior to January
1, 1970, shall be exempt from the offset regulations of this ordinance,
however, garages classified as non-conforming to the previous setback
shall remain so classified.
20.15.000 BUILDING LOCATION
15 - 5
B. In all districts which allow common wall construction or do not require an
offset, all buildings, which are hereafter erected, structurally altered, or
relocated having any rooms required by the Building Code to have light and
ventilation by windows opening directly to the outer air shall provide courts as
follows:
1. Outer Courts. The width of any required court shall be not less than
the height of any opposing wall forming said court. The depth of an
outer court formed by walls on three sides shall be not greater than one
and one half times the width.
2. Inner Courts. The least dimension of an inner court shall be not less
than the full height of the walls enclosing such court.
20.15.040 EXTRA HEIGHT CONSTRUCTION FACTOR. In those districts
permitting buildings in excess of 35 feet in height, and requiring use of the “Extra Height
Construction Factor” described herein, the setbacks and offsets required by the district shall
be modified for buildings over 35 feet in height as follows: providing an “obstruction factor”
for determining either the setback or offset of those portions of buildings exceeding 25 feet in
height, said setbacks and offsets shall be determined by the application of a “plane of
obstruction formula” as follows:
A. Street Setback and Vision Corner: Where a zero street setback is permitted by
the district regulations, buildings over 35 feet in height shall recess the first
story at least five (5) feet from the base setback line. Building support
columns are exempt from this five (5) foot requirement.
B. Common Wall Construction: Where common wall construction is permitted
by the district regulations, the building may be built upon the property line
provided local and state building code requirements for common wall
construction are met throughout the height of the building façade being
located on the property line.
C. Offsets: Where common wall construction is not involved, buildings over 35
feet in height shall provide the minimum offset required by the district
regulation, but in no case less than ten (10) feet, plus one additional foot of
offset for each story over three (3) stories in height.
20.15.050 MAINTENANCE AND USE OF SETBACK AND OFFSET AREAS. Any
such required setback or offset area shall be landscaped and kept clean and free from the
accumulation of debris or refuse, and shall not be used for the storage or display of
equipment, products, vehicles or any other material except as may be specifically otherwise
permitted under this Ordinance.
20.15.000 BUILDING LOCATION
15 - 6
20.15.060 ACCESSORY BUILDING LOCATION. No accessory building shall be
erected, structurally altered, or relocated so that any roofed or enclosed portion thereof is
closer than 10 feet to the principal building on the lot.
20.16.000 HEIGHT REGULATIONS
16 -1
20.16.010 MAXIMUM HEIGHT RESTRICTED. In any district no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered to a height in excess of that
hereinafter specified by the regulations for the district.
20.16.020 EXCEPTIONS. Except as provided in Section 20.16.040 relating to
buildings or structures in the B-4 Central Business District, the following shall be excepted
from the height regulations for all districts:
A. Chimney and flues.
B. Accessory farm buildings, not to exceed 60 feet in height on lots of 120,000
square feet or more in area.
C. Electrical, telephone and telegraph transmission and distribution structures.
D. Subject to approval of Plan Commission: elevator bulkheads, stacks, scenery
lofts, water towers, church spires, radio or television broadcasting towers,
non-dish type antenna extending more than 10 feet above the height limit,
aerials, windmills and necessary mechanical appurtenances. The Commission
in granting or denying the exception shall be guided by the standards
contained in Section 31.000 except that dish-style earth station satellite
antenna shall not be installed on the roofs of residential or their accessory
buildings, nor be eligible for this height regulation exception nor that of
20.16.030.
20.16.030 INCREASE PERMITTED. The maximum height of any structure may be
increased by no more than 10 feet, providing all required offset and setbacks are increased by
one foot for each foot in excess of the height limit of the district in which located.
20.16.040 MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHTS IN B-4 CENTRAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT.
A. Buildings Existing on or Before September 17, 2004. Any building or structure
within the B-4 Central Business District which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in
height, existing or for which a building permit was issued on or before
September 17, 2004, shall be a permitted building or structure and shall not be
deemed a legal non-conforming building or structure on the basis of the height
thereof, nor be subject to any conditions relating to such height nonconformity
under Section 20.12.020 1. The height of such building or structure may be
increased up to a maximum of sixty-one (61) feet by special exception, upon
petition to and recommendation of the Plan Commission, and upon the
favorable two-thirds (2/3) vote of all of the elected members of the Common
Council. A request for such special exception shall be subject to the petition,
public hearing, notice and determination procedures applicable to a petition for
conditional use permit under Section 20.23.020. In considering such petition for
special exception, the Plan Commission and Common Council shall be guided
20.16.000 HEIGHT REGULATIONS
16 -2
by the standards contained in Section 20.30.040 relating to site plan and design
review, and by the criteria contained in Section 20.31.030 relating to approval of
building, site and operational plans, provided, however, that such building or
structure shall not be eligible for the height regulation exceptions set forth in
Section 20.16.020 nor be eligible for the height increase permitted under Section
20.16.030.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, in the event a building
or structure subject to this subsection is damaged to the extent of more than 50%
of its current full market value, it may be repaired or restored to its height at the
time of such damage, provided, however, that it shall not be repaired or restored
for use except in conformity with the use and lot regulations then in effect for
buildings, structures and land within the B-4 Central Business District.
B. Buildings Erected or Structurally Altered After September 17, 2004. Except as
provided in Section 20.16.040 A. and this section, no building or structure
erected or structurally altered within the B-4 Central Business District and for
which a building permit is issued after September 17, 2004, shall exceed a
height of thirty-five (35) feet. The height of such building or structure may be
increased up to a maximum of sixty-one (61) feet by special exception, upon
petition to and recommendation of the Plan Commission, and upon the
favorable two-thirds (2/3) vote of all of the elected members of the Common
Council. A request for such special exception shall be subject to the petition,
public hearing, notice and determination procedures applicable to a petition for
conditional use permit under Section 20.23.020. In considering such petition for
special exception, the Plan Commission and Common Council shall be guided
by the standards contained in Section 20.30.040 relating to site plan and design
review, and by the criteria contained in Section 20.31.030 relating to approval of
building, site and operational plans, provided, however, that such building or
structure shall not be eligible for the height regulation exceptions set forth in
Section 20.16.020 nor be eligible for the height increase permitted under Section
20.16.030.
C. Building Inventory. An inventory listing the heights of all buildings and
structures within the B-4 Central Business District as of September 17, 2004
shall be prepared and maintained by the City Engineer or his designee for
purposes of future reference in the application, interpretation and enforcement of
this Section.
20.17.000 BUILDING SIZE AND FLOOR AREA REGULATIONS
17 - 1
20.17.010 MINIMUM REQUIRED. Any building intended in whole or part for
residential purposes shall provide a minimum floor area, and basement or utility area as
hereinafter specified by the regulations for the District in which such building is located.
A. The minimum floor requirement for residential use shall be based upon the number of
bedrooms, as defined by the Building Code, and total rooms, as defined by the
Building Code exclusive of bathrooms, and is stated in terms of the total useable
residential floor area required per family on a single floor level.
B. In any district which requires minimum floor area for purposes and an attached
garage requirement (sic), the district may credit a portion of the garage area toward
the required minimum floor area. Carports shall not be so credited nor garages built
at a basement level.
C. In the case of any residential building which has more than a single floor level, the
total of all liveable floor area which is not over any other liveable floor area shall be
called the First Floor Area, and shall conform to the required minimum total floor
area, except that the required First Floor Area may be reduced, to any further
minimum as established and in proportion to an increase in total liveable floor area as
set forth in the individual district regulations.
1. The individual district regulations may allow that a percentage of any
such increase in total liveable floor area may be unfinished floor space
capable under the Building Code or this Ordinance below of being
finished to liveable floor area, provided such unfinished area is in the
second story of a two story home as defined on the fold-out chart, (see
20.33.000.) In addition to requirements of the Building Code, such
space shall meet the following requirements.
a. Ceiling height shall be a minimum of 7’2” (86”).
i. Sloped ceilings shall have an average height of at least
6’0”, with at least 50% of the area more than 6’0”.
b. Wiring to be roughed in to the extent that sufficient branch
circuits to meet electrical code standards are provided to the
unfinished area and terminated in a proper junction box. The
power for such circuits shall not go beyond the panel or circuit
box unless the unfinished area is wired according to code.
c. Every room shall have at least one outside window which can
be opened from the inside without the use of tools to provide a
clear opening of not less than 16 inches in the least dimension
and 400 square inches in area, with the bottom of opening not
more than 4 feet from the floor.
20.17.000 BUILDING SIZE AND FLOOR AREA REGULATIONS
17 - 2
2. In no case shall application of (c) above require a total liveable area in
any particular district be larger than the largest required minimum
floor area listed for that district under 20.33.000.
D. Basement or other suitable utility areas shall be provided within the principal
building on the basis of a minimum per family as set forth in the individual district
regulations.
E. Room Areas -Room sizes for one and two family dwellings shall be equal to or
greater than those listed in Table No.1. Multiple family buildings shall be subject to
the same minimum requirements, although, the Plan Commission may increase the
size of each room upon site plan approval.
1. Minimum dimension of living rooms shall be eleven (11)
feet and of kitchens, six (6) feet. Minimum room areas
shall not include areas used for storage or closet
purposes.
2. Rooms and spaces not herein regulated as to area shall be
connected to a living or other habitable room. Rooms and
spaces not herein regulated and of areas less than the
minimum areas herein required shall not be used for
living, dining, sleeping or kitchen purposes.
3. No additional dwelling units shall be created or
maintained by rearranging room suites, by subdividing rooms
or by alterations in any existing building or structure
unless such dwelling units have been authorized by permit
and comply with this and other applicable regulations.
F. Toilets, Bathrooms, and Kitchens.
1. Bathrooms for required toilets, tubs or showers or
lavatories shall have a minimum floor area of not less
than twelve (12) square feet for each water closet and
each tub and ten (10) square feet for each shower,
lavatory or other sanitary plumbing fixture or equipment
installed herein. The ceiling height of the required
bathroom shall not be less than seven (7) feet. Powder
rooms or second baths are not subject to the above but
shall have a minimum floor area of fourteen (14) square
feet with a minimum dimension of three (3) feet in one
direction.
2. Each bathroom or toilet room shall be provided with a
door. No bathroom or toilet room shall provide sole
access to any habitable room.
20.17.000 BUILDING SIZE AND FLOOR AREA REGULATIONS
17 - 3
TABLE 1
ROOM AREAS
CATEGORY REQUIRMENT MIN. DIMENSION
Living Room 160 sq. feet 11’
Living Room w/ dining space 180 sq. feet
Dining Room 80 sq. feet
Kitchen-useable floor area 60 sq. feet 6'
Bedroom 100 sq. feet
Other Habitable Rooms 70 sq. feet
Bathroom See sec. F (i) (ii)
20.17.020 MAXIMUM PERMITTED (F.A.R.). The maximum floor area of the
buildings on a lot shall not exceed that permitted under the floor area ratio (F.A.R.) as
hereinafter specified by the regulations for the district in which such building is located.
20.17.030 HOW MEASURED. Floor area shall be measured at each level from outside
of wall to outside of wall, but for the purpose of determining minimum required floor area
shall not include any area having an average height of less than 7 feet, basements, attached
garages, open porches, attics, public hallways, or storage areas. Basements and attics shall
not be included in determining permitted F.A.R. For the purposes of minimum and
maximum floor area regulations, in the case of floor levels built into a hillside, the floor area
subject to the regulation shall be the area extending back in depth one-half the length of the
exposed wall at grade.
20.17.040 INCREASE PERMITTED. The maximum permitted F.A.R. may be
increased as permitted by Section 20.000.
20.18.000 LOT SIZE
18 - 1
20.18.010 MINIMUM REQUIRED. No building shall be erected on a lot of less area
or of minimum average width less (sic) than hereinafter specified by the regulations of the
district in which such building is located.
20.18.020 LOT AREA-HOW MEASURED. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the lot
area shall be measured from the Base Setback Line and shall be exclusive of the area
between the Base Setback Line and the existing property line ultimately to be included in the
street.
20.18.030 LOT WIDTH-HOW MEASURED. In determining the minimum average
width of a lot such measurement shall be made by a line perpendicular to the line
establishing the average depth of the lot, at any point where one-half (1/2) the required
minimum area would fall on each side of such line establishing the minimum average width
provided that the frontage at the street line measured by a straight line on a curving frontage
shall not be less than 50% of the required average width, whichever is greater.
20.18.040 REDUCTION. No lot area shall be reduced by any means so as to create a
lot of less than the required size or so that the existing offsets, setbacks, open space or lot
area would be reduced below that required by the regulations for the district in which such
lot is located.
20.18.050 EXCEPTIONS. Where a lot has less land area or width than required for the
district in which it is located and was of record at the time of passage of this Ordinance, such
lot may be used for any purpose permitted in such district, subject to the regulations
governing substandard lots set forth under the Subdivision Control Ordinance of the City of
Port Washington provided, however, that in no case shall the setback, or offset requirements
be reduced except by order of the Board of Appeals after due hearing, or as otherwise herein
provided. The open space requirements in the case of such lot may be reduced without
appeal provided the open space is equal to at least 50% of the actual lot area.
20.19.000 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY AND OPEN SPACE
19 - 1
20.19.010 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY.
A. Purpose of Control. The regulatory techniques controlling the distribution of
population throughout the community are intended to achieve the desired
environmental character as set forth in the General Plan and to achieve a practical
economic and functional relationship between the residential use of land and its
consequent impact upon traffic circulation, sewage, disposal, school facilities, and
other service demands.
B. Method of Control. In single family detached development, the density is established
by the minimum required lot size. In single family attached, or multiple family
developments, no minimum lot size is established by the minimum required lot size.
In single family attached, or multiple family developments, no minimum lot size is
established; but the allowable density is established by a required ratio of lot area to
each dwelling unit. In a planned residential development project, the density is
established by a special factor giving the number of dwelling units permitted per acre
based on the underlying zoning. In the Central City Mixed District, a maximum
control may be established by the Density Factor Overlay District which provides for
a sliding scale upon the size of the parcel being developed.
C. How Computed. The determination of the number of allowable dwelling units on a
given property developed with single family attached or multiple family units shall be
made as follows:
1. Single Family Attached and Multiple Family. By dividing the net area
of the parcel to be so developed by the number of square feet of lot
area required per dwelling unit.
2.. Planned Development Projects. By applying the percentage factor to
the total area of the project as hereinafter set forth in Section
20.21.050 on the basis of the underlying zoning.
3.. Density Factor Overlay. By applying the Density Factor formula to
parcels of 25,000 square feet or larger in area as set forth in the ODF
District Regulations, Section 20.33.010.
20.19.020 OPEN SPACE
A. Minimum Required. No building shall be erected, structurally altered or relocated on
a lot so as to reduce the useable open area of such lot to less than that hereinafter
specified by the regulations for that district.
B. How measured. To be considered useable, such open area shall be readily accessible
and of a size and shape which can be reasonably considered to provide for the
amenities and necessities of light, air, play space, drying yard, garden, etc., but shall
not include parking area and drives.
20.19.000 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY AND OPEN SPACE
19 - 2
C. Overlapping. No part of the open space provided for any building shall be included
as part of the open space required for another building, except as hereinafter provided
for planned development projects.
20.20.000 ENVIRONMENTAL ENHANCEMENT INCENTIVE
20 - 1
20.20.010 PURPOSE. In order to encourage the inclusion of site amenities in business
and multiple family developments, incentives are offered in the form of increased density on
F.A.R. allowances where in the opinion of the Plan Commission such increase would be
justified by the enhancement to the environment and would not adversely affect the value or
enjoyment of surrounding property, the provision of municipal services, or the safe efficient
flow of traffic on nearby streets.
20.20.020 APPLICATION. The granting of increases in either allowable density or
F.A.R. may be made by the Plan Commission upon submittal of a request for such allowance
accompanied by appropriate building and site plans, and shall be based upon the following
table of maximum allowable incentive increases. The Commission shall use its discretion as
to whether the character and quality of the proposed enhancement justifies the maximum
increase or a proportion thereof:
Type of Environmental Enhancement
Incentive Business
Incr. in F.A.R.
Increase Multi.
Family Increase in
Density (sic)
Plaza, malls, and other pedestrian
promenades or gathering places provided
they are specifically designated and
appropriately developed to enhance the
pleasure and comfort of the pedestrian and
the aesthetic appearance of the development.
2 sq. ft. of additional
floor area for each sq.
foot of plaza, mall,
etc.
1 dwelling unit for
each 500 sq. feet of
plaza, mall, etc.
Recreational facilities intended for the free
use of residents or patrons such as children’s
play grounds, tennis courts, swimming and
wading pools, etc.
2 sq. ft of additional
floor area for each sq.
ft. of recreational
area.
1 dwelling unit for
each 250 sq. ft. of
pool area, or 500 sq.
ft. of other
recreational area.
Underground parking or underground truck
service area.
1 sq. ft. of additional
floor area for each sq.
ft. of underground
parking or service
area.
1 dwelling unit for
every 3 underground
parking spaces.
Landscaped areas. Special landscape
treatment or features such as outdoor
sculpture, pools, fountains, flower beds, etc.
1 sq. ft. of additional
floor area for each sq.
ft. of landscaped area.
Not to exceed 10%
of the base
allowance density.
20.21.000 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
21 - 1
20.21.010 PERMITTED. The unified and planned development of a site, in single or
corporate ownership at the time of development, may be permitted in an OPD Planned
Development Overlay District without the customary division into individual lots, or without
specific compliance to the district regulations as applicable to individual lots, subject to the
regulations as hereinafter provided in Section 20.33.010.B.3 of this Ordinance.
20.21.020 CLASSIFICATION. For the purpose of this Ordinance all Planned
Development shall be classified as follows and be limited to parcels of not less than the size
indicated:
1. Residential..................................... 75,000 sq. ft.
2. Commercial ................................... 100,000 sq. ft.
3. Industrial ....................................... 200,000 sq. ft.
4. Mixed ............................................ 100,000 sq. ft.
For Planned Development Projects in existing, developed areas where redevelopment is
being proposed, parcels shall not be subject to the minimum square footage limitations set
forth in this section, but the size of the project area subject to the Planned Development
regulations of this Zoning Ordinance may be recommended by the Plan Commission and
determined by the Common Council, based upon the criteria contained in Section 20.21.050
applicable to the type of the project being proposed.
20.21.030 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
A. In addition to the uses permitted in the underlying district, any other use may be
permitted as hereafter designated in Section 20.34.250 consistent with the criteria
established in 20.22.060 following.
B. Individual uses and structures in a Planned Development Project District need not
comply with the specific building location, height, building size, floor area, lot size,
and open space requirements of the underlying basic district provided that the spirit
and intent of such requirements are complied with in the total development plan for
such project consistent with the criteria as established in 20.22.060 following, and
subject to such further requirements as are hereinafter specified under Section
20.34.250.
20.21.040 PROCEDURE.
A. Petition: Petition may be made to the City Council by the owner or agent of property
proposed for such development, to amend the zoning map by the overlaying of an
OPD District in order to permit the application of the provisions of this section to
such development. Such petition shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00 plus $1.00
for every acre or fraction thereof in the project area, and the following information.
1. A statement describing the general character of intended development along
with such other pertinent information as may be necessary to make a
20.21.000 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
21 - 2
determination that the contemplated arrangement or use makes it desirable to
apply regulations and requirements differing from those ordinarily applicable
under this Ordinance.
2. A general development plan of the project showing the following: intended
use or uses of land: the dimensions and location of proposed structures and of
areas to be reserved for vehicular and pedestrian circulation; parking; public
uses such as schools and playgrounds, park, landscaping and other open
spaces; and architectural drawings and sketches illustrating the design and
character of the proposed uses and the physical relationship of the uses.
B. Referral to the Plan Commission and Architectural Review Board: Such petition
shall be referred to the Plan Commission and processed as any other petition for
zoning change except that copies of those exhibits of the petition which relate to
building appearance shall at the same time be referred to the Architectural Review
Board. Where the petitioner chooses to seek general approval of the land use and
circulation pattern first, as mentioned in 20.20.060.B following, submittal of building
plans to the Architectural Review Board can be delayed until more specific and
detailed plans are required for approval to proceed. Upon completion of necessary
study and investigation the Plan Commission shall make its recommendation to the
City Council as to the appropriateness and desirability of the proposed zoning change,
the suitability of the site and development plans and any additional conditions which
it may feel necessary or appropriate. Where building plans have been submitted to
the Architectural Review Board, the Board shall also make its recommendation to the
City Council, basing their finding on the standards set forth in Section 20.30.000 of
this Ordinance.
C. Public Hearing: Upon receipt of the Plan Commission’s recommendations, the City
Council shall cause a public hearing to be held pursuant to Section 20.07.000 of this
Ordinance.
20.21.050 BASIS FOR APPROVAL. The Plan Commission in making its
recommendations and the City Council in making its determination shall give consideration
and satisfy themselves as to the following:
1. That the proponents of the proposed development have demonstrated they
intent to start construction within a reasonable period following the approval
of the project and requested overlay of the OPD District, that the project
appears economically sound, that adequate financing is possible, and that the
development will be carried out according to a reasonable construction
schedule to the City. The developers may not re-sell an approved planned
development project without permission of the City, until construction is
complete, and all terms of the project are complete to the City’s satisfaction.
2. That the proposed development is consistent in all respects to the spirit and
intent of this Ordinance, is in conformity with the general plans for
20.21.000 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
21 - 3
community development, would not be contrary to the general welfare and
economic prosperity of the City or of the immediate neighborhood, that the
specific development plans have been prepared with competent professional
advice and guidance, and that the benefits and improved design of the
resultant development justifies the variation from the normal requirements of
this Ordinance through the application of the Planned Development Project
Overlay District.
3. In the case of proposed residential developments:
a. That such development will create an attractive residential
environment of sustained desirability and economic stability,
compatible with the character established for the area by the
community General Plan, and where the economic impact of the
development in terms of income levels, property values, and service
demands is at least as beneficial to the community as that which could
be anticipated under the basic zoning.
b. That the population composition of the development will not alter
adversely the impact upon school or other municipal service
requirements as anticipated under the existing basic zoning and
General Plan.
c. That the project will not create traffic or parking demand incompatible
with that anticipated under the General Plan.
d. That the total average residential density of the project will be
compatible with the General Plan. For specific project density
computation, the project area shall be measured to include all project
land except those portions zoned Industrial or Wetland Floodplain, and
exclusive of existing public right-of-way or public open space
easement. The allowable maximum density shall be computed
separately for each existing basic district except for Industrial and
Wetland Floodplain Districts. The density shall be computed by
multiplying the area in each such district by the percentage factor given
in the following table and then dividing the result by the number of
square feet per family unit as required by the table for that district.
The total allowable density for the project is the sum of those
individual computations. In the case of a project which includes land
classified as Wetland Floodplain the total allowable density may be
increased by the percentage which such land is of the total project area,
but in no case more than 40%. In the case of any such land which is
reclaimed from its Wetland Floodplain characteristic as a result of the
project development, the total allowable density may be increased by
the percentage which such reclaimed land is of the total project area.
An increase in the computed allowable maximum density, not to
20.21.000 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
21 - 4
exceed 10%, may be permitted upon recommendation of the Plan
Commission that the increased density is justified in terms of the
relationship to open areas, service demand, and the total quality and
character of the project. In no case, however, shall the provisions of
paragraph (5) following be waived.
Underlying Basic District Percentage Factor Density in Feet per Family
R-1 100% 45,000
RS-1 100% 15,000
RS-2 90% 12,000
RS-3 85% 10,000
RS-4 80% 8,400
RS-5 100% 6,000
RS-6 100% 4,000
RM-1 100% 3,500
RM-2 100% 4,000
RM-3 100% 2,000
RM-4 100% 1,500
CCM 100% As established by ODF
B-1 100% 1,500
B-2 100% 1,500
B-3 100% 10,000
B-4 100% 200
B-5 100% 10,000
e. That the aggregate open space of the development will be no less than
would have resulted from the application of open space requirements
of the underlying district.
f. That adequate guarantee is provided for permanent retention as “open
area” of the residual open land area resulting from the application of
these regulations, either by private reservation for the use of the
residents within the development or by dedication to the public.
g. In the case of private reservation the open area to be reserved shall be
protected against building development by conveying to the
municipality as part of the conditions for project approval in open
space easement over such open areas restricting the are against any
future building or use except as is consistent with that of providing
landscaped open space for the aesthetic and recreational satisfaction of
the surrounding residences. Buildings or uses for non-commercial
recreational or cultural purposes compatible with the open space
objective may be permitted only where specifically authorized as part
of the project plan or subsequently with the express approval of the
20.21.000 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
21 - 5
City Council following approval of building, site, and operational
plans by the Plan Commission.
h. The care and maintenance of such open space reservations shall be
insured either by establishment of appropriate management
organization for the project or by agreement with the municipality for
establishment of a special service district for the project area on the
basis of which the municipality shall provide the necessary
maintenance service and levy the cost thereof as a special assessment
on the tax bills of properties within the project area. In any case, the
City shall have the right to carry out, and levy an assessment for the
cost of, any maintenance which it feels necessary if it is not otherwise
taken care of to the satisfaction of the City. The manner of assuring
maintenance and assessing such cost to individual properties shall be
determined prior to the approval of the final project plans and shall be
included in the title to each property.
i. Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservation shall be
established in a manner acceptable to the municipality and made apart
of the conditions of the plan approval.
4. In the case of proposed commercial developments:
a. That the economic practicality of the proposed development can be
justified on the basis of purchasing potential, competitive relationship
and demonstrated tenant interest.
b. That the proposed development will be adequately serviced by offstreet
parking and truck service facilities.
c. That the locations for entrances and exits have been designed to
prevent unnecessary interference with the safe and efficient movement
of traffic on surrounding streets, and that the development will not
create an effect upon the general traffic pattern of the area
incompatible with that anticipated under the General Plan.
d. That the architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting, and
general site development will result in an attractive and harmonious
service area compatible with and not creating an effect upon the
property values of the surrounding neighborhood incompatible with
that anticipated under the General Plan.
5. In the case of proposed industrial developments:
a. That the operational character, physical plant arrangement and
architectural design of buildings will be compatible with contemporary
20.21.000 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
21 - 6
performance standards and industrial development design and will not
produce an effect upon the property values of the surrounding
neighborhood incomparable with that anticipated under the General
Plan.
b. That the proposed development will have adequate provision for offstreet
parking and truck service areas and will be adequately served by
rail or highway facilities.
c. That the proposed development is properly related to the total
transportation system of the community and will not produce an effect
on the safety and efficiency of the public streets incompatible with that
anticipated under the General Plan.
6. In the case of mixed developments:
a. That the proposed mixture of uses produces a unified composite which
is compatible within itself and which as a total development entity is
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and consistent with the
general objectives of the General Plan.
b. That the various types of uses conform to the general requirements, as
hereinbefore set forth, applicable to projects of such use character.
c. The allowable maximum residential density shall be computed in the
same manner as provided for a residential development under
20.21.050 (3) iv.
d. This figure shall then be reduced by the percentage which any nonresidential
use is of the total project area. In determining the area of
non-residential use, landscaped area, pedestrian malls, or other areas
which in the opinion of the Plan Commission contribute to the
enhancement of the total project environment may be excluded.
20.21.060 DETERMINATION.
A. The Common Council after due consideration may deny the petition, approve the
petition as submitted or approve the petition subject to additional information.
B. The approval of a petition and consequent amending of the Zoning Map by an overlay
of the OPD District shall be issued upon and include as conditions thereto, the
building, site and operational plans for the development as approved as well as all
other commitments offered or required with regard to project value, character or other
factors pertinent to assuring that the project will be developed basically as presented
on the official submittal plans, and shall be mapped and recorded as provided for
conditional uses under Section 20.23.000 of this Ordinance. Such plans, however,
20.21.000 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
21 - 7
need not necessarily be completely detailed at the time of Overlay zoning, provided
they are of sufficient detail to satisfy the Plan Commission and City Council as to the
general character, scope, and appearance of the proposed development. Such
preliminary plan shall at least designate the pattern of proposed streets, the basic
pattern of land use, the size and arrangement of lots, and illustrate a “typical” example
of the development proposed. The approval of such preliminary plans shall be
conditioned upon the subsequent submittal and approval of more specific and detailed
plans as the development progresses.
C. Any subsequent change or addition to the plans or use shall first be submitted for
approval to the Plan Commission and if in the opinion of the Plan Commission such
change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration of the original plan, a public
hearing shall be required.
D. The provision of Section 20.23.000 governing termination of the conditional grant
shall apply to such group project development.
20.22.000 ENGINEERING REGULATIONS.
22 - 1
20.22.010 ESTABLISHMENT OF GRADES. Every building hereafter erected,
structurally altered or relocated shall be at a grade approved by the City Engineer as being in
satisfactory relationship with the established street grades, or with the existing street grade
where none is established with particular consideration for proper drainage and safe vehicular
access.
20.22.020 WATER SURFACE PROFILES. The City engineer shall maintain a record
of all water surface profiles, floodplain areas and elevations, elevations of underground
utilities traversing any floodplain and of flood proofing measures established in the
floodplain and shall obtain from the owner of any new structures placed in the floodplain
elevations of those structures as actually built, certified by a registered engineer, architect or
surveyor.
20.22.030 DRAINAGE.
A. Adequate Drainage Required: No principal building shall be erected,
structurally altered, relocated on land which is not adequately drained at all
times nor which is subject to periodic flooding, nor so that the lowest floor
level is less than 3 feet above the highest anticipated seasonal ground water
level.
B. Obstruction to Drainage: The damming, filling, relocating or otherwise
interfering with the natural flow of surface water along any surface water
drainage channel or natural water course shall not be permitted except with
approval of the Plan Commission.
C. Building Restricted Adjacent to Drainage Channels or Watercourses: No
building other than a bridge, dam, boathouse, or revetment subject to the
aforesaid approval, shall be erected, structurally altered or relocated so that the
lowest form of said building is less than 3 feet above possible flood stage as
determined by the City engineer.
20.22.040 SANITATION AND WATER SUPPLY.
A. No principal building involving human use or occupancy shall be permitted on
a lot unless provision is insured for safe and adequate facilities for water
supply and disposal of sewage.
B. In areas intended for municipal sewer no principal building involving human
use or occupancy shall be permitted until connection is made to municipal
sewer or an approved communal sewage disposal system.
C. In areas not being served by a municipal or other approved communal sewage
disposal system, evidence must be submitted that safe sewage disposal is
possible based on the proposed use, the type of disposal system, the
permeability of the soil, and the size of the lot.
20.22.000 ENGINEERING REGULATIONS.
22 - 2
D. No outhouse or privy shall be hereafter erected.
E. Preservation of Topography: In order to protect the property owner from
possible damage due to change in the existing grade of adjoining lands, and to
aid in preserving and protecting the natural beauty and character of the
landscape, no change in the existing topography of any land shall be made
which would result increasing any portion of the slope to a ratio greater than 2
horizontal to 1 vertical, within a distance of 20 feet from the property line,
except where retaining walls are built pursuant to Section 20.11.000 or with
the written consent of the abutting property owner and with the approval of the
Plan Commission; or which would alter the existing drainage or topography
in any way as to adversely affect the adjoining property. In no case, shall any
slope exceed the normal angle or slippage of the material involved, and all
slopes shall be protected against erosion.
20.23.000 CONDITIONAL USES.
23 - 1
20.23.010 GENERAL.
A. Approval Required: Uses listed as permitted by conditional use grant may be
permitted in the district in which listed upon petition for such grant to the City
Council and subject to the approval of the Council upon recommendation of the Plan
Commission and to such other conditions as hereinafter designated. Legal nonconforming
uses may also be permitted conditional grant status pursuant to Section
20.12.030 and Section 20.23.020.F. of this Ordinance.
B. Basis of Approval: The City Council upon recommendation of the Plan Commission
shall base their determination on general consideration as to the effect of such grant
on the health, general welfare, safety and economic prosperity of the City and
specifically of the immediate neighborhood in which such use would be located,
including such considerations as the effect on the established character and quality of
the area, its physical attractiveness, the movement of traffic, the demand for related
services, the possible hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive, or nuisance effect as a
result of noise, dust, smoke or odor and such other factors as would be appropriate to
carrying out the intent of conditional grants as expressed in Section 20.14.000.
20.23.020 PROCEDURE.
A. Petition: A request for conditional use grant shall be submitted in writing to the City
Administrator who shall promptly refer such petition to the Plan Commission for
recommendation. Such petition shall be accompanied by appropriate data and
information necessary for proper evaluation of the request including specifically the
following:
1. An accurate map of the property including indication of general terrain and
topographic characteristics, the location of all significant terrain features such
as streams, ponds, tree growth, etc., and the location of all existing structures.
2. An accurate and complete written description of the use for which conditional
grant is being requested including pertinent statistics and operational
characteristics.
3. Plans and other drawings showing proposed development of the site and
buildings including landscape plans, location of parking and service areas,
driveways, exterior lighting, type of building material, etc.
4. Any other pertinent information required by the Plan Commission or Council
as set forth in forms supplied by the City.
5. The names and addresses of the owners of all property within 200 feet of the
proposed conditional use.
B. Hearing: Upon receipt of the petition the City Council shall hold a public hearing
thereon. For any application on lands located in the WF Wetland and Floodplain
20.23.000 CONDITIONAL USES.
23 - 2
District, a copy shall be transmitted to the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) for review and comment. Final action on Floodplain applications
shall not be taken for 30 days or until the DNR has made its recommendation,
whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions related to conditional uses in the WF
Wetland and Floodplain District shall be transmitted to the DNR within 10 days of
the effective date of such decision.
C. Notice: Notice of the proposed conditional use and a copy of the public hearing
notice shall be sent by regular mail to the owners of all property within 200’.
D. Determination: Following public hearing and necessary study and investigation by
the Plan Commission, the City Council shall as soon as practical render its decision in
writing and a copy made a permanent part of the Council records. Such decision
shall include an accurate description of the use permitted, of the property on which
permitted, and any and all conditions made applicable thereto, or if disapproved shall
indicate the reasons for disapproval.
E. Mapping & Recording: When a conditional grant is approved, the Building and
Occupancy and Zoning Use Permits shall be appropriately noted and such grant shall
be applicable solely to the structures, use and property so described. Indication of
such grant shall also be made on the Zoning Map by appropriate code number or
symbol.
F. Termination: Where a permitted conditional use does not continue conformity with
the conditions of the original approval or where a change in the character of the
surrounding area or the use itself cause it to be no longer compatible with
surrounding areas, or for similar cause based upon consideration for public welfare
the conditional grant may be terminated by action of the City Council following
referral to the Plan Commission for recommendation, and public hearing thereon.
Such use shall thereafter be classified as a legal non-conforming use, except that
where the action is due to failure to comply with the conditions of the conditional
grant, the City Council may require complete termination of such use.
G. Application to existing uses:
1. A use which existed lawfully on a lot at the time said lot was placed in a
district where such use would be permitted only as a conditional grant, may be
granted conditional use status subject to submitting the data required under
Section 20.23.020 A.
20.23.000 CONDITIONAL USES.
23 - 3
2. The grant of conditional use in such case shall be based upon the existing
conditions at the time, however, the City Council upon recommendation of the
Plan Commission may require improvements in general building appearance,
in storage of trash and other materials, in the provision of more satisfactory
off-street parking, in the use of planting fencing screens where necessary, and
in operational matters relating to the control of noise, dust, odor, smoke, and
excessive glare or illumination of lighting, provided that such measures be
within the reasonable economic capacities of such a use. Any expansion or
change in use shall require changing of the conditional use grant.
3. Petition may be made at any time for expansion or other change of the
conditional use grant and such petition shall not prejudice the existing grant as
herein authorized.
H. A request for conditional use shall be accompanied by a review fee of $75.00 for
initial review plus a $250.00 deposit to be drawn on. The applicant will be billed for
the actual costs of publication.
20.23.030 REQUIREMENTS.
A. Standard Requirements:
1. Except as may be specifically otherwise provided, any such use shall conform
to the Building Location, Height, Building Size, Lot Size, and Open Space
Regulations of the district in which it is located.
2. Building, site and operation plans of the proposed use shall be submitted for
approval by the Plan Commission. Such plans shall be in sufficient detail to
enable the Commission to evaluate the suitability of architectural and
landscape treatment; the proper location of the building or buildings on the
lot; the satisfactory provision for parking and circulation needs, for drainage
and sewage disposal, for adequate planting screen where necessary to
eliminate noise, dust, odor, smoke, or other objectionable operating
conditions; and the general compatibility of the proposed use with the area in
which it is located.
B. Special Requirements: In addition to the general standards and requirements as stated
in this section, such conditional uses shall be subject to more specific standards and
requirements pertinent to the particular use, which standards and requirements may
be set out in a supplementary guide for conditional use regulation adopted by the Plan
Commission, and modified from time to time in order that they reflect the best and
most contemporary or regulatory practices.
20.23.000 CONDITIONAL USES.
23 - 4
C. Modification Regulations: Requirements applicable to uses permitted by right or as
accessory uses in any district by the regulations of this Ordinance may be modified or
waived by the Plan Commission in their application to a conditional use if in the
Commission’s opinion they are not appropriate or necessary to the proper regulation
of the conditional use, and where such modification or waiver would not in the
commission’s opinion result in adverse effect upon the surrounding properties.
D. Accessory Uses and Structures: Uses and structures accessory to a principal
conditional use shall be subject to appropriate regulations in the same manner as
herein set forth for the principal conditional use.
20.24.000 PARKING & LOADING REQUIREMENTS
20.24.010 DEFINITIONS. As used in sections 20.24.010, 20.24.020 and
20.24.030, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
A. Approved: When used in reference to an area, location, material, structure or use,
means specifically permitted under the provisions of Sections 20.24.020 or
20.24.030 or, if subject to Plan Commission review under said sections or under
this section, means authorized by official permission of the Plan Commission.
B. Base Setback Area: The land lying between the edge of the existing or proposed
street right-of-way and the Base Setback Line.
C. Base Setback Line: The line from which all required setbacks are measured,
which line corresponds to the established ultimate street right-of-way line as set
forth in Section 20.15.020.
D. Carport: Any parking or storage space or shelter for a motor vehicle, having a
roof but not completely enclosed by walls. A carport shall be attached to a
principal or accessory building or structure, and its covered area shall be included
when calculating any building or zoning code requirements.
E. Commercial Vehicle: A motor vehicle, whether a single vehicle or a combination
vehicle, designed or used to transport passengers or property in conjunction with
the operation of a trade, industry or business, which has information painted on or
attached to such vehicle (e.g., a logo, company name, symbol, telephone number
or text) that identifies a business or service.
F. Driveway: A private road providing access for motor vehicles from a street, alley
or highway to a house, carport, garage, parking lot, parking space or parking
structure.
G. Garage: A structure or portion thereof, whether commercial, private or public and
whether attached or detached to a building, primarily used for the enclosed
parking, rental, repair, servicing, shelter or storage of motor vehicles
H. Loading Space: An off-street space for the temporary parking of vehicles while
engaged in loading or unloading goods, materials or merchandise.
I. Motor truck: See truck.
J. Park (Parked, Parking): The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
property or passengers.
K. Parking Space (Parking Area): A designated location or area where a vehicle is
parked.
20.24.000 PARKING & LOADING REQUIREMENTS
L. Paved (Paving): The act or result of applying material (e.g., cement, concrete,
asphalt mixture, cobblestones, precast concrete, paver units, clay fired bricks, or
other approved driveway material) to a ground surface so as to create a uniform,
dust free, hard, usually level surface for a driveway or for travel.
M. Reconstructed (Reconstruction): The act or result of removing and replacing a
paved surface.
N. Setback Area: The shortest required horizontal distance between any structure
and the Base Setback Line. (See Section 20.15.020.)
O. Street Right-of-Way Line: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land
and a contiguous street.
P. Street Yard: A yard extending across the full width of a lot, the depth of which
shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing or proposed street
or highway right-of-way line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point
of the principal structure. Corner lots and double frontage lots have two (2) such
yards.
Q. Storage (Store) (Stored): A place or a space where a vehicle or recreational
vehicle is kept; to place a vehicle or recreational vehicle for safekeeping or for
disposal for any period of time longer than temporary storage.
R. Temporary storage: As applied to any vehicle or recreational vehicle, a period of
time not exceeding thirty (30) days, provided that such vehicle is removed from
the lot or parcel on which it is kept or placed for a period of at least ten (10) days
thereafter before a recurrence of the temporary storage.
S. Trailer: A vehicle without motive power designed or used for carrying property
or passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
but does not include a mobile home as defined in Section 20.02.000.
T. Truck: Any motor vehicle designed or used primarily for carrying heavy loads,
having a powerful motor, a transmission geared for heavy pulling, and various
types of bodies including, but not limited to, dump trucks and tractor-semitrailers,
but excluding pick-up trucks.
U. Vehicle: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported upon a street, road or highway. Vehicles include, but are not limited
to, automobiles, trucks, vans, sport utility vehicles, mopeds or motorcycles, which
are or can be licensed for use on a public street, road or highway.
V. Vehicle, Recreational: Any device or vehicle equipped and used or intended to be
used primarily for temporary human habitation or recreation, whether on land,
water or in the air. Recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, all-terrain
20.24.000 PARKING & LOADING REQUIREMENTS
vehicles, boats, campers, camping trailers, fifth-wheel mobile homes, motor
homes, off-road motorcycles, off-road utility vehicles and snowmobiles.
Recreational vehicles do not include any device or vehicle which was intended by
its inherent design to be used for commercial purposes, such as a truck, bus, tow
truck, etc., or a mobile home as defined in Section 20.02.000.
W. Vehicle Parking Space (Vehicle Parking Area): An approved location or area
where one or more vehicles can be parked.
X. Vehicle Storage Space (Vehicle Storage Area): An approved location or area
where one or more vehicles can be stored.
Y. Yard: An open space on the same lot with a building or structure, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except for vegetation. The street yard
extends the full width of the lot.
20.24.020 BUSINESS, INDUSTRIAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND MULTIPLE
FAMILY ZONING DISTRICTS. The following requirements shall apply to all
property within the Business, Industrial, Institutional, and RM-2, RM-3 and RM-4
Multiple Family Zoning Districts:
A. Flexibility in Application. The City recognizes that due to unique site or design
conditions, strict application of these parking standards may impede the
maximum use of an existing lot or a proposed development. In such event the
Plan Commission may consider tradeoffs within these standards to facilitate the
benefits to the City.
B. Off-Street Parking Required: In connection with every use, there shall be
provided at the time any use or building is erected, changed, enlarged, extended or
increased, off-street vehicle parking space in accordance with the parking
requirements set forth in this section, except that in the B-4 Central Business
District business uses are exempt from the number of parking spaces required and
from the general requirements set forth in Sections 20.24.020.E.3., E.4., and E.5.
C. Approval: The owner of any parking areas constructed, reconstructed, expanded
or extended after March 4, 2010 shall obtain approval of the proposed parking site
plan from the Plan Commission prior to the commencement of such work.
D. Determination of Need: The number of parking spaces required shall be based
upon the anticipated parking demand of the particular use(s) and shall be as listed
in the following table (as amended from time to time), or as may be determined
by the Plan Commission for specific uses not so listed:
20.24.000 PARKING & LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Use Parking Space Requirements
Multiple Family Dwelling Units ** 1.75 spaces per dwelling unit with a
minimum of 60% of the required spaces to
be enclosed and 10% or a minimum of 3
spaces shall be accessible to visitors.
Elderly (55 years and older) Multiple Family
Dwelling Units **
1 space per dwelling unit of which 75%
shall be enclosed and 10% (a minimum of 3
spaces) shall be at grade and accessible to
visitors, except in the B-4 Central Business
District where 0.5 spaces per unit shall be
required.
Public Assembly Facilities providing for
seated audiences (churches, theatres,
auditoriums, etc.,)
1 space for every 5 seats based on the
maximum capacity of the facility.
Commercial Lodging (hotels, motels, tourist
homes, etc.) **
1 space for each room.
Hospitals 1 space for every 3 beds, plus
1 space for each medical staff member, plus
1 space for every 3 employees for the work
shift with the most employees.
Nursing Homes, Convalescent Homes,
Community Based Residential Facilities
(CBRF) and Elderly Assisted Living Facilities.
1 space for every 3 beds, plus
1 space for each staff member employee for
the work shift with the most employees.
Clinics 5 spaces for every practitioner on the staff,
plus 1 space for each employee for the work
shift with the most employees.
Industrial Uses **
A. Manufacturing, Processing, Fabrication
and Storage Operations
B. Wholesale Business
C. Warehouse
1 space per 2,500 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
1 space per 2,500 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Commercial Office Buildings** 3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Retail Stores ** 3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Customer Service Establishments ** 3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Restaurants, Taverns, Clubs, etc. ** 1 space for every 100 sq. ft. of GLA.*
Planned Shopping Centers ** 1 space for every 200 sq. ft. of GLA.*
20.24.000 PARKING & LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Commercial Recreation: Indoor (other than
theaters)** 1 space for every 200 sq. ft. of GLA.*
Outdoor Recreational Facilities ** As required by Section 20.25.020 C.
* (GLA) Gross Leasable Floor Area: The total floor area for which the tenant pays rent
and that is designed for the tenant’s occupancy and exclusive use. GLA excludes public or
common areas, such as utility rooms, stairwells, hallways or other accessory space, which
do not generate parking demand.
** Handicap parking spaces required to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act
and/or the Wisconsin Administrative Code are excluded in determining whether a use
meets the parking space requirements set forth above.
E. General Requirements:
1. Prohibited Use. No truck, recreational vehicle, mobile home, or other
vehicle,equipment or materials shall be parked or stored on any lot or parcel
unless accessory to or part of the approved use of the development in which
such lot or parcel is located.
2. Surface requirements. All off-street parking areas and driveways shall be
paved. New developments shall be paved prior to issuance of an occupancy
certificate or permit.
3. Paving. All paved surfaces shall be constructed and maintained free of any
upheavals, settlement, holes or loose material.
4. Landscaping. All parking lot street yards and paved areas shall comply with
the landscaping requirements set forth in Sections 20.31.050, et seq.
5. Residential Buffer. In any off-street vehicle parking area, all parking spaces
shall be at least 20 feet from an abutting residential lot line, unless zoning
district requirements are more restrictive.
6. Setback. In any off-street vehicle parking area, no vehicle shall be parked
nearer than 10 feet to the existing or proposed street right-of-way line. A
permanent barrier shall be required on the interior side of all parking lots to
prevent vehicles from driving on the planted areas. A continuous 6” vertical
curb shall be required along the entire length of any parking lot that abuts a
public or private roadway.
7. Lighting. Lights installed in or provided for any off-street vehicle parking area
shall be shielded or directed so as to confine the area of light dispersion to the
parking area. Maximum illumination and fixture height shall be evaluated and
established by the Plan Commission as part of the site review process. An
20.24.000 PARKING & LOADING REQUIREMENTS
engineering drawing illustrating proposed lighting types and levels for the
development and for the adjoining properties shall be submitted with the
proposed site plan.
8. Off-Street Loading and Unloading.
a. Required. In all business and industrial zoning districts, off-street
loading space shall be provided, in addition to the required offstreet
vehicle parking area, for every building used for business or
industrial purposes which exceeds 3,000 square feet in area,
excluding storage areas.
b. Standard Dimensions. Each individual loading space shall be at
least 12 feet wide by 54 feet long, and shall have a minimum
height clearance of 14 feet.
c. Street Servicing Prohibited. No loading space used for a business
or industrial building shall be constructed or located in a manner
requiring or permitting servicing directly from an abutting public
street.
20.24.030 SINGLE AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE ZONING DISTRICTS;
CCM CENTRAL CITY MIXED ZONING DISTRICT. The following requirements
shall apply to all property within the Single and Two-Family Residence Zoning Districts,
and to single and multiple family dwellings within the CCM Central City Mixed Zoning
District:
A. General Requirements:
1. Driveways.
a. All driveways shall be paved.
b. Driveways shall traverse the setback area from the street to the
garage in the shortest path.
c. Driveways shall be located at least three (3) feet from all abutting
lot lines.
d. Driveways leading to a garage or carport facing the street shall be
no more than two (2) feet wider, on each side, than the vehicle
garage door(s) being served, or more than two (2) feet wider, on
each side, than the outermost surface of the posts which face the
street and support the carport roof.
20.24.000 PARKING & LOADING REQUIREMENTS
e. Driveways that do not conform to these General Requirements
may be replaced if the newly constructed or reconstructed
driveway uses the same footprint as the driveway being replaced,
or less area. Any expansion of the original footprint or changes in
the location of the driveway shall require conformity with these
General Requirements.
f. Every vehicle parked in a driveway shall be located so that its
wheels are resting entirely upon the surface of the driveway, and
parallel to the nearest edge of the driveway upon which the vehicle
is parked.
2. Parking Spaces.
a. All parking spaces shall be paved.
b. Parking spaces shall be located at least three (3) feet from all
abutting lot lines.
c. Parking spaces that do not conform to these General Requirements
may be replaced if the newly constructed or reconstructed parking
space uses the same footprint as the parking space being replaced,
or less area. Any expansion of the original footprint or change in
the location of the parking space shall require conformity with
these General Requirements.
d. Parking spaces are prohibited in the setback area, unless there is no
garage or carport on the premises.
e. Every vehicle parked in a vehicle parking space shall be located so
that its wheels are resting entirely within the vehicle parking space,
and parallel to the nearest edge of the parking space within which
the vehicle is parked.
3. Non-Recreational Vehicle Parking and/or Storage.
a. Parking for at least two (2) vehicles per dwelling unit shall be
required in a single or two-family residence zoning district.
b. No vehicle, or any portion thereof, shall be parked or stored so as
to extend over the sidewalk or the street right-of-way line.
c. Commercial vehicles, whether occupied or not, shall not be parked
on any lot, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in delivering, loading or unloading goods, property or
services to that premises. Notwithstanding the foregoing, one
commercial vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating (GVW) of
not more than 15,000 pounds shall be permitted to park on a lot if
20.24.000 PARKING & LOADING REQUIREMENTS
the owner or a permanent resident of the premises regularly uses
the commercial vehicle in the course of the employment in which
he or she is principally engaged. For purposes of this section,
“principally engaged” means that the person devotes the major part
(i.e., over 50%) of his or her time actively and directly working at
such employment, and derives his or her principal support (i.e.,
over 50% of his or her gross income) from such employment.
4. Recreational Vehicle Parking or Storage.
a. Temporary guests traveling in a recreational vehicle, camping
trailer or travel trailer may park such vehicle or trailer in the
driveway of an owner or a permanent resident of the premises for a
period not exceeding seven (7) consecutive days. Such guests
shall be allowed to connect to electrical and water services and to
inhabit the vehicle or trailer during such period, provided that any
water used by the guests shall be contained within such vehicle or
trailer. All electrical connections, equipment and facilities shall
comply with applicable local and state laws.
b. Not more than one (1) recreational vehicle, camping trailer or
travel trailer shall be parked or stored at the same time in the street
yard of any lot or parcel. Such vehicle or trailer shall be parked or
stored either in the driveway or in a paved off-street vehicle
parking or storage space on the lot or parcel. Such vehicle or
trailer shall also be parked so that it does not extend over any
portion of the sidewalk or street right-of-way line.
c. Except as provided in subsection d., multiple recreational vehicles
(e.g., snowmobiles) may be parked or stored on a lot or parcel if
such vehicles are kept on a trailer designed or used for carrying
such vehicles and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. For
purposes of this section, multiple recreational vehicles so parked or
stored shall count as one (1) recreational vehicle.
d. Not more than two (2) recreational vehicles or trailers shall be
parked or stored at the same time on any lot or parcel, excluding
recreational vehicles or trailers properly parked or stored and
screened from public view in an enclosed garage.
B, Special Exceptions. The Plan Commission may, in its discretion in an
appropriate case, grant a special exception to these General Requirements for a
new or reconstructed driveway or vehicle parking space if the Plan Commission
determines that granting such special exception would not have a substantial
adverse effect on surrounding properties by reason of noise, dust, odor,
appearance or other objectionable factors; nor create a nuisance; nor have a
20.24.000 PARKING & LOADING REQUIREMENTS
substantial adverse effect on property values; nor interfere with the reasonable
enjoyment of the surrounding properties.
20.25.000 OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
20.25.010 CLASSIFIED. For the purpose of this Ordinance outdoor recreational
facilities such as beaches, swimming pools, tennis courts, riding paddocks, golf courses,
athletic fields, etc., shall be classified as follows:
1. Public
2. Private, Commercial
3. Private, Non-Commercial Group
4. Private, Residential
20.25.020 GENERAL.
A. Such uses shall be permitted in those districts and subject to those regulations as are
hereinafter designated in this section and in the other sections of this Ordinance
specifically applicable thereto.
B. No such use shall be permitted in any case where it shall create a nuisance, a hazard,
or otherwise result in a substantial adverse effect on the surrounding property values
or on the enjoyment of such property or be otherwise detrimental to the general
public welfare. Every reasonable effort shall be made to prevent such effect through
control of lighting, attractive design and maintenance of structures, use of planting
screens or attractive fences, careful placement on the site, and sensible regulation of
use.
C. Adequate provision shall be made for off-street parking for public, private
commercial and private non-commercial group facilities consistent with the need
generated by the facility. The Building Inspector shall submit the plans for such
facilities to the Plan Commission for determination as to parking need.
D. Outdoor lighting installations shall be so located and shielded that no objectionable
glare or excessive illumination is cast upon adjoining property.
20.25.030 PUBLIC FACILITIES.
A. Where permitted by right as a principal or accessory use any active use area or
structure shall conform to the appropriate setback, offset and height regulations of the
district in which located.
B. Where permitted as a conditional grant such facilities shall conform to the appropriate
regulations as set out in Section 20.23.000 of this Ordinance.
20.25.040 PRIVATE COMMERCIAL FACILITIES.
A. Where permitted by right as a principal accessory use any active use area or structure
shall conform to the appropriate setback, offset, and height regulations of the district
in which located provided, however, that in no case shall any active use area or
structure be closer than 50 feet to an adjoining property line of a property in a
residential district.
20.25.000 OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
20.25.050 PRIVATE NON-COMMERCIAL GROUP FACILITIES.
A. Where permitted by right as a principal or accessory use any active use area or
structure shall conform to the appropriate setback, offset, and height regulations of
the district in which located provided, however, that in no case shall any active use
area or structure be closer than 50 feet to an adjoining property line of a property in a
residential district.
B. Where permitted as a conditional grant such facilities shall conform to the appropriate
regulations as set out in Section 20.23.000 of this Ordinance.
C. Commercial activity incident but not directly involved in the primary outdoor
recreational purpose such as restaurants, taverns, and personal service facilities shall
be permitted only where specifically authorized as part of the conditional grant.
20.25.060 PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES.
A. Where such facilities are permitted as a principal or accessory use by right, any active
use area or structure shall be subject to the setback, offset, and height regulations of
the district in which located except as may be hereinafter specifically designated
otherwise, the provisions of Section 20.10.030 not withstanding.
B. The requirement for offset may be eliminated where the signed consent of the
affected abutting property owner has been obtained.
20.25.070 SWIMMING POOLS. In addition to the foregoing, swimming pools shall
be subject to the following:
A. Pumps and filter equipment shall in no case be closer than 15 feet to a property line
and shall be adequately housed and muffled.
B. Surfaced terraces, sun decks, and walks shall be permitted no closer than 5 feet to a
lot line where accessory to a private residential pool. In any other case they shall be
permitted no closer than 10 feet to a lot line.
C. Reasonable precautions shall be taken to insure the safety of the pool area and to
prevent it from becoming an “attractive nuisance”. Pools other than those classified
as “Private Residential” shall be completely fenced so as to prevent the unregulated
entrance of young children to the pool area.
D. Pools erected on top of the surface of the ground shall have the pool construction
completely and adequately screened from view of the abutting properties by means of
combined fence and landscape screen approved by the Plan Commission.
E. Pools other than those classified as “Private Residential” or “Private Non-
Commercial Group” shall conform to the following:
20.25.000 OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
1. Pool water shall meet state standards for pure drinking water.
2. Adequate provision shall be made for separate shower, lavatory, and dressing
facilities for men and women which are well lighted, ventilated and properly
equipped.
3. Pool construction shall be of concrete, steel, or other material having an
impervious smooth surface and approved by the Engineer.
4. Pool shape, design, depth, and slopes shall be such as to promote safe control
of the bathers in the pool.
5. Inlets must be submerged and produce uniform circulation without “dead”
spots.
6. Outlets must be of ample size and located at the pool low points.
7. Hose connections must be of ample size and located at the pool low points.
8. Overflow gutters must surround the pool and have a pitch adequate to carry
off all overflow.
9. Adequate steps or ladders shall be provided to allow safe emergence from the
pool and shall be made of impervious material, easily cleaned, and must not
collect water or retain water.
10. A suction cleaner must be used to remove sludge, sediment and other
accumulations.
11. Recirculation systems shall consist of pumping equipment, hair and lint
gather, filter, and all necessary fixtures and connections; must be capable of
six-hour turnover of water; and must include disinfecting equipment.
12. All equipment must be accessible, satisfactorily located and the equipment
room adequately drained.
13. Each pool shall have available a pH and residual determination outfit.
14. If used at night, the pool shall be adequately lighted.
20.26.000 EXTRACTIVE OPERATIONS.
26 - 1
20.26.010 RESTRICTED. Quarrying, the removal of any sand or gravel, stripping of
topsoil, mining of minerals or any other extractive operation as defined in this Ordinance
shall not be permitted except as follows:
A. Extractive operations incident to or pre-requisite to the preparation of the site for a
permitted use may be permitted provided such operation does not involve the sale or
commercial disposal of the material removed and for a period of no longer than 30
days.
B. The following may be permitted in any district subject to approval of the Plan
Commission:
1. Operations incident to another permitted use of the premises where the
material removed is sold or otherwise commercially disposed of or for a
period in excess of 30 days.
2. Sod removal provided no such operation shall be permitted which adversely
affects the drainage of the area and provided adequate provision is made to
prevent erosion.
3. Topsoil removal, except that no such operation shall be permitted except as
incidental to another permitted use of the premises, and provided such
operation will not adversely affect the drainage of the area, or exceed 18
inches in depth, and provided adequate provision is made to prevent erosion.
20.26.020 PERMIT. No extractive operation shall take place in any district until a
permit has been secured from the Building Inspector.
20.26.030 APPLICATION. Application for a permit shall be made directly to the
Building Inspector and shall be accompanied by:
1. A fee of $50.00 to defray the cost of notification and holding of public hearing
and administrative processing.
2. A full and adequate description of all phases of the contemplated operation
and the specific mention of type of machinery and equipment which will be or
might be necessary to carry on the operation.
3. A legal description of the proposed site with a map showing its location with
indications of private access roads, existing or proposed, and of public
highways adjacent to the site which will be affected by the operation.
4. A topographic map of the area at a minimum contour interval of 5 feet
extending beyond the site to the nearest public street or highway or to a
minimum distance of 300 feet on all sides.
5. A restoration plan as hereinafter required.
20.26.000 EXTRACTIVE OPERATIONS.
26 - 2
20.26.040 REFERRAL TO PLAN COMMISSION & PUBLIC HEARING. Where
the application is for a use permitted only with Plan Commission approval, the application
and all data and information pertaining thereto shall be referred to the Plan Commission for
public hearing. The Plan Commission shall hold such public hearing within 30 days after an
application has been referred to it. In addition to the normal posting and publishing, notices
also shall be sent through the mail or otherwise placed in the hands of all owners within a
half mile radius of the approximate center of the proposed operation. These notices shall be
mailed or delivered at least 10 days prior to the date of hearing. Substantial compliance with
the notice requirements of this section shall be deemed sufficient.
20.26.050 CRITERIA. The Plan Commission in making its determination shall give
particular consideration to the following factors:
1. The effect of the proposed operation on drainage and water supply.
2. The possibility of soil erosion as a result of the proposed operation.
3. The degree and effect of dust and noise as a result of the proposed operation.
4. The practical possibility of restoration of the site.
5. The effect of the proposed operation on the natural beauty, character, tax base,
land value and land uses in the area.
20.26.060 ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS. Any conditions accessory to the granting of
a permit shall be in writing and copies made a part of the permit and a part of the records of
the City.
20.26.070 RESTORATIVE REQUIREMENTS.
A. In order to insure that the area of extractive operation shall be restored to a condition
of practical usefulness and reasonable physical attractiveness, the owner or operator
shall prior to the issuance of a permit submit to the Plan Commission a plan for such
restoration in the form of the following:
1. An agreement with the City whereby the applicant contracts to restore the
premises to a condition and within a time satisfactory to the City.
2. A physical restoration showing the proposed contours after restoration,
plantings and other special features of restoration, and the method by which
such restoration is to be accomplished.
3. A bond, written by a licensed surety company, a certified check, or other
financial guarantee satisfactory to the City in an amount sufficient in the
opinion of the Plan Commission to secure the performance of the restoration
agreement.
20.26.000 EXTRACTIVE OPERATIONS.
26 - 3
4. Such agreement and financial guarantee shall be in a form approved by the
City Attorney.
B. In the event of the applicant’s failure to fulfill this agreement, such bond, check or
other financial guarantee shall be deemed forfeit for the purpose of enabling the City
to perform the restoration.
C. Restoration shall proceed as soon as practicable and at the order and direction of the
Plan Commission. However, the owner or operator may, at his option, submit a plan
for progressive restoration as the operation is being carried on. The required financial
guarantee in such case may cover progressive stages of the restoration for periods of
not less than 2 years.
D. At any state during the restoration the plan may be modified by mutual agreement
between the City and the owner of the operation.
E. Where there is any backfilling, the material used or the method of fill shall not be
such as to create a health hazard nor which would be objectionable because of odor,
combustibility, or unsightliness. In any case the finished grade of the restored area
except for rock faces, outcroppings, water bodies, or areas of proposed building or
paving construction, shall be of sufficient depth of earth to support plant growth.
20.26.080 EXISTING OPERATIONS.
A. Permit: Within 60 days after the adoption of this Ordinance all existing extractive
operations shall be required to register with the City Administrator submitting data
relative to the present operation, including the boundaries of the actual operation and
of the ownership. A permit shall be granted to such existing operation subject to
compliance with the Operational Requirements, Section 20.26.090 where they can be
reasonably applied under existing circumstances.
B. Plan for Restoration: There shall be required within one year after the adoption of
this Ordinance, the submission of a plan for restoration of the site of existing
extractive operation as provided by Section 20.26.070 (9) where they can be
reasonably applied under existing circumstances.
C. Renewal Permit: Within 3 years after the date of this Ordinance, any such existing
operation unless permitted as a use by right shall be required to make application for
a renewal permit the same as for re-application for the renewal permit the same as for
re-application in the case of a new operation under this Ordinance.
20.26.090 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
20.26.000 EXTRACTIVE OPERATIONS.
26 - 4
A. Fencing or other suitable barrier shall be erected and maintained around the site
where in the determination of the City Council such fencing or barrier is necessary
for the protection of the public, and shall be of a type approved by the Plan
Commission.
B. All machinery and equipment used in the extractive operation be constructed,
maintained and operated in such a manner as to minimize dust, noise and vibration.
Access and haulage roads on the site shall be maintained in a dust-free condition by
surfacing or treatment as directed by the Council.
C. The crushing, washing, refining or other processing other than the initial removal of
material, may be permitted as an accessory use only as specifically authorized under
the terms of the grant of permit or as otherwise provided in an Industrial District.
D. The manufacture of concrete building blocks or similar blocks, the production or
manufacture of lime products, the production of ready-mixed concrete and any
similar production or manufacturing process which might be related to the extractive
operation shall not be permitted except as otherwise provided in an Industrial District.
E. The washing of sand and gravel shall be prohibited in any operation where the source
of water is of doubtful capacity or where the quantity of water required will seriously
affect the supply for other uses in the area, or where disposal of water required will
seriously affect the supply for other uses in the area, or where disposal of water will
result in contamination or pollution or excessive silting.
F. The planting of trees and shrubs and other appropriate landscaping shall be provided
where deemed necessary by the Plan Commission to screen the operation so far as
practical from normal view to enhance the general appearance from the public rightof-
way, and to generally minimize the damaging effect of the operation on the beauty
and character of the surrounding countryside. Such planting shall be started as soon
as practicable, but no later than 1 year after extractive operations have begun and
shall be done according to the recommendations of the Plan Commission.
20.27.000 HOUSE TRAILERS
27 - 1
20.27.010 PERMANENT HABITATION PROHIBITED. Except within an approved
trailer camp no house trailer camp no house trailer shall be used for the purpose of permanent
habitation in the City, permanent habitation being herein defined as more than 3 days of
habitation.
20.27.020 TRAILER CAMPS. The provision of area and facilities for permanent
habitation as above described for two or more house trailers shall be permitted only as a
conditional grant in those districts designated and where permitted shall be subject to the
provisions of the Trailer Camp Ordinance of the City.
20.28.000 AIRPORT SAFETY ZONE
28 - 1
20.28.010 MAXIMUM HEIGHT. No building or object of natural growth located
within 2 miles of the boundaries of any airport, landing field, or landing and take-off strip
and within a band of 500 feet on each side of the center line extended of any runway shall
hereafter be erected, altered or permitted to grow to a height above the elevation of the
nearest point of such runway greater than 1/15 of the distance from said point.
20.28.020 CONTROL OF USES. No building or land located within 2 miles of the
boundary of any airport, landing field, or landing and take-off strip shall be so used that by
reason of the emission of smoke, gas or other emanation it shall produce a hazard to the
operation of aircraft.
20.28.030 DENSITY. No apartment, church, assembly hall or other type of building
where people normally congregate is permitted within the area prescribed in sub-paragraph
(28.020).
20.28.040 EXCEPTIONS. The aforesaid regulations shall not apply to growing field
crops which are harvested at least once a year nor to fences not over 5 feet high. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to landing areas that are designed and used
exclusively for helicopters or similar vertical take-off aircraft.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-1
20.29.010 PURPOSES AND INTENT. The purposes and intent of this sign ordinance are:
A. To regulate the size, type, construction standards, maintenance and placement of signs
situated within the boundaries of the City of Port Washington, Wisconsin.
B. To promote the public health, safety, welfare and comfort of the general public by:
1. Reducing distractions and obstructions from signs which would adversely affect
pedestrian and/or traffic safety, and alleviate hazards caused by signs projecting over
or encroaching upon the public rights-of-way.
2. Discouraging excessive visual competition in signage and ensuring that signs aid
orientation and adequately identify uses and activities to the public.
3. Preserving or enhancing the natural beauty and unique physical characteristics of the
City of Port Washington as a community in which to live and work by requiring new
and replacement signage which is:
a. Creative and distinctive;
b. Harmonious with the buildings, surrounding neighborhood aesthetics and
other signs in the area;
c. Appropriate to the type of activity to which it pertains;
d. Expressive of the City's identity in a manner which will not diminish
property values;
e. Complimentary to the City's architectural character and to unobtrusive
commercial developments; and
f. Professionally designed and/or manufactured, except as may otherwise be
approved by the Plan Commission.
4. Promote a healthy and properly designed business environment.
5. Protect property values within the City.
20.29.020 UNIFORM APPLICATION; VARIANCES AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
A. The restrictions and limitations expressed in this sign ordinance are intended to provide
uniformity in sign use, design, placement, etc. throughout the City. However, the Plan
Commission may grant a special exception to the setback, offset, height, size, landscaping,
and permitted sign requirements if the Plan Commission determines that granting such
special exception would not have a substantial adverse effect on surrounding properties by
reason of appearance or other objectionable factors, or create a nuisance, or have a
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-2
substantial adverse effect on property values, or interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of
the surrounding properties.
B. In granting a special exception, the Plan Commission may require such architectural
treatment, screening by landscape or architectural means, lighting requirements or
limitations, or other measures which, in the judgment of the Plan Commission shall be
necessary conditions of such special exception.
20.29.030 DEFINITIONS.
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the specific meaning as
hereinafter defined, and any words not listed shall have the meaning defined by the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Port Washington:
1. Abandoned Sign – A sign that no longer correctly advertises an existing, bona fide
business, lesser, product or activity conducted or available on the premises where the
sign is displayed.
2. Animated Sign - A sign that creates an illusion of movement or motion, but
excluding a flashing sign as defined in this sign ordinance.
3. Area of Sign – Measurement of sign area shall be calculated as the sum of the area
within the smallest regular rectangle that will encompass all elements of the actual
sign face including any writing, logo, representation, emblem, or any figure or
similar character together with any material forming an integral part of the display or
forming the backing surface or background on which the message or symbols are
displayed.
a. For a sign painted on or applied to a building or to a freestanding wall, the
area shall be considered to include all lettering, wording, and
accompanying designs or symbols, together with any background of a
different color than the natural color, or finish material of the building or
architectural wall. The architectural wall shall be subject to Plan
Commission approval of the site and landscaping plan.
b. The main supporting sign structure (i.e., brackets, posts, foundation,
etc.) shall be included in the area measurement.
c. When a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be
include in determining the area, except that where two (2) faces are placed
back t back and the angle between the faces measures forty-five (45)
degrees or less the total sign area shall be computed by measuring the
square footage of a single face.
d. When the angle between sign faces measures greater than forty-five
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-3
(45) degrees, the total sign area shall be computed by adding the square
footage of each face.
4. Banner - A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame, and which
possesses characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper,
plastic, or fabric of any kind.
5. Bulletin Board - A sign not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area located on
the premises of a charitable, religious or educational institution, or a public
agency, for purposes of announcing events which are held on the premises. The
City of Port Washington official bulletin boards may be located off the premises.
6. Building Front (Fascia) – That portion of a building that is parallel or closely
parallels the abutting street or public right-of-way.
7. Canopy Sign – Any sign that is attached to or part of an awning, canopy or other
fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, sidewalk,
window, or outdoor service area.
8. Changeable Message Sign – A sign such as a manual reader board where copy
changes. Changes to copy can be made either manually or electronically. Any
sign may be, or included as part of, a changeable message sign.
9. Construction Sign – A temporary sign identifying companies involved in the
design, engineering, construction, razing, financing or development of a
commercial building, development or a residential subdivision.
10. Copy - The message, announcement, words, letters, numbers, pictures, art,
decoration or other information displayed on a sign.
11. Crawl Sign - A sign in which the copy moves or crawls across the message area
and/or creates an illusion of movement or motion.
12. Development Sign - A temporary sign designating and/or promoting the future
use of a new commercial building, commercial development, residential
development, or subdivision.
13. Directional Sign – A sign, the purpose of which is to direct patrons or traffic to a
location or area on the premises, including, but not limited to, “Enter,” “Exit” or
“Parking” signs. Such signs should contain no advertising material, and the
display area will not exceed three (3) square feet or extend higher than four (4)
feet above the immediate grade.
14. Election Campaign Period – In the case of an election for office, the period
beginning on the first day for circulation of nomination papers by candidates, or
the first day on which candidates would circulate nomination papers were papers
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-4
to be required, and ending on the day of the election. In the case of a referendum,
the period beginning on the day on which the question to be voted upon is
submitted to the electorate, and ending on the day on which the referendum is
held.
15. Election Campaign Sign – A sign which supports a candidate for public office or an
issue on a referendum election ballot.
16. Electronic Message Sign – A changeable message sign whose message is
electrically activated or displayed such as with light bulbs or mechanical flip
discs.
17. Flashing Sign – A sign whose illumination is not kept constant in intensity at all
times when in use and/or which exhibits changes in light, intensity or animation.
Illuminated signs, which display a message that change from a complete line of
text to the next line of text, are permitted. However, signs that indicate the date,
time and temperature will not be considered flashing signs.
18. Frontage – The length of the property line of any one premises parallel to and
along each public right-of-way it borders.
19. Ground Mounted Sign – A permanent sign which is free-standing, or mounted on
poles or other supports placed on and anchored in the ground or on a base, and
which is not attached to any building or other structure. Public agency signs and
Directional Signs are defined elsewhere, and are not deemed ground mounted signs
for purposes of this ordinance.
20. Home Occupation Sign – A sign associated with a home occupation as defined in
the Zoning Ordinance.
21. Height of Sign – The height of a sign shall be the distance between the existing
natural grade at the base of the sign or, in the case of a negative grade, a point
one foot above the curb line, and the highest point on the sign or supporting
structure.
22. Historic Sign - A sign which makes a contribution to the cultural, historic, or
aesthetic character of the City because of the unique construction materials or
unique design, unusual age, prominent location within the City, or unique
craftsmanship from another period of time.
23. Illuminated Sign – A sign designed to incorporate artificial light by the following
means:
a. External Illumination - Illumination of a sign with an exterior lighting
source.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-5
b. Illuminated Canopy/Awning – An internally illuminated canopy/awning
fabricated from a translucent material, which may be used for an awning
sign.
c. Internal Illumination - Illumination of a sign in which the source of light is
contained within the sign itself.
24. Landscaping – the adornment, alteration, development or improvement of a
natural landscape such as yards, gardens, parks, grounds and other planned
outdoor spaces through the arranging of land, plants and objects for human use
and enjoyment, including, but not limited to, the decorative use or planting of a
combination of vegetation such as trees, shrubs, bushes, flowers, vines and
grasses, and other elements such as retaining walls, fencing, rocks, etc. for
aesthetic effect or conservation.
25. Length of Lineal Building Front Foot - The length of any wall of the building
adjacent and parallel or closely parallel to any abutting street or public right-ofway.
26. Marquee - A permanent roof-like structure extending from part of the wall of a
building, but not supported by the ground, and constructed of durable material
such as metal or glass.
27. Master Identification Sign – A sign which is a listing of tenants or services in a
multi-tenant retail, office or mixed-use building or center.
28. Master Sign Program – A plan that is approved by the Plan Commission and
identifies all signs in a multi-tenant retail, office or mixed-use development.
29. Memorial Signs and Plaques – A sign, plaque or tablet, not exceeding four (4)
square feet in area, containing the name of a building and/or date of erection
which are cut into a masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building or
constructed of bronze or other nonconvertible material and attached to a building.
30. Monument Sign - A sign that rests on, is supported by, or is attached to a base at
least two (2) feet above the immediate grade.
31. Nonconforming Sign – A sign that does not meet the requirements of this sign
ordinance.
32. Off-Premises Sign – A sign owned or leased by a person or entity other than the
owner or occupant of the principal business on the parcel on which the sign is
located.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-6
33. Operational Sign – A sign that relates to the functional operation of the building
including, but not limited to, “Drive Thru,” “Restrooms” or “No Trespassing”
signs.
34. On-Premises Sign – Any sign identifying or advertising a business, person,
activity, goods, products or services located on the premises where the sign is
installed and maintained.
35. Political Message Sign – A sign containing a message intended for a political
purpose or a message which pertains to an issue of public policy of possible
concern to the electorate, but does not include a message intended solely for a
commercial purpose.
36. Portable Sign – A sign not permanently affixed to the ground, building, or other
structure and which may be easily moved from place to place.
37. Projecting Sign – A sign, normally double faced which is attached to and projects
from a structure or building façade.
38. Public Agency Sign – A sign erected by national, state, county, or municipal
governmental agencies, including official traffic and informational signs such as,
but not limited to, “Hospital,” “School Zone,” “Speed Limit,” “Parking,” or “No
Parking,” signs.
39. Real Estate Sign – A temporary on-premises sign pertaining to the sale, lease or
rental of land and/or buildings.
40. Residential Contractor Sign - A sign in a residential district that identifies the
company or contractor performing a service on the premise.
41. Roof Sign – A sign or billboard which is located or projects above the lowest
point of the eaves or the top of the parapet wall of any building or structure, or
which is painted on or fastened to a roof.
42. Rummage Sale Sign – A temporary sign advertising the sale of used household
goods in residential districts.
43. Sandwich Board Sign - A portable, freestanding, temporary A-frame advertising
sign only visible from two sides, consisting of two (2) equal or approximately
equal length boards or placards hinged or otherwise fastened at the top with no
moving parts or lights.
44. Sign - Any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard, design, identification,
description, illustration or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, to advertise,
identify, convey information or direct attention to a product, service, place,
activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-7
installed or situated merchandise. For the purpose of removal, signs shall also
include all sign structures, but not including any buried foundations.
45. Sign Contractor – Any person or entity engaged in whole or in part in the erection
or maintenance of signs, excluding the business that the sign advertises.
46. Sign Structure – Any device or material that supports, has supported, or is capable
of supporting a sign in a stationary position, including decorative covers.
47. Temporary Sign - A sign intended to be used for a period not to exceed seven (7)
consecutive days with no more than four (4) such occurrences per year, with a
time interval of at least thirty (30) days between occurrences, unless otherwise
specified in this sign ordinance.
48. Time and Temperature Sign – An electrically controlled sign alternately
displaying date, time and temperature for public service information. Such signs
may be incorporated into a business identification sign.
49. Wall Sign – A sign attached to the wall of a building or structure with the face in
a plane parallel to the plane of the wall of the building or structure, and including
signs painted directly on a wall.
50. Window Sign – A sign installed on the interior surface of a window.
20.29.040 PROHIBITED SIGNS. Except as noted, the following signs shall be prohibited
within all zoning districts:
A. Abandoned signs.
B. Any sign other than public agency signs located in the public rights-of-way or on publicly
owned lands, unless otherwise specified in this sign ordinance.
C. Banners, pennants, streamers, balloons, and other gas-filled figures, except as permitted
in Section 20.29.070 N.4. for Special Events or Promotions.
D. Flashing or rotating signs, crawl signs, signs containing moving parts, and signs
containing reflective elements which sparkle or twinkle in the sunlight.
E. Hazard or Nuisance signs: Any sign that creates a hazard or dangerous distraction to
pedestrians or traffic, or a nuisance to adjacent property.
F. Interior lit box signs.
G. Non-accessory signs: No sign not directly related to the use of the premises on which it is
located, except directional signs, shall be permitted in any zoning district. Signs showing
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-8
date, time, temperature and similar information not related to the premises are permitted, but
must be counted as part of the allowable sign area.
H. Portable and wheeled signs, except as permitted in Section 20.29.070 N.4. for Special
Events or Promotions.
I. Roof signs.
J. Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers, which are parked on public rightsof-
way, public property, or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way
where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or service or direct people to a
business or activity. However, this provision shall not restrict or prohibit signs placed on
or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers, such as lettering on motor vehicles, where such sign
is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer.
K. Signs attached or otherwise affixed to rocks, trees, or other vegetation.
L. Signs or other advertising painted directly on walls, unless specifically approved by the
Plan Commission.
M. Outdoor advertising devices such as banners, decorative displays or other advertising
devices of cloth, paper, or other non-rigid materials, unless otherwise permitted in this
sign ordinance.
N. Signs which bear, contain or depict statements, letters, words, symbols, drawings or
pictures of obscene, pornographic or immoral subjects.
O. Signs which imitate, or resemble in shape, size, copy or color, an official traffic control
sign or signal.
20.29.050 EXISTING NONCONFORMING SIGNS. Signs lawfully existing at the time of
the adoption or amendment of this sign ordinance may be continued even though the use, size or
location may not conform to the provisions of this ordinance. Such signs shall be nonconforming
signs and shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Nonconforming signs may be repaired provided they are not relocated, expanded, enlarged,
repositioned, or raised in height.
B. In the event that any such sign or its supporting structure is hereafter damaged or altered
to an extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the sign, or is
removed by any means, including an act of God, such sign when restored, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, or replaced must conform to the requirements of this sign ordinance. If
restoration of a damaged sign is not completed within three (3) months of the date
damage occurred, such sign shall be removed or replaced in a manner as will conform to
all specifications of this sign ordinance.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-9
C. If a nonconforming sign is to be replaced with a compliant sign in a specific case where
owing to special conditions a literal application of the standards set forth in Section
20.29.140 would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship in the location of the
replacement sign, the Plan Commission may recommend to the Zoning Board of Appeals
the granting of a variance or special exception to allow a reduction of the offset and setback
requirements of that section, provided such variance or special exception is not contrary to
the public interest, safety or welfare.
D. Any change in wording of the sign shall require that the sign be brought into conformity
with the requirements of this sign ordinance.
E. A nonconforming sign or sign structure shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the date
the building containing the use, to which the sign is accessory, is demolished or destroyed to
an extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the building's appraised value.
F. At any such time as the owner of any building, structure or lot on which a nonconforming
sign is located requests Plan Commission approval of any proposed change to the use,
building, structure or lot, the Plan Commission may, as a condition of building or site plan
approval, require that such nonconforming sign be removed or made to conform to this sign
ordinance.
20.29.060 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS WITHOUT A PERMIT. Except
as noted, the following signs are permitted in all zoning districts without a permit, subject to the
following restrictions:
A. Bulletin boards for a charitable, religious or educational institution, or a public agency,
not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
B. Directional signs.
1. A parking lot contiguous to the business may have directional signs the display
area of which does not exceed three (3) square feet or extend higher than four (4)
feet above the existing natural grade at the base of the sign. The total directional
signage shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet, except as permitted in
Section 20.29.100 for Signs for Multi-Tenant Buildings and Centers.
2. Parking lots or premises not contiguous to and owned or leased by the business
may, in addition to the directional signs allowed in Subsection B.1., above, have
one (1) sign identifying the business. A permit is required for such business sign,
and such sign shall be limited to fifty percent (50%) of the size and height of the
signage as permitted for the business under Section 20.29.090 of this sign
ordinance.
C. Political Message and Election Campaign signs.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-10
1. Number – Except as provided in §12.03, Wis. Stats. or as restricted in this
Subsection C., any individual may place no more than one (1) election campaign
sign per candidate for office, and no more than one (1) sign per referendum
question to be voted upon, and no more than one (1) sign containing a political
message upon residential property owned or occupied by that individual during an
election campaign period.
2. Area – To ensure pedestrian and traffic safety, the gross surface area of any
political message or election campaign sign shall not exceed eleven (11) square
feet.
3. Location – No political message or election campaign sign shall be posted on any
building or structure, in any rights-of way, or upon any grounds that are owned,
operated or maintained by a public agency. Such signs shall be subject to the
vision setback regulations for rights-of-way as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance
of the City of Port Washington. Such signs shall not be located in a manner so as
to obstruct a window, door, fire escape, ventilation or other area which is required
by an applicable building code to remain unobstructed.
4. Time Limit – No political message or election campaign sign shall be erected
prior to the first day of an election campaign period, and shall be removed within
five (5) following the day of the election or the day on which the referendum is
held in connection with which election or referendum such sign is posted.
5. Political message and election campaign signs shall not have any electrical,
mechanical or audio auxiliary or augmentation.
D. Flags. The display of a national flag, an official flag of the state and/or a flag displaying
the logo of a business or industry located on the same premises is permitted in any zoning
district without a permit. Such flags shall not be located within a vision setback area and
shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from all lot lines. Flags in the Central City Mixed
zoning district shall be set back at least five (5) feet from all lot lines. Flags hung from a
building or structure are subject to the requirements in Section 20.29.090 C.5.
E. Home occupation signs and professional home office signs shall not exceed three (3)
square feet in area, shall be mounted flush against the dwelling, may not be illuminated
and are limited to one such sign.
F Memorial signs, plaques and tablets containing names of buildings, and/or date of
erection when cut into a masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of building or when
constructed of bronze or other nonconvertible material and affixed flat against a structure.
G. Murals or other artwork determined by the Plan Commission, upon referral by the
Building Inspector, not to be signs, shall be exempt from this sign ordinance.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-11
H. Operational signs and other such signs relating to functional use of the building or
premises shall be permitted. The maximum size of such sign shall be four (4) square feet,
and the aggregate total area of all such signs cannot exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
I. Public agency signs erected by national, state, county or municipal governmental
agencies, including traffic and informational signs, unless the principal use is permitted
by Conditional Use Grant, in which case any restrictions on such signs shall be specified
and included as part of the Conditional Use Grant.
J. Real estate signs that advertise the sale or lease of the premises upon which such signs
are temporarily located, provided that:
1. Such signs in residential zoning districts shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in
area and one (1) sign per street frontage.
2. Such signs in industrial or agricultural zoning districts shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height.
3. Such signs in business zoning districts shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in
area.
4. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from front or side lot
lines. Such signs may be placed on the building or placed in a window if there is
less than a five (5) foot set back. Signs shall not be located within the vision
setback area or closer than fifteen (15) feet to a driveway.
5. Such signs may be single or double-faced.
6. Such signs shall not be illuminated.
7. Such signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of sale or lease of the
premises.
K. Residential nameplates identifying the owners or occupants, provided that no more than
two (2) such signs are erected, each being less than two (2) square feet in area.
L. Sandwich board signs are permitted in all business zoning districts, subject to the
following restrictions:
1. The sign shall not be placed so as to block any intersection or cause a public
safety hazard.
2. The sign shall be professionally lettered, neatly painted and assembled,
constructed of finished all-weather materials, and shall be maintained at all times.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a sandwich board sign hand lettered on a
chalkboard surface is permitted.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-12
3. Only one (1) sign is allowed per business and shall be displayed in front of the
main entrance to the business using the sign, unless a special exception is granted
by the Plan Commission pursuant to Section 20.29.020.
4. The sign shall be displayed only during business hours of the business using the
sign, and shall be removed at the close of such business hours.
5. The sign shall be no larger than 24” in width, and 48” in height measured from
the ground.
6. A permit shall be required before the sign is erected. Permit applications may be
obtained at City Hall, and a one-time permit fee may be charged for processing
the sign application.
7. Any sign that does not comply with the restrictions set forth in this section may be
immediately removed from the public right-of-way by City personnel.
M. Seasonal signs advertising the sale of seasonal products, including Christmas trees and
pumpkins, provided that:
1. Only one (1) sign per business site shall be permitted.
2. The sign shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all lot lines.
3. The sign area shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
4. The sign shall not exceed five (5) feet in height.
5. The sign shall not be posted for more than thirty (30) days in any calendar year.
N. Temporary signs – These signs shall not be illuminated except as noted below.
1. Portable Signs: The Plan Commission may permit on any single premises in any
zoning district the temporary use of a portable sign for advertising purposes,
provided that:
a. Such sign shall not be located in any public rights-of-way.
b. Such sign shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to an adjacent
property, and shall not cause a hazard to pedestrians or traffic, or adjacent
properties.
c. A sign permit shall not be granted for a period exceeding seven (7)
consecutive days per event, and shall be limited to four (4) events per
year.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-13
d. The Plan Commission shall determine an appropriate size limit of the sign
for the specific use, but in no event shall such sign exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet in area.
e. Except in any residential zoning district, the Plan Commission may allow
such sign to be illuminated.
f. A permit is required.
2. Public or Community Events signs:
a. Signs located in the public rights-of-way require approval of the
Department of Public Works, and are further subject to the requirements
and regulations of that Department.
b. Signs or banners that advertise an event open to the public, such as a grand
opening, fish fry etc. Such signs are not permitted for the promotion or
sale of the goods or merchandise of a particular business establishment.
Such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, shall be
erected not more that fourteen (14) days before the event and must be
removed within three (3) days after completion of the event.
3. Residential Contractor signs – A sign in a residential district that identifies the
company or contractor performing a service on the premises. Such sign shall not
exceed six (6) square feet in area, and must be removed within seven (7) days
after completion of the work.
4. Special Events or Promotions signs - For advertising or promoting special sales or
events, the following signs are permitted for business uses, on business premises,
subject to the following restrictions:
a. Grand Opening signs. One (1) grand opening sign not exceeding thirtytwo
(32) square feet in area shall be allowed per business. The sign may
be displayed for a maximum of thirty consecutive (30) days.
b. Banners. Special event banners shall be allowed for each business as
follows:
i. Banner size shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
ii. Banners shall not be displayed for more than fourteen (14)
consecutive days.
iii. Each individual business shall be limited to four (4) banner events
per year.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-14
iv. There shall be no more than two (2) banners erected per business
site at any one time.
c. Inflatables, temporary structures, vehicles, props, etc. used for advertising
or promoting a sales event must be approved in advance by the Plan
Commission.
O. Window signs – Permitted subject to the restrictions in Section 20.29.090 C.
20.29.070 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS WITH A PERMIT. The
following signs are permitted in all zoning districts with a permit, subject to the following
restrictions:
A. Permanent real estate development signs placed at the entrance to a residential complex,
subdivision, or development shall contain only the name and/or address of the complex,
subdivision, or development. The Plan Commission may permit a permanent
development sign within a street right-of-way or driveway median after determining that
the sign will not have an adverse impact on pedestrian or traffic safety, and provisions are
established for the maintenance of such signs. The Plan Commission shall determine the
appropriate size of the sign based on the design of the sign and its compatibility with
adjacent buildings and land uses.
B. Quasi-public informational, noncommercial signs of a general information nature such as
community welcome, safety warning or other sign similar in nature may be erected by
service clubs or other non-profit organizations upon approval of the Plan Commission.
C. Temporary construction and development signs
1. The size of the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
2. No more than one (1) sign of each type is permitted.
3. The period of time the sign may remain is one (1) year, which may be extended
up to one (1) additional year upon approval of the Plan Commission.
4. Such signs shall be professionally designed, either new or in good condition and
repair, and all visible structural members shall have a decorative, aesthetically
pleasing appearance.
20.29.080 SIGNS PERMITTED IN BUSINESS, CCM CENTRAL CITY MIXED, B-4
CENTRAL BUSINESS, AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
A. Total Square Footage Permitted: The total sign area permitted for each business or
industrial building or site shall be determined by multiplying the length of lineal building
front foot by a factor of 1.5 square feet, up to a maximum of 200 square feet. This
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-15
maximum shall exclude monument signs, the restrictions on which are set forth in
Subsection 20.29.080C.4. The provisions of Section 20.29.090 shall regulate signs
proposed for multi-tenant buildings or centers.
1. If there is parking for the business, or a public way, located on the side or to the
rear of a building, the additional signage for the side and/or rear of the building
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) in area of the sign allowed on the building
front.
2. In a case where the building is not adjacent to a public street, the Plan
Commission shall designate the “front” of the building for purposes of this
Subsection 20.29.090A.
B. Relationship Between Sign Number and Total Sign Area: The aggregate total sign area
for all signs (but excluding the area of monument signs) permitted for a business or
industrial building or site shall not exceed the square footage limitation under Subsection
20.29.080A. and, in addition, shall be subject to the following restrictions:
1. An industrial site of more than ten (10) acres may have a monument sign
identifying the site. As part of the design review process, the Plan Commission
shall determine the appropriate sign location and size.
2. Signs proposed for multi-tenant buildings or centers shall be regulated by Section
20.29.090.
C. Permitted Signs by Type: The following signs are permitted in all business and industrial
zoning districts, subject to the following restrictions:
1. Awning and Canopy signs affixed to the surface of an awning or canopy are
permitted, provided that such signs do not extend vertically or horizontally
beyond the limits of such awning or canopy. In addition:
a. The total area of the sign portion of an awning or canopy sign shall not
exceed 1.0 square foot times the length of lineal building front foot of the
building.
b. An awning or canopy sign may extend into the street right-of-way, but in
no event shall such sign extend beyond a point one (1) foot back from the
vertical plane formed by the curb line extended vertically.
c. An awning or canopy sign shall not extend more than six (6) feet from the
wall of the building to which the sign is attached.
d. The maximum height of an awning or canopy sign shall be limited to the
height of the rooftop or parapet wall of the building to which the sign is
attached.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-16
e. An awning or canopy sign may be internally illuminated.
2. Banners. As permitted in Section 20.29.070 N. 4. for Special Events or
Promotions.
3. Changeable Copy signs. Changeable copy signs, including electronic message
signs, are permitted in any business zoning district as follows:
a. The maximum size shall be twenty-four (24) square feet per face.
b. The sign may be illuminated.
c. Animation, flashing, or distracting features are prohibited.
d. Changeable copy signs shall be part of a permanent sign, and its area shall
be included in the calculation of the maximum allowable permanent sign
size.
e. Changeable copy signs shall be limited to one (1) per business site.
4. Monument signs:
a. The maximum size of a monument sign shall be one hundred twenty-five
(125) square feet, which shall include the sign, base, and supporting or
decorative elements of the structure.
b. The base, supports, monument and decorative portion of the sign must be
at least forty percent (40%) of the total area of a monument sign.
c. Landscaping shall be provided as required in Section 20.29.140 E.
d. The color scheme of the sign shall, to the greatest extent practicable,
follow the color scheme of the principal building.
e. Architectural features (e.g., sills, piers, reveals, capstones, medallions,
etc.) that are part of the architectural style of the principal building shall,
to the greatest extent practicable, be incorporated into the sign.
f. The maximum height of a monument sign shall be twelve (12) feet.
g. Such signs may be double faced.
5. Projecting signs fastened to, suspended from, or supported by a building:
a. Shall be limited to one (1) sign per building façade.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-17
b. Shall not exceed, in total area, 1.0 square foot times the length of lineal
building front foot per business.
c. Shall not extend more than six (6) feet from the building to which such
sign is attached.
d. Shall not extend beyond the height of the roofline.
e. Shall not be less than eight (8) feet above the adjoining sidewalk, or more
than fifteen (15) feet above an adjoining driveway or alley.
6. Time and Temperature signs may be erected as a wall sign, projecting sign,
monument sign, or freestanding sign, provided they shall meet the requirements
for each of those sign types.
7. Wall signs. The total area of a wall sign shall not exceed 1.0 square foot times the
length of lineal building front foot for office, retail and/or mixed uses. Mixed-use
sites include buildings and centers with a combination of retail and office uses or
a combination of retail, office, and industrial uses. In addition:
a. The face of a wall sign shall not project more than twelve (12) inches from
the outside of the building’s wall surface.
b. No part of a wall sign shall extend above the roofline of the building to
which such sign is attached.
8. Window signs: Shall not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the total
glazed front window area per business premises.
a. Temporary window signs:
i. Shall not be included in calculating the total permitted sign square
footage.
ii. Shall not be placed on glass doors or window areas so as to cause a
pedestrian or traffic hazard, or impede a clear view by police.
iii. Shall not be illuminated.
iv. A permit is not required for such signs. However, it is intended
that enforcement of this provision shall generally occur upon a
complaint basis.
b. Permanent window signs:
i. Shall be included in calculating the total permitted sign square
footage.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-18
ii. Shall not be placed on glass doors or window areas so as to cause a
pedestrian or traffic hazard, or impede a clear view by police.
iii. May be illuminated.
D. Flexible Criteria Covering Signs in Industrial Parks and Business Parks. Signs located
in areas zoned for industrial parks or business parks may be approved by the Plan
Commission with elements that exceed the permitted height, size, type, or number of signs if
the director of planning and development determines that:
1. The site contains unique or unusual physical conditions such as topography,
proportion, or size of the principal building, or relation to a public street or roadway
that would limit or restrict normal sign visibility; or
2. The proposed or existing development exhibits unique characteristics of land use,
architectural style, site location, physical scale, historical interest or other
distinguishing features that represent clear variation from conventional development;
or
3. The proposed signage incorporates special design features such as logos, emblems,
murals or statuaries that are integrated with the principal building architecture or
business/corporate identity.
E. Special Criteria Applicable to Signs in CCM Central City Mixed and B-4 Central Business
Zoning Districts.
1. CCM Central City Mixed Zoning District:
a. Ground mounted signs with two (2) or more supports are permitted. Ground
mounted signs with one (1) support are prohibited.
b. Ground mounted signs may not exceed six (6) feet in height.
c. Ground mounted signs may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
d. Ground mounted signs shall not extend over the property line or be located
in the public right-of-way.
e. Landscaping shall be as provided in Section 20.29.130 E.
2. B-4 Central Business Zoning District:
a. A monument sign may not exceed eight (8) feet in height.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-19
b. A monument sign may not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area.
c. Ground mounted signs shall not extend over the property line or be
located in the public right-of-way.
20.29.090 SIGNS FOR MULTI-TENANT BUILDINGS AND CENTERS.
A. Definitions. For purposes of calculating the total sign area under this section, “length of
lineal building front foot” shall mean the length of any wall of a building or adjoining
buildings within the center that are adjacent to and face any street, public rights-of-way,
or the parking lot of the building.
B. Multi-Tenant Building signs. In a multi-tenant retail, office, or mixed-use building or
center in which each business premises is primarily accessed by an interior door after the
building is entered by an exterior door shared with other tenants, only the building shall
be identified, and then only by its name and address. A monument sign or a wall sign
shall be permitted.
C. Master Sign Program.
1. An application for a Master Sign Program shall be filed with the Building
Inspector, who shall forward it to the Plan Commission for review and approval.
2. In a multi-tenant retail, office or mixed-use building or center, a Master Sign
Program shall be used if more than one (1) sign will be erected in conjunction
with such building or center.
3. Each individual sign proposed in accordance with an approved Master Sign
Program must be applied for and permitted separately. Approval of a Master Sign
Program shall not constitute, nor be deemed, permission to construct any
particular sign under that program.
4. All signs that are intended to be erected must be included in the Master Sign
Program. These shall include, but are not be limited to:
a. Master identification sign.
b. Entrance markers.
c. Traffic directional signs.
d. Tenant identification signs.
e. Wall signs.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-20
f. Operational signs
5. The maximum sign area of all signs within a multi-tenant building or center,
excluding the master identification sign, entrance markers, and traffic directional
signs, shall not exceed 1.5 square feet times the length of lineal front foot of the
building or center. The total area of individual signs shall not exceed the
maximum size specified in Section 20.29.090.C, for the specific type of sign
proposed.
6. In evaluating an application for approval of a Master Sign Program, the Plan
Commission shall, in its discretion, consider the type and location of the building
site, the proposed tenant mix, the size of the development and such other factors
as it may in each particular case deem relevant. In determining the size of signs
permitted signs, the Plan Commission shall consider factors such as the building
setback from the abutting street, the speed of traffic on that street, the area to be
occupied by each tenant, and the size and shape of the building façade. The Plan
Commission may, in its discretion, permit an additional twenty-five percent
(25%) sign area to the maximum sign area. The total area of individual signs
shall not exceed the maximum size specified in Section 20.29.090.C for the
specific type of sign proposed.
7. Application for approval of a Master Sign Program for new multi-tenant buildings
or centers shall be submitted to and approved by the Plan Commission before sign
permits may be issued.
8. Owners of existing multi-tenant buildings or centers shall submit an application to
the Building Inspector for approval of any sign changes. The application must
show all existing signage for the site and the proposed changes. If upon review
the Building Inspector determines that the proposed changes will not comply with
Section 20.29.100, an application must be submitted to the Plan Commission for
its review and approval before a sign permit may be issued
D. Master Identification signs. Master identification signs under a Master Sign Program for
a multi-tenant retail, office, or mixed-use building or center, shall be subject to the
following guidelines:
1. Monument signs are preferred; however site conditions may warrant
consideration of wall signs.
2. Master identification signs shall not contain the names of tenants of the building
or center unless the identification of the building or center includes the name of
the principal tenant. However, any tenant, but not more than two (2) tenants, each
occupying one-third or more of the building area of any building or center may be
identified on such master identification sign.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-21
3. The size and number of such signs shall be determined by the total area of the
project, the design of traffic patterns and/or the arterial street frontage of the
project.
E. Apartments in Multi-Tenant Buildings in Nonresidential Districts. Where apartments
exist or are proposed as a part of multi-tenant buildings or centers in nonresidential
zoning districts, the residential portion of the building or center shall be identified only
by the name of the building or center and/or the address.
20.29.100 SIGNS PERMITTED IN INSTITUTIONAL AND PARK DISTRICTS.
The following signs are permitted in the institutional and park zoning districts only upon the
approval of the Plan Commission, and subject to the following restrictions:
A. Private institutional and park name signs.
B. Public institutional and park name signs, after review and recommendation by the Park
and Recreation Commission.
C. Design and location of institutional and park signs shall be subject to review and approval
based upon the compatibility of the proposed signs with adjacent buildings and land uses.
20.29.110 HISTORIC SIGNS.
A. If the Plan Commission determines that a sign is of historic significance, the Plan
Commission may, in its discretion, exempt such historic sign from any or all of the size,
height, animation, lighting, or setback requirements of this sign ordinance.
B. Signs determined to be of historic significance by the Plan Commission shall be exempt
from the restrictions in Section 20.29.050 for Existing Nonconforming Signs.
C. Historic signs shall be maintained in good condition and repair.
20.29.120 COMPLIANCE.
A. In any zoning district, no sign shall be permitted except as specified for that district. All
signs shall meet the structural requirements of City and state building codes.
B. No sign shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged,
converted or structurally altered without first obtaining a permit reflecting conformity
with the provisions of this sign ordinance, except for those signs allowed without a
permit under Sections 20.29.060 or 20.29.070.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-22
C. Unless otherwise specified, all sign permits shall be issued by the Building Inspector.
D. Where signs are illuminated electrically, a separate electrical permit shall be obtained as
required by City and state electrical codes.
20.29.130 SIGN STANDARDS.
A. Location
1. Except as provided in Section 20.29.080 D., no nonresidential sign shall be located
nearer than ten (10) feet to any street or public right-of-way.
2. No nonresidential sign shall be located closer to the side lot line than the required
offset of the zoning district in which the sign is to be located.
3. No nonresidential sign shall be located in such a manner as to obstruct entrance,
exit, access, ventilation, natural light or view from, to or of a building or property.
4. Placement of all signs shall be subject to the vision setback regulations at rightsof-
ways as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Port Washington.
5. Any sign located near an entrance to or exit from any parking lot or area must be
so placed as to provide a clear view of and for pedestrians and traffic.
6. Permanent signs that are professionally designed and/or manufactured and which
meet the requirements and standards of Sections 20.29.000 to 20.29.130 shall be
approved by the Plan Commission.
B. Construction
1. Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements. All signs and other advertising
structures shall be designed to withstand loading and other forces through best
engineering practices. The Building Inspector may, at any time, require data and
calculations, certified as accurate by a professional engineer, to substantiate the
structural integrity of any sign.
2. Construction of Supporting Members or Braces. Supporting members or braces
of all signs shall be constructed of properly treated wood, non-corrosive materials
or materials that will be protected from the elements. The Building Inspector may
require that all materials and methods to be used for erecting or attaching any sign
shall be furnished along with the application for a sign permit.
3. Protection of the Public. The temporary occupancy of a sidewalk, street, right-ofway
or other public property during construction, removal, repair, alteration or
maintenance of a sign is permitted, provided that the space occupied shall be
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-23
roped off, fenced off, barricaded or otherwise rendered inaccessible by
pedestrians and traffic for the protection of the public.
4. Attachment of Signs to Fire Escapes, etc. No signs or any part thereof, nor any
sign anchors, braces, or guide rods shall be attached, fastened, or anchored to any
fire escape, fire ladder, or standpipe, and no such sign or any part thereof or any
anchors, braces, or guide rods shall be erected, installed or maintained so as to
limit, hinder or prevent ingress or egress through any door, doorway, or window,
or so as to limit, hinder or prevent the raising or placing of ladders against such
building by the Fire Department, as necessity or public health and safety may
require.
5. Overhead Electrical Wiring. Overhead electrical wiring for signs is prohibited,
and all electric signs shall be listed by a recognized testing laboratory.
7. Permanent signs that are professionally designed and/or manufactured and which
meet the requirements and standards of Sections 20.29.000 to 20.29.130 shall be
approved by the Plan Commission.
C. Maintenance Standards
1. Maintenance. The owner of any sign shall keep it in good maintenance and repair
which shall include landscaping, restoring, repainting and/or replacement of a
worn or damaged legally existing sign to its original condition; and shall maintain
the premises on which the sign is placed or erected in a clean, sanitary, and
inoffensive condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and
weeds. Restoration or painting which changes the name, size or location of a sign
shall require a new sign permit.
2. Painting Requirement. The owner of any sign shall be required to have all parts
and supports of a sign properly painted as directed by the Building Inspector,
unless they are galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust or deterioration and
have not been previously painted.
3. Sign Owner’s Responsibility. The sign owner shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the sign. If ownership of the sign should be transferred, the new
owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the sign.
D. Illumination Standards
1. In addition to complying with the provisions of this sign ordinance, all signs in
which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be subject to the
applicable provisions of City and state electrical codes. No person may erect a
sign with exposed electrical wires.
20.29.000 SIGNS______________________________
Chapter 29-24
2. Lighting Intensity. In no case shall the lighting intensity of any sign, whether
resulting from internal or external illumination, exceed sixty (60) foot candles
when measured with a standard light meter held perpendicular to the sign face at a
distance of ten (10) inches.
3. All sign lighting shall be so designed, located, shielded or hooded so as to prevent
the casting of direct light or glare upon adjacent roadways, surrounding properties or
into the sky.
4. The use of unshielded lighting, including exposed incandescent light bulbs hung or
strung on poles, wires or any other type of support intended to illuminate a sign or
other advertising device is prohibited.
5. Neon signs or other exterior neon displays may be permitted in cases where they are
custom designed to be compatible with the building's architectural character, and
where the colors of such signs have been selected to harmonize with the building’s
exterior colors. Such lighting shall be subject to review and approval by the Plan
Commission.
6. Signs shall not have any bare light bulbs, shall not rotate or have any flashing lights,
shall not resemble, imitate or approximate the shape, size, text, form or color of
official railroad or official traffic signs, signals, or devices, and shall not obstruct or
interfere with the effectiveness of said devices.
E. Landscaping Standards
1. The minimum landscaping required for signs shall be designed and determined in
accordance with Section 20.31.000, Table 1 Landscaping Points and Minimum
Installation Sizes. The classification of plants contained in that section is a
baseline, and shall not be deemed a complete list of recommended and acceptable
plants. A minimum of twenty (20) landscaping points shall be required for a sign
up to four (4) feet in width, and six (6) additional landscaping points shall be
required for each additional one (1) foot of a width in excess of four (4) feet.
Landscape plantings shall be of such type as will ensure effective year-round
aesthetics.
2. The landscaping area shall extend a minimum of three (3) feet around the entire
base of the sign or the sign face, whichever is greater.
20.30.000 SITE PLAN AND DESIGN REVIEW
30 - 1
20.30.010 PURPOSE.
A. In order that commercial, industrial, public and multi-family development within the
City be compatible with the general character of the surrounding neighborhood and with
the environmental and aesthetic goals of the community, and thereby provide both a
satisfying physical environment and greater economic stability through preservation and
enhancement of property values, new construction or exterior remodeling within those
Zoning Districts enumerated below shall not be issued a Building Permit until the
Design Review Board has recommended and the Plan Commission approved all
building, site, landscaping and operational plans, except those involving Planned Unit
Developments or Conditional Uses which are to be submitted directly to the Plan
Commission.
B. Historic Preservation. Pursuant to sec. 62.23(7)(em), Stats., in all zoning districts of
the City every building, property, place, structure, object or landmark listed on, or
within and contributing to a historic district listed on, the national register of historic
places in Wisconsin, the state register of historic places, or identified as potentially
eligible to be listed on such national or state registers, or listed on the inventory of
historic places maintained by the City entitled Intensive Survey Report (1998), as such
registers, identification or inventory may be amended from time to time, and every
building, property, place, structure, object or landmark subsequently designated by the
Common Council with the consent of the owner as having historic or archeological
significance, including groups of properties designated by the Common Council as a
historic district, shall be regulated as provided in Sections 20.30.010 through 20.30.050,
inclusive.
C. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. Sec. 62.23 (7) (em). Historic Preservation, in addition to the
above number under A, regardless of zoning district and including single family
residences, any property or place on the national register of historic places as of
December 31, 1995, and any place, structure or object subsequently designated by the
Common Council with the consent of the owner as having historic or archeological
significance, including groups of property designated by the Council as an historic
district, shall be regulated under this section.
1. The purposes of such historic designation shall be to aid in the preservation,
enhancement, and restoration of such places or structures to reflect the City’s
cultural heritage, without impeding the continuing progress of the City and the
stabilization or improvement of property values, commerce and the evolving
social and economic character of the City.
2. Before a place, structure, or object is presented to the Council for
consideration under this section, it shall first receive the favorable
endorsement of the Plan Commission after hearing from the Design Review
Board, (see 20.30.030 and 20.30.050 below). Nomination for such
endorsement may be by the Council, Commission, or by citizen petition,
provided that prior to Council action, the reasons for nomination are set forth
20.30.000 SITE PLAN AND DESIGN REVIEW
30 - 2
by the petitioner and the standards by which the place, structure, or object are
to be administered under this section are also set forth and further provided
written consent shall have been obtained from the owner for individual
properties being individually nominated, and from a two-thirds majority of
owners for properties being nominated for district status. In cases where
district status is involved, the petitioners shall identify any individual
properties which best epitomize the character of the district. Such leader
properties shall not be included in the district without the consent of the
current owner. Once the district is created, any current or subsequent owner
of a leader property may become part of the district upon written request to the
Council.
20.30.020 ZONING DISTRICTS AFFECTED. The Director of Planning and
Development shall refer to the Design Review Board an application for a building permit in
any case involving all new development or construction, or the complete redesign or
remodeling of the exterior appearance of an existing building located in any of the following
districts: Commercial Districts (B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, BP, OOS, OHS, OPD, OAG); Industrial
Districts (I-1 and I-2); OIP Institutional and Public Service Districts; RM-1 Single and Two
Family Residence Districts having dwellings of three (3) or more units by a conditional use
grant; Multiple Family Residential Districts (RM-2, RM-3, RM-4); dwellings of three (3) or
more units in the CCM Multiple Family (Central City Mixed) District; and buildings in any
district subject to OCP Conservation Protection Overlay or ONP Neighborhood Preservation
Overlay.
In the case of historic buildings, properties, places, structures, objects or landmarks
describedin or designated under Section 20.30.010 B. which are located in a zoning district
other than a residential district, the plans for any proposed erection, construction,
reconstruction,alteration, conversion or maintenance affecting the same shall be referred to
the Design Review Board for its review and recommendation, and for review and action by
the Plan Commission, as provided in Section 20.30.040C.
In the case of historic buildings, properties, places, structures, objects or landmarks described
in or designated under Section 20.30.010 B. which are located in any zoning district, or in the
case of buildings in any zoning district subject to ONP Neighborhood Preservation Overlay,
an application for a razing permit shall be referred to the Design Review Board for its review
and recommendation, and for review and action by the Plan Commission, including issuance
of a Certificate of Appropriateness, as provided in Section 20.30.040C.
20.30.030 DESIGN REVIEW BOARD ACTION.
Action by the Design Review Board shall take the form of advisory recommendations to the
Plan Commission. Upon receipt of a plan referral from the Director of Planning and
Development, or upon receipt of a referral from the Building Inspector relating to an
application for a razing permit, the Chairperson shall convene the Board so as to render its
advice to the Plan Commission in time for Commission consideration at its regular meeting,
pursuant to consent agenda, unless the referral occurs less than three weeks prior to such
20.30.000 SITE PLAN AND DESIGN REVIEW
30 - 3
meeting date, in which case the Board may make its report for the next following Plan
Commission Meeting. The Chairperson shall invite the permit applicant to the Board meeting
to observe its deliberations and recommendations.
20.30.040 REVIEW STANDARDS; REGULATION OF CONSTRUCTION,
RECONSTRUCTION ALTERATION AND RAZING OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS
AND STRUCTURES; PROCEDURES; APPEALS.
A. The Design Review Board shall render its advice as to the appropriateness of the
proposed site plan with respect to the requirements established in Chapter 20.31.000 of
the Zoning Ordinance, as well as the type of materials, general form and proportions,
window, entrances and colors of buildings or structures in relation to these criteria:
1. The building or structure is not of such unorthodox or abnormal character in
relation to the surroundings as to be unsightly or offensive to generally accepted
taste.
2. The building is not so identical with those adjoining as to create excessive
monotony and drabness. In applying this criteria to attached or row buildings, to
apartment groupings, or commercial shopping centers, the overall composition
and aesthetic effect shall be considered.
3. The building shall not have any exposed facade that is finished, including choice
of materials, so as to be aesthetically incompatible with the other facades.
B. All Other Areas Except Historic Areas: In those districts where the Plan Commission
has not adopted an architectural theme, the Board shall render its advice as to the
appropriateness of the proposed use and type of materials, general form and building
proportions, window entrance and sign treatment and colors, in relation to these
criteria:
1. The building or structure is not of such unorthodox or abnormal character in
relation to the surroundings as to be unsightly or offensive to generally
accepted taste.
2. The building is not so identical with those adjoining as to create excessive
monotony and drabness. In applying this criteria to attached or row buildings,
to apartment groupings, or commercial shopping centers, the overall
composition and aesthetic effect shall be considered.
3. The building will not have any exposed facade that is finished, including
choice of materials, so as to be aesthetically incompatible with the other
facades.
C. Regulation of Historic Buildings, Sites, Structures, etc.
20.30.000 SITE PLAN AND DESIGN REVIEW
30 - 4
1. Erection, Construction, Reconstruction, Alteration, Conversion or Maintenance.
No owner or person in charge of a historic building, property, place, site,
structure, object or landmark described in or designated under Section
20.30.010 B. which is located in a zoning district other than a residential
district shall erect, construct, reconstruct, alter or convert all or any part of the
exterior of the same or construct any improvement upon the same or cause or
permit any such work to be performed upon the same unless the Design
Review Board has made its recommendations, and the Plan Commission has
approved the plans for such work. Also, unless the Plan Commission has
granted such approval, the Building Inspector shall not issue a permit for any
such work.
a. In reviewing and/or approving such proposed erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration or conversion the Design Review Board and
Plan Commission shall use the following criteria:
i. In the case of a designated historic building, structure or site,
whether the proposed work would detrimentally change,
destroy or adversely affect any exterior feature of the
improvement or site upon which said work is to be done.
ii. In the case of the construction of a new improvement to or
upon a historic building, structure or site, or within a historic
district, whether the exterior of such improvement would
adversely affect or not harmonize with the external appearance
of other neighboring improvements on such site or within the
district.
iii. In the case of any property located in a historic district, whether
the proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, exterior
alteration or conversion does not conform to the purpose and
intent of this Section and to the objectives and design criteria of
the historic preservation plan for said district.
b. Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be undertaken without the
review and recommendation of the Design Review Board and approval
of the Plan Commission provided that the work involves repairs to
existing features of a historic building, structure or site or the
replacement of elements of a historic building or structure with pieces
identical in appearance, and provided that the work does not change
the exterior appearance of the building, structure or site and does not
require the issuance of a building permit.
c. Section 20.30.040 C. 1. a. hereof shall not apply to the proposed
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or conversion of a
historic building, property, place, site, structure, object or landmark
20.30.000 SITE PLAN AND DESIGN REVIEW
30 - 5
described in or designated under Section 20.30.010 B. which is located
in a residential zoning district.
2. Razing. No owner or person in charge of a historic building, property, place,
site, structure, object or landmark described in or designated under Section
20.30.010 B. which is located in any zoning district shall raze the same, or
cause the same to be razed, unless such person has applied for a razing permit
and a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Design Review Board has made its
review and recommendations, and the Plan Commission has approved such
work, including the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness. Also, unless
such Certificate has been issued by the Plan Commission, the Building
Inspector shall not issue a permit for any such work.
a. In reviewing and/or approving such proposed razing the Design
Review Board and Plan Commission shall use the following criteria:
i. In the case of any property located in a historic district, whether
the proposed demolition does not conform to the purpose and
intent of this section and to the objectives and design criteria of
the historic preservation plan for said district.
ii. Whether the building or structure is of such architectural or
historical significance that its demolition would be detrimental
to the public interest and contrary to the general welfare of the
people of the city and state.
iii. In the case of a request for the demolition of a deteriorated
building or structure, whether any economic hardship or
difficulty claimed by the owner is self-created or is the result of
any failure to maintain the property in good repair.
b. If the Plan Commission determines that the application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness is consistent with the character and
features of the property or district, it shall issue the Certificate of
Appropriateness. The Plan Commission shall make this decision
within forty-five (45) days of the date of filing of the application.
c. The issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not relieve the
applicant from obtaining other permits and approvals required by the
City for the demolition work. A razing, building or other city permit
shall be invalid if it is obtained without the presentation of the
Certificate of Appropriateness required for the proposed demolition
work.
d. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to abrogate or limit the
authority of the Common Council, Building Inspector or other
20.30.000 SITE PLAN AND DESIGN REVIEW
30 - 6
designated City officer under § 66.0413, Stats. to order the owner of a
building which is old, dilapidated or out of repair and consequently
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation
to raze or repair the building, or the City’s right to commence and
prosecute a court action to obtain an order determining that the
building constitutes a public nuisance, or for any other relief.
3. Appeals. Should the Plan Commission fail to approve the proposed work or
fail to issue a Certificate of Appropriateness for the proposed demolition due
to the failure of the plan or proposal to conform to the above standards, the
applicant may appeal such decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals within
thirty (30) days thereof. In addition, if the Plan Commission fails to issue a
Certificate of Appropriateness, the Common Council shall, with the
cooperation of the applicant, work with the applicant in an attempt to obtain a
Certificate of Appropriateness within the standards set forth in this ordinance.
20.30.050 DESIGN REVIEW BOARD.
A. Membership. The Design Review Board shall consist of the City Engineer, one
representative from the Police and Fire Department appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the Plan Commission, and two citizen members appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by the Common Council. One citizen member should be a
graduate architect in the State of Wisconsin, and the other citizen member should have
design, development or construction experience. Each citizen member shall serve a
term of three years. The members of the Board shall, at its regular May meeting, elect
one member to act as Chairperson for a term of one year, or until a successor is duly
elected. The Chairperson shall preside over all meetings of the Board. In the event of
the Chairperson’s absence, members of the Board present shall select a member to
preside over the meeting. The Director of Planning and Development shall be
responsible for processing applications, agendas and minutes for the Board, and for
presenting the recommendations of the Board to the Plan Commission.
B.. Duties and Powers. The Board shall have the duty and authority to review and
provide recommendations to the Plan Commission regarding all building, site and
operational plans; conditional uses; conditional use grants; planned unit
developments; the razing of historic buildings, properties, places, structures, objects
or landmarks described in or designated under Section 20.30.010 B. which are located
in any zoning district; and the proposed erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or maintenance of historic buildings, properties, places,
structures, objects or landmarks described in or designated under Section 20.30.010 B.
which are located in a zoning district other than a residential district.
C. Records: The Board shall keep records of all its proceedings and its
recommendations shall be stated in writing for submittal to the Plan Commission and
the permit applicant.
20.30.000 SITE PLAN AND DESIGN REVIEW
30 - 7
D. Technical Advice: The Design Review Board established by this ordinance shall
include two (2) technical advisors appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by
the Common Council to provide advice to the Plan Commission on issues related to
historical preservation and the downtown Main Street program.
E. Term of Office: Technical advisors to the Design Review Board advising that Board
for purposes of historic preservation and downtown building façade alterations shall
have terms of three (3) years except that, upon the first appointment, one technical
advisor’s term shall be for two (2) years and the other technical advisor’s term shall
be for three (3) years.
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 1
20.31.010 WHERE REQUIRED. In the case of certain uses, the character of which
could have substantial adverse effect upon the surrounding environment and general
character of the City, by reason of the appearance of the structures, arrangement or use of the
land, such uses if required by the district regulations as a qualifying condition to their
permissibility shall submit for approval by the Plan Commission, their proposed building,
site, and operational plans.
20.31.020 USE BY RIGHT NOT INFRINGED. Such required approval shall be
limited solely to reasonable compliance with design, locational, and operational requirements
and shall not involve the basic permissibility of the use where such use is permitted as a Use
By Right.
20.31.030 CRITERIA. In determining the acceptability of the building, site or
operational plans, the Plan Commission shall take into consideration the following factors as
well as any others they deem appropriate:
A. The design and appearance of any structures, taking into consideration
recommendations of the Design Review Board in those Districts enumerated
under Section 20.30.020 and in those districts not so enumerated, the
Commission shall follow the same standards as Section 20.30.040.
B. The relationship of structures and uses to each other and to the site, with
particular consideration of traffic flow, access, screening of parking and
storage areas, and general appearance.
C. The character of the operation in terms of its impact upon traffic facilities,
sewage disposal, water supply, and environmental character with particular
consideration of the control of any possible noise, dust, odor or other
undesirable operating characteristic.
20.31.040 FORM OF SUBMITTAL. Before issuing a Building or an Occupancy and
Zoning Use permit, the Building Inspector shall submit the necessary building, site and
operational plans to the Plan Commission for their consideration. Such plans shall be in
reasonable detail to enable the Commission to properly evaluate them and shall specifically
include the following:
A. A site plan of the property accurately dimensioned, showing the location of
all-existing and proposed structures and uses.
B. General building plans including either elevations or perspective drawings
showing the exterior appearance.
C. A statement describing the basic operational characteristics of the proposed
use.
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 2
20.31.050 LANDSCAPING.
20.31.060 PURPOSE. This section is intended to promote compatible development;
stabilized property values; foster the attractiveness and functional utility of the community as
a place to live and work; preserve the character and quality of the built and natural
environment by maintaining the integrity of those areas which have a discernible character;
protect certain public and private investments in the area; and raise the level of community
expectations for the quality of its environment. This section applies to commercial,
industrial, institutional and multi-family residential development.
20.31.070 FINDINGS. The Common Council finds that:
A. Trees and shrubs are proven producers of oxygen, a necessary element for
human survival.
B. Trees and shrubs transpire considerable amounts of water each day and
thereby purify the air;
C. Trees and shrubs have an important role in neutralizing waste water passing
through the ground from the surface to groundwater tables and lower aquifers;
D. Trees and shrubs, through their root system, stabilize the groundwater tables
and play an important and effective part in soil conservation, erosion control
and flood control.
E. Trees and shrubs are in an invaluable physical, aesthetic and psychological
counterpoint to the urban setting, making urban life more comfortable by
providing shade and cooling the air and land, reducing noise levels and glare
and breaking the monotony of human developments on the land, particularly
parking areas;
F. Trees and shrubs have an important impact on the desirability of land and
therefore on property values;
G. Screening can lessen the visual pollution that may otherwise occur within an
urbanized area. Even minimum landscaping can provide an impression of
separation of spaces, and more extensive landscaping can focus attention onto
the landscape elements and away from the less attractive elements of certain
sites.
H. Screening can establish a greater sense of privacy from visual or physical
intrusion, the degree of privacy varying with the intensity of the screening;
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 3
I. Landscaping can preserve and enhance the unique identity of the City of Port
Washington and preserve the economic base attracted to the City by such
factors;
J. The provisions of this ordinance are necessary to safeguard the public health,
safety and welfare.
20.31.080 APPLICABILITY.
A. Landscaping Required: Landscaping is required in buffer yards, along the
foundation of buildings, and in off-street parking areas of all Commercial,
Industrial, Institutional and Multi-family Residential Development. The area
or length of each, as required in this Ordinance, shall be measured to
determine the amount of landscaping required.
Parkway street trees are required in all zoning districts per the City’s adopted
street tree policy.
B. Exemptions and Modifications: All development shall meet the provisions of
this section of the Zoning Ordinance except those explicitly exempted below:
1. Additions to existing buildings which do not increase the total existing
floor area by more than ten (10) percent.
2. Additions to existing buildings which increase the total existing floor
area between eleven (11) and fifty (50) percent shall conform to the
landscaping standards specified in this section of the Zoning
Ordinance to the maximum extend possible. If insufficient area or
dimensions exist to meet the required amount of landscaping, the Plan
Commission may reduce the standards set forth in this section up to
thirty (30) percent.
3. Developed property or platted lots or record which are impacted by a
subsequent right-of-way dedication may be developed without strict
compliance with the requirements of this section, with the following
provisions:
a). Improvements (structures or related facilities) which are
proposed on the remainder of the platted lot after dedication
has occurred, may be constructed subsequent to the approval by
the Plan Commission of a modified landscape plan reflecting
the impact of the right-to-way dedication.
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 4
b). Improvements on developed property which are lost through
the dedication of right-of-way may be replaced elsewhere on
the remaining lot and only the area contained within the new
limits of construction for the recaptured improvements shall be
required to comply with the requirements of this section.
4. If, in a particular case, the site or new development conditions should
warrant, the Plan Commission may in its discretion reduce the
standards and requirements set forth in this landscaping ordinance by
not more than fifty percent (50%).
20.31.90 GENERAL PLAN REQUIREMENT.
A. Requirements for Submission: To assure that the intent of the standards are
accomplished, applicants are required to submit to the Plan Commission for
approval a landscape plan developed by a recognized landscape design
professional, and following installation, a written certification that all the
required landscape materials have been installed in substantial conformance
with the plans as approved by the Plan Commission. In addition, applicants
shall submit an installation and maintenance security deposit with the City to
assure full compliance with the landscaping and maintenance requirements.
B. Certification of Compliance: A landscape design professional must certify in
writing that the plan is complete, accurate and in compliance with the
requirements of this ordinance. The requirement that such plans and
specifications be certified by a landscape design professional may be waived
for minor alterations and improvements which, in the sole discretion of the
Director of Planning and Development, does not require the services of a
professional.
C. Landscape Construction Performance Surety Required: At the time of final
execution of a Development Agreement or prior to the issuance of a building
permit by the City, the owner is required to provide landscape construction
sureties either by bond, certificate of deposit or letter of credit with the City to
ensure that the owner is in full compliance with the approved landscape and
maintenance plan.
The amount of surety required shall reflect the cost of required landscaping to
ensure that such landscaping is installed. A financial surety in an amount
equal to the full cost of landscape installation shall be included, as a
segregated line item, as part of the letter of credit required by the City grading
permit. Should the City have to provide for full compliance, the applicant will
then forfeit the surety deposit?
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 5
D. Maintenance Compliance Surety or Letter of Credit: A financial surety in the
amount of $10 per landscape point shall be deposited with the City at the time
of application for a building permit and shall remain in force for twenty-four
(24) months.[See Section 6(f)]
E. Temporary Access Easement and License: The owner shall grant a two year
temporary access easement and license to the City or its contracted agent to
enter upon the land for the purpose of installing the required landscaping
and/or for maintenance compliance in the event that such landscaping is not in
place by the date specified in the agreement or maintained in a healthy
condition during the two year time frame.
20.31.100 PROCEDURES.
A. Information to be Provided: The Landscape Site Plan shall contain
information in accordance with the provisions provided in this section and
with the City’s minimum requirements for site plan information. The
Landscape Site Plan submitted for approval must contain the following:
1. The Landscape Site Plan shall show the location and dimensions of all
existing and proposed structures, project boundary lines, parking lots,
drives, roadways and right-of-way, delineation of traffic vision corners
[Chapter 20.15.020 (6)(7)], sidewalks, bicycle paths, signs, refuse
disposal areas, bicycle parking areas, architectural features, utility
equipment, utility easements and lines (above and below ground),
conservation easements, and lighting. All existing or proposed sewer
manholes and water main valves and hydrants must be shown, and the
landscape design maintains clear access avoiding any conflict with said
manholes, water main valves and hydrants.
2. The Landscape Site Plan shall show the location of all existing and
proposed vegetation and shall be submitted with a plant schedule
and/or plant list with the common and scientific names, quantity and
size at planting (See Exhibit I). Where applicable, root ball condition
and spacing of shrubs shall either be included on the plant list/schedule
or indicated on the Plan; or
3. Landscape Planting Plan developed by a recognized landscape
professional at a scale of 1” = 20” or larger, as the Plan Commission
deems necessary, may be submitted or be required to be submitted by
the Plan Commission, showing the location of all buildings,
architectural features, parking lots, walkways, paths, storage areas and
the detailed location of all plant materials drawn at 50-70% of mature
size and shall include all site features within the area detailed. The
Planting Plan shall also be submitted with a plant schedule/plant list
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 6
indicating the common and scientific names, quantity, size and
condition of plant material at the time of planting.
EXHIBIT I
PLANT SIZE/UNIT OF MEASURE
TREES:
Caliper Diameter at 4” above the root
crown or graft; or height to tip
EVERGREENS:
Diameter or Height to Tip
SHRUBS:
Height to Tip
GROUND COVER: Diameter or Container Size
4. All existing vegetation which is equal to or exceeds the following sizes
must be inventoried and shown on the plan: 1) Deciduous trees 3” in
caliper or greater; 2) Evergreen trees five (5) feet high or greater and 3)
Shrubs 36” high or greater.
5. All existing vegetation which is equal to or exceeds the following sizes
must be inventoried and shown on the plan: 1) Deciduous trees 2” to
3” caliper or greater, 2) Evergreen trees 5” high or greater, and 3)
Shrubs in five (5) gallon containers or 24:” – 36” high.
6. The location of all proposed berming indicating contours at one (1)
foot intervals and percent of slope. The Plan Commission may, when
necessary and appropriate, wave this requirement for Landscape
Planting Plans.
7. Detail sections and/or elevations of all proposed architectural features,
walls lighting standards, water features, etc. This requirement is not
necessary for Landscape Planting Plans.
8. All landscaping plans must include a Title Block including the
following information:
a). North Arrow
b). Scale 1 inch = 40 feet
c). Name of Developer
d). Address of Project
e). Name of Project
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 7
f). Date
g). Signature and name of Landscape Design Professional
h). Space for Revision Dates
i). Sheet Number
A. No Further Approvals Required: Landscape plans approved by the Plan
Commission as part of a development site plan shall not require further
approval by other city agencies if the approved landscape plan meets all the
requirements of this Chapter.
B. Sealed Letter of Completion: Prior to the release of the owner’s fiscal
security, a sealed letter of completion shall be provided to the Inspection
Department from a registered engineer, architect or landscape architect
representing the development, which letter shall verify that the project has
been implemented in accordance with City approved plans and is in full
compliance with this Chapter.
C. Optional Review Fee: For development projects over 1 acre in size the
developer/owner shall be assessed a landscape plan review fee of $25.00 plus
$5.00 per acre to be deposited with the City at the time of application to insure
compliance with the Landscaping Ordinance.
D. Minimum Planting Size of Multi-Stemmed Plant Material: The minimum
planting size shall be:
Trees and Ornamental Trees: 7’ to tip or as can be justified by
the cultivar
Deciduous Shrubs: 24” high or 18”-24” in diameter
Evergreen Shrubs: 24” high or 18”-24” in diameter
20.31.110 ON-SITE LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
A. General Standards: The following standards apply to all industrial,
commercial, utility or multi-family residential sites:
1. No tree shall be located within five (5) feet of a vehicular access way,
bike trail or public sidewalk or within ten (10) feet of a street light,
stop sign, fire hydrant, street sign or directional sign.
2. All landscaping material located within a vision triangle shall be two
and one-half (2.5) feet or less in height or have clearance of eight (8)
feet beneath the lowest branch or projection.
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 8
3. No permanent impervious surfacing or sub-surfacing shall be located
around the base of any tree or shrub which may impede growth of said
plant.
4. Existing trees should be retained to the greatest extent possible and
protected during the course of development.
5. The Plan Commission shall maintain and periodically update a listing
of acceptable plants in accordance with the Classification of Plants
found in Table 2.
6. The Plan Commission shall maintain and periodically update a list of
banned and not recommended plant materials.
B. Categories of On-Site Landscaping Requirements: On-site landscaping shall
be required of all developments in the City of Port Washington. The areas onsite
landscaping requirements are for:
1. Building Foundations
2. Parking Lot Street Yard
3. Side and Rear Yard Buffer Areas
4. Paved Areas
5. Undesignated Areas
C. Landscaping Point System and Minimum Installation Sizes for Multi-stemmed
Plant Materials: Landscaping requirements are measured by “points”, the
number of which is dependent upon the size of the development. A different
number of points are awarded for each plant, depending upon its typical
growth rate, its mature height, and whether it is a deciduous or evergreen
species. A minimum installation size is required for each of these plant
categories (See Table 1 below).
The Classification of Plants is a baseline and is not to be considered a
complete list of recommended and acceptable plants. The City of Port
Washington recognizes that in horticulture and in landscape nursery
operations, recently introduced and newly developed cultivars of existing tree
and shrub species are regularly being offered into the landscaping trade and
will fit into the Classification categories below.
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 9
TABLE 1.
LANDSCAPING POINTS AND MINIMUM INSTALLATION SIZES
Plant Category
Landscaping Points Per Plant
Minimum Permitted
Installation Size
Tall Deciduous Tree
30 2” to 3” Caliper
Medium Deciduous Tree
15 6’ Tall or 2” Caliper
Low Deciduous Tree
10 4’ Tall
Tall Evergreen Tree
30 6’ Tall
Medium Evergreen Tree
20 4’ Tall
Low Evergreen Tree
5 3’ Tall
Tall Deciduous Shrub
5 36” Tall
Medium Deciduous Shrub
3 24” Tall
Low Deciduous Shrub
1 18” Tall
Medium Evergreen Shrub
5 18” Tall/Wide
Low Evergreen Shrub
3 12” Tall/Wide
Tall Perennials and Grasses 1 for every 20 sq. ft. planted to a
maximum of 5 pts.
? 18” Mature Height
Medium Perennials Grasses ½ for every 10 sq. ft. planted to a
maximum of 5 pts.
? 18” Mature Height
Decorative Fence 1 pt. For every 5 lineal feet in buffer
areas adjacent to single family and
duplex development.
Minimum 4.5 Ft.
High
Source: The City of Port Washington Department of Planning and Development based on A
Guide to Selection Landscape Plants for Wisconsin, Hasselkus, UW-Ext. Publication:
A2865
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 10
TABLE 2: CLASSIFICATION OF PLANTS
TALL DECIDUOUS TREES
(30 Landscaping Points)
MEDIUM EVERGREEN TREES
(20 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name
Common Name
Botanical Name
Common Name
Acer saccharum
Sugar Maple Abies concolor White Fir
Ginkgo biloba Ginko Pinus sp. Pine: Red, White,
Scot
Quercus sp. Oak: Red, White,
Pin
Tsuga Canadensis Canada Hemlock
Acer sp. Maple: Red, Silver,
Norway
Thuja occidentalis American
Arborvitae
Fraxinus sp. Ash: White Green
Gleditsia
triancanthos
Honeylocust
Populus
grandidentata
Bigtooth Aspen
Tilia sp. Linden: Basswood,
Littleleaf, Redmond
MEDIUM DECIDUOUS TREES
(15 Landscaping Points)
LOW EVERGREEN TREES
(12 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name
Common Name
Botanical Name
Common Name
Betula sp.
Birch: River, Paper Juniperus sp. Juniper:
Mountbatten,
Redcedar
Prunus sp.
Cherry: Choke, Pin Thuja sp. Arborvitae:
Pyramidal, Techny
Salix sp.
Willow
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 11
TABLE 2 CON’T CLASSIFICATION OF PLANTS
LOW DECIDUOUS TREES
(10 Landscaping Points)
TALL DECIDUOUS SHRUBS
(5 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name
Common Name
Botanical Name
Common Name
Amelanchier sp. Birch: River, Paper Cornus sp. Dogwood: Grey,
Pagoda
Crataegus sp. Hawthorn:
Cockspur, Downy,
Washington
Syringa sp. Lilac: Chinese,
Hyacinth
Malus sp. Carbapple sp. Viburnum sp. Viburnum:
Arrowwood,
Wayfaringtree,
Nannyberry
MEDIUM DECIDUOUS SHRUBS
(3 Landscaping Points)
LOW DECIDUOUS SHRUBS
(1 Landscaping Points)
Botanical Name
Common Name
Botanical Name
Common Name
Corylus Americana
American Filbert
Hazelnut
Berberis thunbergii Japanese Barberry
Cotoneaster sp. Cotoneaster Spiraea sp. Spirea: Froebel,
Showmound
Forsynthia sp. Forsythia: Border,
Early, Weeping
Rosa sp. Rose: Virginia,
Rugosa
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 12
D. Methods of Measurement of Landscaping Requirements for Landscaping
Areas: A minimum number of landscaping points is required for the
landscaping areas listed below based upon the methods of measurement for
each area. Except as otherwise required, at least twenty-five percent (25%)
but not more than fifty percent (50%) of the plant materials installed shall
provide color on a year-round basis.
1. BUILDING FOUNDATIONS: Measured in lineal feet.
a. The landscaping area for building foundation shall be located
within twenty (20) feet of the building foundation. This
landscaping shall not be located in the areas designated as
parking lot street yards, buffer areas or paved areas.
b. For each one hundred (100) feet of building foundation
perimeter, eighty (80) landscaping points shall be installed on a
prorated basis and shall be permanently maintained.
c. A visual screen shall be required for all external appurtenances,
(e.g. HVAC/utility boxes, etc.)
2. PARKING LOT STREET YARDS: Measured in lineal feet of street
frontage.
a. New developments and/or reconstruction of existing parking
lots where existing conditions allow, shall provide a twenty
(20) foot wide parking lot street yard between the street rightof-
way and the building setback line on all public and private
streets.
b. Within the parking lot street yard, a minimum fifteen (15) foot
deep planting area is to be provided along two-thirds (2/3) the
entire length of the parking lot which abuts a public or private
roadway.
c. A minimum of four (4) feet of maintained lawn shall be
provided on both the street side and the interior side of the
parking lot street yard so as not to interfere with use of the
sidewalks and to provide for snow storage.
d. Where it is not feasible to comply with Section (6) (f) 2 and 3,
the following minimum requirements may apply: the
landscape screen shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in height
at installation, measured from the parking lot elevation. Up to
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 13
one (1) feet of the minimum four (4) feet maybe accomplished
by crowning the plant bed.
e. For those existing situation where narrow street yards less than
twenty (20) feet abut a parking lot, approval of the Plan shall be
based on the site’s physical limitations, be contingent on Plan
Commission approval of a reduction of the twenty-five (25)
feet street yard depth and comply with the following
provisions:
i. Parking lot street yard depths of fifteen (15) feet or
greater shall provide for a minimum four (4) foot wide
lawn area on either side of a seven (7) foot wide
landscaped bed.
ii. Parking lot street yard depths ten (10) feet wide but less
than fifteen (15) feet wide shall provide a four (4) foot
wide lawn area on the parking lot side of the street yard
and a minimum six (6) foot wide landscaped bed.
iii. Parking lot street yard depths five (5) feet wide but less
than ten (10) feet wide shall provide a minimum five
(5) feet wide landscaped bed.
f. For each one hundred (100) lineal feet of street frontage, of a
lot abutting a private or public street right-of-way, eighty (80)
landscaping points shall be installed on a prorated basis and
permanently maintained.
3. SIDE AND REAR LOT BUFFER AREAS in lineal feet measured
along the lot line. Every new development shall provide a buffer area
the entire length of the side and back property lines with sufficient
screening to shield adjacent properties from any adverse external
effects of that development and/or to shield the development from the
negative impacts of adjacent uses, street or railroads.
a. Buffer Areas Between the Same or Compatible Uses: For each
one hundred (100) feet of lot line, beginning at the front
setback line, of a buffer area between like uses, eighty (80)
landscaping points shall be installed on a prorated basis and
shall be permanently maintained. The buffer area may contain
plant materials only or be a combination of plant materials and
decorative fencing. The buffer area shall be a minimum of ten
(10) feet wide and shall be within twenty (20) feet of the lot
line excluding areas along street rights-of-way. In addition, the
interior side of the buffer area shall be planted with a minimum
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 14
of 2.5 feet of maintained lawn. At least fifty percent (50%) of
the plant materials shall provide color on a year-round basis.
b. Buffer Areas Adjacent to Single Family and Duplex
Residential Development: For each one hundred (100) feet of
lot line, beginning at the front setback line, of a buffer area
adjacent to single-family and duplex residential development,
one hundred twenty (120) landscaping points shall be installed
on a prorated basis and shall be permanently maintained. The
landscaping in such buffer area shall be in the form of a solid
hedge or a hedge/decorative fence combination, and shall be
not less than 4.5 feet in height. The buffer area shall be a
minimum of twenty (20) feet wide measured from the lot line,
excluding areas along street rights-of-way. In addition, the
interior side of the buffer area shall be planted with a minimum
of 2.5 feet of maintained lawn. Not more than fifty percent
(50%) of the points allocated to plant materials shall consist of
deciduous shrubs.
4. PAVED AREAS – Measured in square footage of pavement areas.
Paved areas on lots developed after the effective date of this ordinance
shall be required to be landscaped according to the following
standards.
a. All landscaping areas within paved areas shall be separated by
a continuous concrete curb at a minimum height of four (4)
inches.
b. For every twenty (20) parking spaces or 10,000 square feet of
pavement (whichever yields the greater amount of landscaping)
on a lot, ninety (90) landscaping points shall be installed and
permanently maintained. A minimum of thirty (30) percent of
all points shall be devoted to shade trees.
c. Parking islands, which meet the following requirements, may
be used to meet the landscape requirements for paved areas.
i. Planting island between interior parking lanes shall be
ten (10) feet wide and incorporate 2.5 feet of
maintained lawn of each of the long side for snow
storage and a five (5) foot planting area in the
middle.
ii. If pedestrian traffic crosses the planting area, the design
shall provide for a defined paved walkway through
the area.
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 15
5. UNDESIGNATED AREA measured in square feet. All areas not
described in Subsections 20.31.110 4.i.–iv. of this ordinance shall be
classified as undesignated areas. Undesignated areas of less than 5,000
square feet shall consist of maintained lawn and shall not require
additional landscaping. Undesignated areas of 5,000 square feet or
more shall require installation of eighty (80) landscaping points for
every 5,000 square feet on a prorated basis, which shall be permanently
maintained.
E. Plant Classification: Plant materials are classified into the following thirteen
groupings: Tall deciduous trees, Medium deciduous trees, Low deciduous
trees, Tall evergreen trees, Low evergreen trees, Tall deciduous shrubs,
Medium deciduous shrubs, Low deciduous shrubs, Medium evergreen shrubs,
Low evergreen shrubs, Tall perennials and grasses and Medium perennials and
grasses. (See Table 2 below).
F. Landscaping Installation: All landscaping shall be installed within 1 year of
occupancy and planted in sound workmanlike manner and according to
accepted good planting procedures with quality plant materials. The City shall
inspect all landscaping and no final certificate of occupancy or similar
authorization will be issued unless the landscaping meets the requirements
herein provided or the appropriate surety is established in compliance with
Section 17.13(4) for future installation of the required landscaping.
1. Existing plant material which meets the requirements of this ordinance
and which will be preserved in good health and in a viable condition
on the subject property when development is completed may be
counted towards the landscape requirements in (6)(e)(f)(g)(h) of this
ordinance.
2. All remaining open space on a developed lot shall be planted and
maintained in lawn, unless such lawn is already fully established.
3. The exact placement of plant materials, fencing and berms as
recommended or required by this ordinance to be installed, shall be the
decision of the property owner except that the following requirements
shall be met:
a. Evergreen shrubs shall be planted in cluster to maximize their
chances for survival.
b. Where a combination of plant materials, fencing and berms is
used, the fencing and berms shall be located toward the interior
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 16
of the subject property and the plant material shall be located
toward the exterior of the subject property.
c. In no event shall landscaping material be selected and/or
located in a manner that results in the creation of a safety or
visibility hazard.
4. Upon completion of landscaping installation, written certification shall
be provided by a landscape design professional to the Director of
Building Inspection verifying that the landscaping has been installed in
accordance with the landscape plans approved by the City, and in full
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
G. Landscaping Maintenance: All landscaping areas shall be provided with a
readily available water supply, shall be maintained in good condition so as to
present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance, and shall be kept free from
refuse and debris. The property owner, tenant and/or their or its agents, if any,
shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all
landscaping areas and for the prompt replacement of approved landscape
elements. The property owner, developer and/or their or its agents, if any, of a
subdivision, condominium, industrial, institutional, commercial or multifamily
residential site shall be jointly and severally responsible for the prompt
replacement of any landscape elements which are dead or damaged beyond
repair. No subsequent changes to any structures or to the site shall be
approved for a developed property until the landscaping on the site is
completely installed and maintained in accordance with the landscape plans
approved by the City. If any landscaping area or landscape elements are not
maintained or replaced in accordance with this ordinance, the Director of
Building Inspection shall issue a notice of violation and order to correct, cease
and desist such violation.
H. Calculating Required Landscaping: All areas and distances on which point
calculations are based shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number of
square feet or lineal feet (e.g. 24¼ lineal feet = 26 lineal feet for the purpose of
calculating required landscape points.)
I. Berm Requirements: The construction of earth berms may be permitted in
parking lot street yards subject to the following:
1. The berm shall not exceed 2 feet in vertical height.
2. An earth berm exceeding 2 feet in vertical height shall be permitted
only after approval of the Plan Commission as to the height and
location and landscaping of the berm.
20.31.000 APPROVAL OF BUILDING, SITE (INCLUDING
LANDSCAPING AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
31 - 17
3. All berms shall be constructed such that the width of the base of the
berm shall be no less than six (6) times the vertical height of a berm.
The vertical height of a berm shall be measured from an average of the
existing ground grades on either side of the berm.
4. A cover growth of City approved plant mulching materials containing
no noxious weeds shall be immediately established over the entire
berm to prevent erosion or unsightly conditions.
5. In addition to a cover growth of plant material, all berms will have
landscape planting spaced randomly to help visually break up the
continuous line of the berm.
6. Ground cover used in lieu of grass in whole or in part shall be planted
in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and provide
reasonably complete coverage within three (3) months after planting.
20.31.120 DEFINITIONS.
A. Plant Materials: Evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs and perennials.
B. Maintained Lawn: Grass planted and maintained adjacent to landscaped areas
of a site and mowed at regular intervals.
C. Screening: Hiding or obstructing non-compatible uses from single family and
duplex residential uses through the use of approved plant materials and
decorative fencing.
D. Landscaping: Changes in the natural features of a site by a recognized
landscape design professional to make it more attractive.
E. Landscape Design Professional: One who has the academic credentials in
landscape design, landscape architecture, horticulture, or a related field,
professional landscaping experience or a combination thereof.
F. Decorative Fence: Fencing made of wood, stone, or brick that is used as part
of the landscaping of the buffer areas of a site.
G. Paved Areas: Areas of a site covered in asphalt, brick, concrete or other
impervious paving materials.
H. Berm: A mound of earth created for landscaping purposes.
20.32.000 GENERAL INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT
APPLICATION
32 - 1
20.32.010 REGULATIONS MADE APPLICABLE TO EACH DISTRICT. The
regulations as set forth in previous sections of this Ordinance are made specifically applicable
to each individual district as hereinafter set froth in the Individual District Regulation
Summary or Charts.
20.32.020 BASIC DISTRICTS. All property in the City has been placed in one of the
basic districts created for the purpose of establishing the general pattern of intended land use
consistent with the General Plan for Comprehensive Development.
20.32.030 OVERLAY DISTRICTS. Overlay or “floating” districts are also established
which provide for the possibility of superimposing upon a basic district certain additional
permissive uses and regulatory standards applicable thereto without disturbing the underlying
basic district regulations. The basic intent is similar to that upon which conditional use
grants are premised and in effect represents the granting of specifically defined special use
rights in specifically defined areas.
20.32.040 FORMAT OF INDIVIDUAL DISTRICT REGULATION SUMMARY.
A. For convenience and readability, the uses as permitted in each district and the
supplementary regulations thereto are presented in a summary tabular form consisting
of the following:
1. A statement of intent interpreting the intended purpose of the specific district
classification.
2. A list of permitted uses.
3. Special regulations which apply to that district.
B. A summary tabulation of the specific numeric requirements of the provisions of this
Ordinance made applicable to the various district. In case of an Overlay district, the
requirements listed apply to the uses permitted by virtue of the overlay and do not
alter the application of the underlying district regulations to the uses permitted
therein.
Zone standards
ZONING DISTRICT Minimum Total Lot Area Minimum Width Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit Minimum Open Space Setback Side Side FAR Height Garage Unfinished Space  
R-1 Single Family Detached Residence 45,000 150 45,000 35,000 30 25 25 30 15 15% No 400 35% 900 
RS-1 Single Family Detached Residence 15,000 110 15,000 10,000 30 10 15 30 15 20% No 400 35% 900 
RS-2 Single Family Detached Residence 12,000 100 12,000 7,500 30 8 12 30 15 25% No 400 35% 850 
RS-3 Single Family Detached Residence 10,000 85 10,000 6,000 25 6 10 30 15 30% No 400 35% 800 
RS-4 Single Family Detached Residence 8,400 75 8,400 5,000 25 6 8 30 15 30% No 400 35% 750 
RS-5 One and Two Family Residence (Single) 8,400 75 4,200 2,500 25 6 8 30 15 30% No 400 35% 750 
RS-5 One and Two Family Residence (Two) 8,400 75 4,200 2,500 25 6 8 30 15 40% No 200 Per Unit 0 750 
RS-6 One and Two Family Residence (Single) 10,000 85 5,000 3,000 25 6 10 30 15 35% No 400 35% 750 
RS-6 One and Two Family Residence (Two) 10,000 85 5,000 3,000 25 6 10 30 15 40% No 200 Per Unit 0 750 
RM-1 Single and Two Family Residence 7,000 50 3,500 2,300 25 6 6 35 15 40% No N/A N/A N/A
RM-2 Multiple Family (Garden Apts. & Townhouses N/A N/A 3200 3600 4000 2,000 25 10 15 30 15 40% No N/A N/A N/A 
RM-3 Multiple Family (Low Rise Apts.) N/A N/A 2700 3000 3300 1,500 25 15 10 35 15 60% Yes N/A N/A N/A 
RM-4 Multiple Family (Medium Rise Apts.) N/A N/A 1,500 750 25 15 10 60 15 125% Yes N/A N/A N/A
CCM Multiple Family (Central City Mixed) 7,000 50 3,500 2,300 20 6 6 35 15 40% Yes N/A N/A N/A 
B-1 Office District (9) N/A N/A N/A 500 25 10 10 30 15 35% (5) No N/A N/A N/A 
B-2 Local Service Center Business (6, 7) N/A N/A N/A 500 15 10 10 30 15 50% (5) No N/A N/A N/A 
B-3 General Business District (6, 7) N/A N/A N/A 500 15 10 10 40 15 60% (5) No N/A N/A N/A 
B-4 Central Business District (6, 7) N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 0 0 35 (10) 35 (10) 400% (5) No N/A N/A N/A 
BP Business Park District (9) 40,000 150 N/A N/A 40 40 25 35 30 40% (5) No N/A N/A N/A 
I-1 Existing Industrial N/A N/A N/A N/A 10 10 10 85 85 70% Yes
I-2 Industrial Park 40,000 150 N/A N/A 25 25 25 45 35 40% No
AG Agricultural 10 acres 600 10,000 10,000 50 20 20 30 85 N/A No N/A N/A N/A 
SW Shoreland-Wetland N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 30 15 N/A No
PUL Public and Utility Lands N/A N/A N/A 500 15 10 10 85 85 N/A Yes
OVERLAY DISTRICTS USE UNDERLYING DISTRICTS EXCEPT AS NOTED SAME AS UNDERLYING DISTRICTS
ODF Density Factor (4) 7,000 60 (4) 3,000 (4) 2,000 20 6 6 85 35 70% Yes
OOS Office and Special Service (5)
OIP Institutional and Public Service 85 85 Yes
OPD Planned Development
OHS Highway Service
ONP Neighborhood Preservation
OCP Conservation Protection
(Over 35 ft. see "Extra Height
Construction Factor"
FOOTNOTES
(5) F.A.R. may be increased by use of Environmental Enhancement Incentive. (See 20.000)
(6) All uses other than 1 and 2 family dwellings are subject to approval by the Plan Commission of building, site, and
operational plans.
(7) For all units, add 100 square feet per unit to required square footage if there is no basement storage space of at least 200
square feet designated for each unit.
(8) Only 70% of any livable floor area which is over another livable floor area may be counted toward required minimum floor
area.
(9) Lot Size and Lot Width As Necessary To Meet Other Requirements.
(10) Special Exemption may be granted to increase height up to 61 feet.
FOOTNOTES
(1) In new plats approved after January 1, 1982, the Common Council may upon favorable recommendation of the Plan
Commission, allow the lots in the R1, RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, RS-4, RS-5 & RS-6 Districts to be up to 20% narrower in
required minimum average width, providing the total lot area is increased 80 square feet above the minimum required
lot area for each 1 foot of the lot width is reduced, and providing further said lots will not be directly facing
existing wider lots.
(2) When an attached garage of 400 square feet is included for each dwelling unit, the minimum required first floor area
is reduced by 100 square feet.
(3) May be reduced under ODF Overlay District.
(4) See Section 34.270 for other ODF Regulations
20.33.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
33 - 1
20.33.010 DISTRICTS LISTED
A. Basic Districts
1. R-1 Single Family Detached Residence
2. RS-1 Single Family Detached Residence
3. RS-2 Single Family Detached Residence
4. RS-3 Single Family Detached Residence
5. RS-4 Single Family Detached Residence
6. RS-5 Single Family Detached Residence
7. RS-6 Single and Two Family Residence
8. RM-1 Single and Two Family Residence
9. RM-2 Multiple Family (Garden Apartments & Townhouses)
10. RM-3 Multiple Family (Low Rise Apartments)
11. RM-4 Multiple Family (Medium Rise Apartments)
12. CCM Multiple Family (Central City Mixed)
13. B-1 Office District
14. B-2 Local Service Center Business
15. B-3 General Business
16. B-4 Central Business District
17. BP Business Park
18. I-1 Existing Industrial
19. I-2 Industrial Park
20. AG Agriculture
21. SW Shoreland-Wetlands
22. PUL Public and Utility Lands
B. Overlay Districts
1. OOS Office and Special Service
2. OIP Institutional and Public Service
3. OPD Planned Development
4. OHS Highway Service
5. ODF Density Factor
6. OAG Arterial Gateway District
7. ONP Neighborhood Preservation
8. OCP Conservation Protection
33.020 REGULATIONS CHART
A. Regulation Chart. The following chart identifies the development standards for each
basic and overlay district.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 1
20.34.010 R-1 SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for high quality, low density
residential development of a suburban character limited to single family homes set
individually on separate lots where sewer service is not available.
B. Permitted Uses by Right.
1. Single-Family dwellings.
2. Public parks and recreation areas, but not including facilities for organized
athletics except as a permitted conditional use. (See Section 20.25.030 B)
3. Public utility transmissions and distribution lines, poles, and other related
accessories provided that when a utility proposes a main intercity transmission
facility, they shall give notice to the Plan Commission of such intention and of
the date of hearing before the Public Service Commission, and before
beginning construction of a specific route shall file with the Plan Commission
a mapped description of the route of such transmission line.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Private garages, carports, and paved parking areas, when located on the same
lot and not involving the conduct of a business, except as a permitted home
occupation or conditional use, provided that no such garage shall be erected
prior to the erection of the principal building to which it is necessary.
2. Quarters for household employees, provided that such quarters shall be
occupied only by individuals employed full time on the premises and their
families.
3. Guest houses, provided such structure shall not be rented, leased, or used for
continuous or permanent habitation.
4. The following signs subject to the general regulations governing signs. (See
Section 20.29.000).
a. A sign identifying the property or the name of the owner or occupant
not in excess of 6 square feet in area.
b. A “No Trespassing”, or other similar sign and not in excess of 6
square feet in area.
c. Temporary signs pertaining to the lease or sale of the property on
which located or any building thereon, not in excess of 20 square feet
in area per sign and not more than 2 signs on any single parcel.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 2
5. Home occupations and professional offices, when incident to the principal
residential use, situated in the same building, and carried on by the residential
occupant, subject to the following conditions:
a. Such use shall not occupy more than 20% of the floor area of the
principal building in which it is located.
b. Such use shall not employ more than one person, not a resident on the
premises.
c. No such use shall be permitted which generates pedestrian or vehicular
traffic incompatible with the residential character of the neighborhood.
d. Any offset parking area shall be maintained reasonably dustless, and
adequately screened from adjoining residential properties. (See
Section 20.24.000)
e. Such use shall not include the conduct of any retail or wholesale
business on the premises, nor the removal of sand, gravel, stone,
topsoil, or peat moss for commercial purposes.
f. Such use shall not include the operation of any machinery, tools, or
other appliances, or the outside storage of materials, or other
operational activity which could create a nuisance or be otherwise
incompatible to surrounding residential area.
g. A nameplate not in excess of 3 square feet in area shall be permitted.
6. Home gardening and horticulture not involving commercial facilities for the
same of garden produce, trees, shrubs, plants, or cut flowers and not
permitting greenhouses in excess of 500 square feet in area.
7. Private residential outdoor recreation facilities. (See Section 20.25.000)
8. Service buildings and facilities normally incident to the use of a public park or
recreation area.
9. Any other structure or use normally accessory to the principal use permitted.
10. Adult day care centers providing services for part of the day ina group setting
to adults who need an enriched health-supportive or social experience and
who may need assistance with activities of daily living or protection.
D. Permitted Uses by Conditional Grant.
1. Public, private commercial, private non-commercial group outdoor
recreational facilities. (See Section 20.23.000)
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 3
2. Public and private schools.
3. Churches and other religious institutions.
4. Public administrative offices and service buildings.
5. Private lodges and clubs.
6. Nursing and rest homes for the aged.
7. Public utility offices and installations including electric and gas transmission
lines and substations, municipal water towers, pump houses, water and
sewage treatment plants.
8. Bed and Breakfast lodging, providing the property fronts upon a state
highway.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 4
20.34.020 RS-1 SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide moderately high quality,
moderately low density residential development of an urban character limited to
single family homes set individually on separate sewered lots.
B. Permitted Uses By Right. Same as R-1 District.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses. Same as R-1 District.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant. Same as R-1 District.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 5
20.34.030 RS-2 SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE.
A. Statement of intent. This district is intended to provide for moderately high quality,
moderately low density residential development of an urban character limited to
single family set individually on separate sewered lots.
B. Permitted Uses By Right. Same as R-1 District.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses. Same as R-1 District.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Use Grant. Same as R-1 District.
20.34.040 RS-3 SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for moderate value, moderate
density residential development of an urban character limited to single family homes
set individually on separate sewered lots.
B. Permitted Uses By Right. Same as R-1 District.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses. Same as R-1 District.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant. Same as R-1 District.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 6
20.34.050 RS-4 SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for moderately high density
residential developments of an urban character limited to single family homes in
developed areas of the City as well as new development of modest value single
family homes set individually on sewered lots.
B. Permitted Uses By Right. Same as R-1 District.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses. Same as R-1 District.
D. Permitted Uses by Conditional Grant. Same as R-1 District.
20.34.060 RS-5 SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE.
A. Statement of Intent. This district provides for the same type and general density of
residential development as the RS-4 District, but adds the permissibility of two
family dwellings on the same sized lot.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. Single and Two Family Dwellings.
2. Public Parks and recreation areas, but not including facilities for organized
athletics except as a permitted conditional use.
3. Public utility transmission and distribution lines, poles, and other accessories
provided that when a utility proposes a main inter-city transmission facility,
they shall give notice to the Plan Commission of such intention and of the
date hearing before the Public Service Commission, and before beginning
construction of a specific route shall file with the Plan Commission a mapped
description of the route of such transmission line.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The same as R-1 District, except No. 2 (Quarters for
household employees), and No. 3 (Guesthouses), are not permitted as Accessory Uses
in the RS-5 and RS-6 Districts.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Use Grant. The same as in the R-2 District, except
No. 1 (group outdoor recreational facilities) and No. 7 (Public Utility installations)
are not permitted as conditional uses in the RS-5 and RS-6 Districts.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 7
20.34.070 RS-6 SINGLE & TWO FAMILY RESIDENCES.
A. Statement of Intent. This district provides for the same type and general density of
residential development as the RS-3 District, but adds the permissibility of two
family dwellings on the same size lot.
B. Permitted Uses By Right. Same as RS-5.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses. Same as RS-5.
D. Permitted Accessory Uses. Same as RS-5.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 8
20.34.080 RM-1 SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for single and two family
dwellings, principally in areas of existing older development, such as duplexes, flats
or apartment conversions in large, older single family dwellings.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. Single-family dwellings.
2. Public parks and recreations areas, but not including facilities for organized
athletics except as a permitted conditional use. (See Section 20.25.030 B).
3. Public utility transmissions and distribution lines, poles, and other related
accessories provided that when a utility proposes a main intercity transmission
facility, they shall give notice to the Plan Commission of such intention and of
the date of hearing before the Public Service Commission, and before
beginning construction of a specific route shall file with the Plan Commission
mapped description of the route of such transmission line.
4. Two family dwellings including duplexes, flats, and apartments constructed as
such or converted from a single-family dwelling prior to January 1, 2006.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Private garages, carports, and paved parking areas, when located on the same
lot and not involving the conduct of a business, except as a permitted home
occupation or conditional use, provided that no such garage shall be erected
prior to the erection of the principal building to which it is necessary.
2. Quarters for household employees, provided that such quarters shall be
occupied only by individuals employed full time on the premises and their
families.
3. Guesthouses, provided such structure shall not be rented, leased, or used for
continuous or permanent habitation.
4. The following signs subject to the general regulations governing signs. (See
Section 20.29.000).
a. A sign identifying the property or the name of the owner or occupant
not in excess of 6 square feet in area.
b. A “No Trespassing”, or other similar sign and not in excess of 6
square feet in area.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 9
c. Temporary signs pertaining to the lease or sale of the property on
which located or any building thereon, not in excess of 20 square feet
in area per sign and not more than 2 signs on any single parcel.
5. Home occupations and professional offices, when incident to the principal
residential use, situated in the same building, and carried on by the residential
occupant, subject to the following conditions:
a. Such use shall not occupy more than 20% of the floor area of the
principal building in which it is located.
b. Such use shall not employ more than one person, not a resident on the
premises.
c. No such use shall be permitted which generates pedestrian or vehicular
traffic incompatible with the residential character of the neighborhood.
d. Any offset parking area shall be maintained reasonable dustless, and
adequately screened from adjoining residential properties. (See
Section 20.24.000).
e. Such use shall not include the conduct of any retail or wholesale
business on the premises, nor the removal of sand, gravel, stone,
topsoil, or peat moss for commercial purposes.
f. Such use shall not include the operation of any machinery, tools, or
other appliances, or the outside storage or materials, or other
operational activity which could create a nuisance or be otherwise
incompatible to surrounding residential area.
g. A nameplate not in excess of 3 square feet in area shall be permitted.
6. Home gardening and horticulture not involving commercial facilities for the
same of garden produce, trees, shrubs, plants, or cut flowers and not
permitting greenhouses in excess of 500 square feet in area.
7. Private residential outdoor recreation facilities. (See Section 20.25.000).
8. Service buildings and facilities normally incident to the use of a public park or
recreation area.
9. Any other structures or uses normally accessory to the principal use permitted.
D. Permitted Use By Conditional Grant.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 10
1. Public, private commercial, and private non-commercial group outdoor
recreational facilities. (See Section 20.23.000).
2. Public and private schools.
3. Churches and other religious institutions.
4. Public administrative offices and service buildings.
5. Private lodges and clubs.
6. Nursing and rest homes for the aged.
7. Public utility offices and installations including electric and gas transmission
lines and substations, municipal water towers, pump houses, water and
sewage treatment plants.
8. Boarding and lodging houses.
9. Multiple family “walk-up” apartment houses of not less than 2 nor more than
4 dwelling units per structure nor more than 2 stories in height.
10. Single family attached dwellings in row buildings of at least 2 but no more
than 4 dwelling units per structure.
11. Two-family dwellings including duplexes, flats and apartments constructed as
such or converted from a single-family dwelling on or after January 1, 2006.
12. Day care centers providing care for nine (9) or more children.
13. Adult day care centers providing services for part of the day ina group setting
to adults who need an enriched health-supportive or social experience and
who may need assistance with activities of daily living or protection.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 11
20.34.090 RM-2 MULTIPLE FAMILY (GARDEN APTS. & TOWNHOUSES).
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide principally for “family” type
occupancy in multiple dwellings constructed at the lowest end of the urban multiple
family density range, where the emphasis on unit design is toward fewer units per
building and few units per entrance, larger individual units having, in the case of
townhouses, private entrances and storage for children’s equipment and where the
site development shows concern for adequate children’s play area, shielded from
traffic and pedestrian ways toward schools. In many cases, this district will be placed
near community facilities that serve families, such as schools and parks. In certain
other instances, this district will provide areas for spacious high quality developments
often sold as condominiums to be located in areas of very high residential appeal and
intended to serve residents compatible to those residing nearby.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. Multiple family apartment houses and attached single family or row houses of
not less than 2 or more than 8 dwelling units per structure nor more than 3
stories in height, subject to approval by the Plan Commission of building, site
and operation plans (See Section 20.31.000). The Plan Commission may
approve apartment structures containing up to 16 dwelling units where it finds
these structures would be compatible with the principles of Section 20.31.000
and with the spirit of the Statement of Intent with regard to units per entrance,
accommodations of family occupancy, and relating the bulk of the structure to
possible nearby single and two family development, and the site plan provides
some additional environmental enhancement in the form of recreational
facilities or landscaping amenities, that would not be possible if 8 units
structures were developed.
2. Public parks and recreation areas, but not including facilities for organized
athletics except as permitted conditional uses. (See Section 20.25.000).
3. Public utility transmission and distribution lines, poles, and other accessories
provided that when a utility proposes a main intercity transmission facility,
they shall give notice to the Plan Commission of such intention and of the
date of hearing before the Public Service Commission, and before beginning
construction of a specific route shall file with the Plan Commission mapped
description of the route of such transmission line.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Garages, carports, and paved parking areas serving exclusively the occupants
of the apartment house, their guests, and service employees.
2. Private residential and private non-commercial group outdoor recreational
facilities. (See Section 20.25.000).
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 12
3. Service buildings and facilities normally incident of the use of a public park
or recreational area.
4. Any other structures or uses normally accessory to the principal uses
permitted.
D. Permitted Uses by Conditional Grant.
1. Any conditional use permitted in the RS-5 District. (See Section 20.34.060).
2. Mobile Homes in a mobile home court specifically designed for such
occupancy whether for lease, fee simple lot sales, or sale by condominium.
The court shall provide each living unit with access to an approved private
road or public street, and an exclusive land area not less than 3,600 sq. ft.,
notwithstanding the provisions of density in this district. Specific unit
arrangement, setbacks, and offsets shall be established in the conditions of
use, however, building location requirements of this district shall be
maintained around the periphery of the court as required in this district.
Minimum Floor Area Per Family may be reduced up to 10% from this
district’s regulations, and the required addition of floor area where there is no
basement shall be waived.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 13
20.34.100 RM-3 MULTIPLE FAMILY (LOW RISE APTS.).
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for “adult” type occupancy in
multiple dwellings constructed at a higher density than the RM-2 District because the
emphasis on occupancy is small family units or individuals, where less space per unit
is required in terms of land and buildings, but where outside surface parking is still
involved, thus preventing the higher density of the RM-4 District. This district will
often occur near work opportunities. The possibility of some children occupancy and
the need to relate the bulk of the structures to single family and two family
development of which will typically also be nearby, requires a limitation on the
height of buildings and the number of units per structures in the RM-2 District.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. Multiple family apartment houses not exceeding 12 units per structure nor
more than 3 stories in height, subject to approval by the Plan Commission of
building, site and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000). The Plan
Commission may approve apartment structures containing up to 24 dwelling
units where it finds these structures would be compatible with the principles
of Section 20.31.000 and with the spirit of the Statement of Intent with regard
to relating the bulk of the structure to possible nearby lower density
residential development.
2. Same as RM-2 District.
3. Same as RM-2 District.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Garages, carports, and paved parking areas servicing exclusively the
occupants of the apartment house, their guests, and service employees.
2. Private residential and private non-commercial group outdoor recreational
facilities. (See Section 20.25.000).
3. Service of buildings and facilities normally incident to the use of a public park
or recreational area.
4. Any other structures or uses normally accessory to the principal uses
permitted.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant.
1. Any Conditional Use permitted in the RS-5 District.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 14
2. Commercial service facilities accessory to the apartment function such as coin
operated automatic laundry equipment, a commissary, etc., provided it is
intended solely to serve the occupants of the premises.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 15
20.34.110 RM-4 MULTIPLE FAMILY (MEDIUM RISE APTS.).
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for adult type occupancy of
small family size in higher density locations requiring less open land area on the lot,
with some underground parking required to meet occupants transportation needs and
to help preserve some of the more minimal open lot area in pedestrian and landscape
areas rather than parking spaces and where a height limitation and limit on the bulk of
the building is imposed to conserve an overall character of the City with regard to the
light, air, views and appearance.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. Multiple Family apartment houses not exceeding 36 units per structure nor
more than 6 stories in height, having at least .7 of one parking space for every
dwelling under the building or placed underground so that the top surface is
usable open space at or near ground grade, subject to approval of building,
site and operational plans (See Section 20.31.000). The Plan Commission
may approve apartment structures containing more than 36 units where it
finds such structures would be compatible with the criteria of Section
20.31.000 and with the spirit of the Statement of Intent and of this District of
the basic intent of the Zoning Ordinance regulating the overall features of the
City.
2. Public parks and recreation areas, but not including facilities for organized
athletics except as permitted conditional uses. (See Section 20.25.000).
3. Public utility transmission and distribution lines, poles, and other related
accessories provided that when a utility proposes a main intercity transmission
facility, they shall give notice to the Plan Commission of such intention and of
the date of hearing before the Public Service Commission, and before
beginning construction of a specific route shall file with the Plan Commission
a mapped description of the route of such transmission line.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Garages, carports, and paved parking areas serving exclusively the occupants
of the apartment house, their guests, and service employees.
2. Private residential and private non-commercial group outdoor recreational
facilities. (See Section 20.25.000).
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant. Any Conditional Use permitted in the RM-3.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 16
20.34.120 CCM CENTRAL CITY MIXED.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for greater diversity of
compatible uses in the central city area where the functional and environmental
character is distinctly urban, and where a variety of housing types is needed to
accommodate a heterogeneous population, and where a selective controlled mixture
of residential uses with appropriate non-residential uses does not produce a
depreciating effect upon neighborhood environmental values.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. Single and two-family dwellings.
2. Public parks and recreation areas, but not including facilities for
organized athletics except as a permitted conditional use. (See Section
20.25.030 B.).
3. Public utility transmission and distribution lines, and poles.
4. Rental apartments as a secondary use in commercial buildings on a
non-ground level.
5. The following are subject to approval by the Plan Commission of
building, site, and operational plans. (See Sections 20.31.000, et seq.).
a. Administrative and public service offices.
b. Professional offices (e.g., architect, landscape architect,
lawyer, doctor, dentist, minister, engineer, or other similar
recognized profession).
c. Studios (e.g., photography, painting, music, sculpture,
dance, or other recognized art).
d. Real estate and insurance offices.
e. Specialized retail or customer service establishments:
(e.g., boarding, lodging or tourist homes, delicatessen,
floral shop, funeral home, gift shop, interior design,
restaurant, spa, beauty or barbershop).
f. Libraries, museums, art galleries and concert halls.
g. Cemeteries and mausoleums.
h. Dental and medical clinics.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 17
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Private garages, carports, and paved parking areas, when located on
the same lot and not involving the conduct of a business, except as a
permitted home occupation or conditional use, provided that no such
garage shall be erected prior to the erection of the principal building to
which it is accessory.
2. Quarters for household employees, provided that such quarters shall be
occupied only by individuals employed full time on the premises and
their families.
3. Guesthouses, provided that such structures shall not be rented, leased,
or used for continuous or permanent habitation.
4. Home occupations and professional offices, when incident to the
principal residential use, situated in the same building, and carried on
by the residential occupant, subject to the following conditions:
a. Such use shall not occupy more than 20% of the floor
area of the principal building in which it is located.
b. Such use shall not employ more than one person who is
not a resident on the premises.
c. No such use shall be permitted which generates
pedestrian or vehicular traffic incompatible with the
residential character of the neighborhood.
d. Any offset parking area shall be maintained reasonably
dustless, and adequately screened from adjoining
residential properties. (See Sections 20.24.000, et
seq.).
e. Such use shall not include the conduct of any retail or
wholesale business on the premises, or the removal of
sand, gravel, stone, topsoil, or peat moss for
commercial purposes.
f. Such use shall not include the operation of any
machinery, tools or other appliances not associated with
the use, or the outside storage of materials, or other
operational activity which could create a nuisance or be
otherwise incompatible with the surrounding residential
area.
5. Home gardening and horticulture not involving commercial facilities
for the sale of garden produce, trees, shrubs, plants or cut flowers, and
excluding green houses in excess of 500 square feet in area which
shall be prohibited.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 18
6. Private residential outdoor recreation facilities. (See Sections
20.25.000, et seq.).
7. Service buildings and facilities normally incident to the use of a public
park or recreation area.
8. Commercial service facilities accessory to an apartment function (e.g.,
coin-operated automatic laundry equipment, commissary, etc.),
provided such facilities are intended solely to serve the occupants of
the premises.
9. Any other structures or uses normally accessory to a permitted
principal use.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant.
1. Public, private commercial and private non-commercial group outdoor
recreational facilities. (See Sections 20.25.000, et seq.).
2. Public and private schools.
3. Churches and other religious institutions.
4. Private lodges and clubs.
5. Nursing and rest homes for the aged.
6. Public utility offices and installations including electric and gas
transmission lines and substations, municipal water towers, pump
houses, water and sewage treatment plants.
7. Multiple family apartment houses constructed after August 18, 2005
that are greater than three (3) units but not exceeding eight (8)
dwelling units per structure.
8. Facilities for organized athletics in public parks and recreation areas.
9. Printing and publishing houses and related activities.
10. Day care centers providing care for nine (9) or more children.
11. Adult day care centers providing services for part of a day in a group
setting to adults who need an enriched health-supportive or social
experience and who may need assistance with activities of daily living,
supervision or protection.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 19
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 20
20.34.130 B-1 OFFICE DISTRICT.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for individual sites, or for
planned groupings on single larger sites or on subdivided larger sites, of office
buildings and related service uses serving the needs of both neighborhood, and of the
larger community area. Planning Commission approval of the building, site and
operation plans of each such building proposal will be necessary to achieve a
satisfactory relationship of the office use and its operating characteristics to possible
adjacent residential uses, to the arterial highway system, and in some cases to
adjacent retail and customer service uses where shared parking is likely and some
interchange may occur between these various uses.
B. Permitted Uses By Right. The following subject to approval by the Planning
Commission of building, site and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000).
1. Offices, whether for single or multiple tenant use, including business,
professional, governmental or other institutional occupancy as well as for
medical and dental clinics.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following subject to approval by the Planning
Commission of building, site, and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000).
1. Incidental sales or service uses such as product or service display area,
warehousing and repair service, customer or employee service including
restaurants, cafeterias, day care facilities, studios or instructional area,
provided that these uses are accessory or subordinate to the principal office
used by not comprising cumulatively more than 30% of the floor area.
2. Off-street parking or loading areas. (See Section 20.24.000)
3. Sign subject to the regulations of Section 20.29.000.
4. Any other structures or uses normally accessory to the principal permitted
uses.
D. Permitted Use By Conditional Grant.
1. Banks, savings and loans, credit unions and similar financial service facilities
having drive-up window service.
2. Rental apartments as a secondary use on other than the ground floor level.
3. Day care centers not accessory to a principal office use.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 21
20.34.140 B-2 LOCAL SERVICE CENTER BUSINESS.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for the orderly and attractive
grouping at appropriate locations of retail stores, shops, offices and service
establishments serving the daily needs of the surrounding local community area and,
in appropriate situations, the inclusion of residential apartments principally for
childless families. The size and location of such districts shall be based upon
evidence of justifiable community need, of adequate customer potential, of
satisfactory relationship to the circulation system and other related facilities, and of
potential contribution to the economic welfare of the community.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. Any use permitted by right in the B-1 District.
2. The following are subject to approval by the Plan Commission of building,
site and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000).
a. Retail stores and shops.
b. Community and customer service establishments such as, but not
limited to the following:
i. Business, professional, public service, banking, and savings
and loan offices.
ii. Restaurants, taverns, theaters, bowling alleys, nightclubs and
other indoor, commercial entertainment facilities.
iii. Laundromats, coin operated dry cleaning establishments, and
laundry or dry cleaning pick-up stations.
iv. Dental and medical clinics.
v. Lodges and private clubs.
c. Commercial studios, display galleries, and vocational training schools.
d. Public utility offices and installations.
e. Rental apartments intended for childless couples, single individuals or
other small family combinations, as a secondary use of a commercial
building on a non-ground level.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 22
1. The following are subject to approval by the Plan Commission of building,
site and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000).
a. Garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation
of the business.
b. Off-street parking and loading areas. (See Section 20.24.000).
c. Residential quarters for the owner, proprietor, commercial tenant,
employee, or caretaker located in the same building as the business.
d. Any other structures or uses normally accessory to the principal uses
permitted.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant.
1. Any conditional use permitted in the B-1 District.
2. Any use permitted by right in the B-3 District.
3. Animal hospitals.
4. Appliance and small machinery repair establishments.
5. Private commercial outdoor recreational facilities. (See Section 20.25.000).
6. Experimental, testing and research laboratories.
7. Outdoor eating or drink facilities.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 23
20.34.150 B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for the orderly and attractive
grouping at appropriate locations of commercial activities of the more general retail
and wholesale nature, and of office and service facilities serving a larger community
trade area. The size and location of such districts shall be based upon relationship to
the total community need and economy. Generally, no such district should be less
than 100,000 square feet in area.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. Any use as permitted by right in the B-2 District, except for rental apartments
as a secondary use.
2. The following are subject to approval by the Plan Commission of building site
and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000).
a. General merchandising and wholesale establishments.
b. Printing and publishing houses and related activities.
c. Service and sales establishments for automobiles, including body repair
shops and used car lots but not including the storage of junked or
wrecked automobiles, and parts.
d. Transportation terminals, not including trucking.
e. Commercial parking facilities.
f. Hotels and motels.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Any accessory use as permitted in the B-2 District.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant.
1. Any conditional use permitted in the B-2 District.
2. Lumber and building supply yards.
3. Experimental, testing and research laboratories.
4. General warehousing, including boat storage.
20.34.160 B-4 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 24
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide appropriate regulations to
insure the compatibility of the diverse uses typical of the “downtown” area and its
relationship to the marina and lakefront activities without inhibiting the potential for
maximum development of commercial, cultural, entertainment, apartment and other
urban activities which contribute to its role as the “heart” of the City.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. Any use as permitted by right in the B-3 Central Business District except as
set forth in B. 2. c. and B. 2. d.
2. The following are subject to approval by the Plan Commission of building site
and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000).
a. Rental apartments intended for childless couples, single individuals or
other small family combinations, as a secondary use of a commercial
building on a non-ground floor level.
b. Apartment buildings intended for childless couples, single individuals
or other small family combinations, except that ground floor apartment
use shall not be permitted where the Plan Commission determines that
such non-commercial use would be in conflict with the continuity of
business frontage as proposed in the downtown portion of the City’s
General Plan.
c. Any use as permitted by right in the OIP District.
d. Any use as permitted by right in the PUL District.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Any use as permitted in the B-3 District.
2. Any accessory use as permitted in the PUL District.
3. Any other structures or uses normally accessory to a permitted principal use.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant.
1. Gasoline service stations.
2. Appliance and small machinery repair establishments.
3. Experimental, testing and research laboratories.
4. Public outdoor recreation.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 25
5. Any use permitted as a conditional grant in the PUL District.
6. Outdoor eating or drinking facilities.
7. Boat sales and service operations without outside storage of merchandise and
equipment.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 26
20.34.170 BP BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT.
A. Statement of Intent This district is intended to provide for the development of an
attractive and aesthetically mixed grouping of office and limited retail and retail
services, and light industrial uses, in a highly landscaped setting free of outside
storage or display, where the setting is highly visible to one or more main traffic
arteries, and all of the uses seek or require such exposure and all are willing to adhere
to a higher standard of architectural and grounds appearance to maximize the benefit
of such visibility.
B. General Requirements.
1. Buildings shall not exceed 40,000 square feet of gross floor area; except that
following a public hearing the Plan Commission may approve larger buildings
based on their location within the Business Park and surrounding area.
2. Development shall be designed and sized in such a manner that is
architecturally, aesthetically and operationally harmonious with surrounding
development.
3. All business, servicing, processing or storage, except for off-street parking,
shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.\
4. All utilities shall be underground.
5. Vehicular circulation within Business Park development shall be oriented to
internal circulation drives with limited access provided to city streets.
6. No external nuisance which is offensive by reason of odors, lighting, smoke,
fumes, dust, vibrations, noise, pollution or which is hazardous by reason of
excessive danger of fire or explosion shall be permitted.
7. Project elements, such as architecture, landscaping, lighting, signage, access,
circulation, parking and utilities shall be designed and constructed in a
coordinated manner. In approving or disapproving proposed locations for
uses in this district, the Plan Commission shall give due consideration to the
character of the use and its suitability in relationship to other nearby uses, and
shall also base its decision on such evidence as may be presented to the Plan
Commission regarding traffic generation, heavy vehicular traffic, soil
limitations, emission of noise, smoke, dust or dirt, odorous or noxious gases
attributed to the proposed use.
8. Site development shall be approved by the Design Review Board or Plan
Commission in accordance with Section 20.31.000 of the City of Port
Washington Zoning Code.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 27
C. General Restrictions.
1. No continuous or intermittent noise from operations greater than the volume
and range of noise emanating from vehicular traffic or its equivalent in noise
shall be detectable at the boundary line of any residential district.
2. No toxic matter, noxious matter, smoke or gas, and no odorous or particulate
matter detectable beyond the lot lines shall be emitted.
3. No vibrations shall be detectable beyond the lot lines.
4. No glare or heat shall be detectable beyond the lot lines.
5. No merchandise shall be handled for sale or service rendered on the premises
except that which is incidental or accessory to the principal permissible use of
the premises.
D. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in this district if the Plan
Commission determines they are not detrimental to the surrounding area and are in
compliance with the general restrictions stated above.
1. Professional offices and services including, but not limited to, accounting,
architectural,chiropractic, dental, medical, engineering and legal services.
2. Business offices and services including, but not limited to, advertising agency,
management consulting, manufacturing representatives, public relations,
stenographic, travel agency, and duplicating services.
3. Financial, insurance and real estate offices and services including, but not
limited to, financial institutions, security brokers, holding and investments,
insurance agency, insurance carriers, electronic data processing and
information technology.
4. Restaurants (excluding fast food and drive-thru restaurants), motels and
hotels.
5. Retail and retail service shops located on the street level of office buildings,
up to 5,000 square feet per building in the aggregate or 50% of the first floor
area, whichever is less. No individual retail space shall be larger than 2,000
square feet.
6. Any similar use meeting all the requirements of this District.
E. Permitted Accessory Uses.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 28
1. Garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of the
business or for occupants of the premises.
2. Signage subject to Section 20.29.000 of the City of Port Washington Zoning
Code.
3. Governmental and public services.
F. Prohibited Uses.
1. Automobile wrecking yards, junk yards, or similar uses.
2. Excavating, grading, trucking and similar construction yards.
3. Drop forges, foundries, grain elevators, refineries, tank farms, tanneries and
similar uses.
4. Dairies, cheese factories, stockyards and rendering plants.
5. Fertilizer storage and packaging.
6. Landscape contractors or landscape services.
7. Uses involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products
which decompose by detonation.
8. Mini-warehouses.
9. New and used car and truck sales.
10. Drive-thru and fast food restaurants.
11. Waste disposal, dumping, incineration, hazardous waste storage and similar
uses.
12. All types of residential uses.
G. Conditional Uses.
1. Light industrial uses involving the manufacture and fabrication of goods
within the confines of a building, and in which any noise, vibration, heat,
flash or odor produced in the manufacturing process is confined within the
building.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 29
2. Wholesale and distribution facilities (excluding mini-warehouses) for the
storage of non-hazardous goods and materials, where such goods or materials
are stored inside a building.
3. Research and development.
4. Printing and publication.
5. Warehousing.
6. Public and/or private utility, transmission and distribution lines, and other
accessories, provided that when the utility proposes a main inter-city
transmission facility, the utilities shall give notice to the Plan Commission of
such intention and of the date of any hearing before the Public Service
Commission, and, before actual construction, shall file with the Plan
Commission a map description of the route of any transmission line.
H. Lot Size. The minimum lot size in the BP Business Park District is 40,000 square
feet.
I. Building Floor To Lot Area Ratio. The floor to lot area ratio of the building(s) shall
not exceed forty percent (40%) of the lot area.
J. Building Height. The maximum height of principal structures shall not exceed thirtyfive
feet (35ft) unless otherwise allowed as part of a planned development agreement
and overlay zoning pursuant to Section 20.21.000 of the City of Port Washington
Zoning Code. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed thirty
feet (30ft).
K. Minimum Building Setback. All structures within the BP Business Park District shall
be set back forty feet (40ft) from the ultimate road right-of-way.
L. Minimum Building and Parking Offset. Building or structure offsets shall be a
minimum of twenty-five feet (25ft) from a side or rear lot line, except where the
property is adjacent to an existing or proposed residential development, in which case
the minimum offset shall be one hundred feet (100ft.).
M. Buffer Area Landscaping. Thirty feet (30ft) of all offsets immediately adjacent to
residential zoning districts shall be landscaped in the following manner: 1.) With a
minimum of 120 points for every 100 lineal feet of side or rear lot line. 2.)
Decorative fencing may be incorporated into, but not replace, the landscape buffer.
When decorative fencing is incorporated into the landscape buffer, the total number
of required buffer area points may be reduced by 15 points for every 50 lineal feet of
fencing. Said buffer area landscaping shall be in addition to that required under the
landscape ordinance (Section 20.31.050 of the Zoning Code).
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 30
N. Lot Coverage and Open Space Ratio. A maximum of 70% of each lot shall contain
buildings, structures and pavement. A minimum of 30% of each lot shall be open
space.
O. Lot Width. The minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
P. Off-street Parking. All parking hall be in accordance with applicable regulations set
forth in Section 20.24.000 of the Zoning Code.
Q. Minimum Parking and Driveway Offset. No driveway shall be located closer than
twenty feet (20ft) from a side or rear lot line unless specifically waived by the Plan
Commission, except where property is adjacent to an existing or proposed
residential property no parking space or access driveway shall be closer than one
hundred feet (100ft).
R. Minimum Parking Setback. No driveway (excluding the portion of driveway
required for road access) or parking area shall be located closer than twenty-five feet
(25ft) to the ultimate road right-of-way.
S. Landscaping. All premises shall, within one year after the date of receiving an
occupancy permit, be planted with sod or seeded (except for parking areas) and
landscaped throughout pursuant to Section 20.31.000 and Section 34.170M of the
City of Port Washington Zoning Code.
T. Loading Docks. Loading docks shall generally not face a dedicated or reserved
public street. Loading docks on property adjacent to a residential property shall not face the
residential property.
U. Exterior Mechanical Equipment. All exterior equipment shall be located, screened
and painted to minimize visibility from streets and adjacent sites.
V. Storage. Garbage and refuse containers shall be screened from view from streets and
adjacent sites.
W. Minimum Design Standards. All office or industrial buildings constructed in the BP
Business Park District shall be of tilt-up construction, split-face block or brick.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 31
20.34.180 I-1 EXISTING INDUSTRIAL.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended for those established manufacturing and
wholesale areas within the City where industrial uses, often in direct proximity to
residential uses, have developed on sites too small to provide for the area
requirements of the I-2 District.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. The following are subject to approval by the Plan Commission of building,
site and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000).
a. Manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, and processing plants and
similar type industrial operations but not including any of the
following:
i. Manufacture of cement, lime, gypsum, plaster of paris, acid,
explosives, fertilizers, or glue.
ii. Rendering plants, refineries, or tanneries.
iii. Stockyards or slaughter houses.
iv. Junk or salvage yards.
v. Storage of explosives except as incidental to a permitted use
and storage of gasoline or petroleum in excess of 50,000
gallons.
vi. Extractive operations except as permitted by Section
20.26.000.
vii. Any similar use which in the opinion of the Plan Commission
would be hazardous, noxious or offensive to the surrounding
area.
b. Transportation terminals, including trucking.
c. General warehousing.
d. Experimental, testing and research laboratories.
e. Lumber and building supply yards.
f. Dog parks.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 32
g. Public utility offices, installations, buildings and structures including
municipal water towers, pump houses, water and wastewater treatment
plants, and related public utility facilities and uses.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Any accessory use as permitted in the I-2 District.
2. The following are subject to the approval by the Plan Commission of the
building, site and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000).
a. Office, storage, power supply and other such uses normally auxiliary
to the permitted principal use.
b. Off-street parking, loading and service facilities. (See Section
20.24.000).
c. Residential quarters for the owner, resident operator, guard or
caretaker.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant.
1. Automobile body repair shops, including the storage of junked or wrecked
automobiles and parts.
2. Animal hospitals, kennels, and laboratories using animal products.
3. Junk or salvage yards.
4. Storage of gasoline or petroleum in excess of 50,000 gallons.
5. Ready-mix concrete plants.
6. Extractive operations.
7. Public utility generating and transmission facilities and offices.
8. Public and recreational facilities such as indoor or outdoor ice/roller rinks,
archery ranges, go-kart tracks, or any such use as determined (or classified) by
the Plan Commission.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 33
20.34.190 I-2 INDUSTRIAL PARK.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for the orderly and attractive
grouping in appropriately landscaped grounds of manufacturing or industrial
operations which, on the basis of actual physical and operational characteristics,
would not be detrimental to the surrounding area or to the community as a whole by
reason of noise, dust, smoke, odor, traffic, physical appearance or other similar
factors; and to establish such regulatory controls as will reasonably insure
compatibility with the surrounding area in this respect. No such district should
normally be less than 25 acres in area.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
Any use as permitted in the I-1 District.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Any accessory use as permitted in the I-1 District except that no residential
quarters shall be permitted.
2. Any other structures or uses normally accessory to the principal use permitted.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant.
Any use as permitted by Conditional Grant in the I-1 District.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 34
20.34.200 AG AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to permit farming operations on lands
annexed to the City for eventual development but where such development is not yet
proceeding. The potential nuisance factors of the farming operation to adjacent urban
development can be tolerated because of the temporary nature of farm use.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. Agricultural, including but not limited to crop farming, dairying, horticulture,
including commercial greenhouses, livestock and poultry raising.
2. Public utility transmission and distribution lines, poles, and other related
accessories provided that when a utility proposes a main intercity transmission
facility, they shall give notice to the Plan Commission of such intention and of
the date of hearing before the Public Service Commission, and before
beginning construction of a specific route shall file with the Plan Commission
mapped description of the route of such transmission line.
3. Dog parks.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Residences for owners or farm laborers actually employed full time in the
principal use. New such structures shall at least conform to the RS-3
standards for lot area and building location, subject to the Plan Commission
approval as to conformance with possible future lot and street patterns for the
property.
2. Uses normally accessory to residences as regulated in the RS-3 District.
3. One roadside stand per farm for the sale only of products raised on the
premises operated by the resident farmer and subject to the following.
a. Off-street parking for a minimum of 4 vehicles shall be
provided.
b. No stand shall be permitted in a location where it would create
a traffic hazard or nuisance; and where permitted, driveways
shall be so located as to minimize possible interference with
normal flow of highway traffic.
c. No such stand shall be closer than 15 feet to the existing street
line or closer than 20 feet to any other lot line.
d. Signs shall conform to the B-1 District regulations under
Section 20.29.000.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 35
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Use Grant.
1. Boarding and riding stables for horses.
2. Cemeteries.
3. Churches.
4. Dog Kennels.
5. Fire Stations.
6. Gas or electric transmission installations.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 36
20.34.210 SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING.
A. Statutory Authorization. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in
sections 62.23, 62.231, 87.30 and 144.26, Wis. Stats.
B. Finding of Fact and Purpose. Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and
pollution of the navigable waters in the City of Port Washington would adversely
affect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax
base. The Legislature of Wisconsin has thus delegated responsibility to the City to:
1. Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
2. Maintain the storm and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands;
3. Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter or store
sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise
drain into navigable waters;
4. Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and wildlife by preserving
wet-lands and other aquatic habitat;
5. Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and
6. Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland
cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth
moving activities.
C. General Provisions.
1. Compliance. The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within the
shoreland area of the City shall be in full compliance with the terms of this
ordinance and other applicable local, state or federal regulations. All permitted
development shall require the issuance of building and site plan approvals unless
otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this ordinance.
2. Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated. Unless specifically exempted by
law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this
ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply
if section 13.48(13), Wis. Stats. applies. The construction, reconstruction,
maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation are exempt when section 30.12(4) (a), Wis. Stats.
applies.
3. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
a. This ordinance supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under sections 61.35, 62.23 or 87.30, Wis. Stats. which
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 37
relate to floodplains and shoreland-wetlands, except that where another
municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than this ordinance, that
ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater
restrictions, but not otherwise.
b. This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this ordinance
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
4. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the City and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of this
ordinance is required by a standard in chapter NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, and
where the ordinance provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light
of the chapter NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this
ordinance or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this
ordinance.
5. Severability. Should a court of competent jurisdiction declare any portion of this
ordinance invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be
affected?
6. Annexed Areas. The Ozaukee County shoreland zoning provisions remain in
effect for all areas annexed by the City after May 7, 1982 unless any of the
changes as allowed by s. 59.692(7)(a)(1-3), Stats. occurs. These annexed lands are
described on the City’s official zoning map. The Ozaukee County shoreland
zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering
this section and are on file in the office of the Director of Planning and
Development. All lands annexed after the date of adoption of this ordinance shall
be subject to the provisions herein. These lands are also described on the City’s
official zoning map.
D. Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District. The following maps are hereby adopted and
made part of this ordinance and are on file in the office of the City Clerk and Director
of Planning and Development:
1. Wisconsin Wetland Inventory maps stamped "FINAL" on September 12, 1989.
2. Floodplain zoning maps titled and dated October 8, 1991.
3. United States Geological Survey maps dated 1989.
4. Zoning map titled Zoning District Map and dated 2002.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 38
E. District Boundaries. The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the
City that are five (5) acres or more and are shown on the final Wetland Inventory Map
that has been adopted and made a part of this ordinance and which are:
1. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable
lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in City shall be presumed to
be navigable if they are shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle
maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and
made a part of this ordinance.
2. Within three hundred (300) feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable
rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is
greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are
designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States
Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been
incorporated by reference and made a part of this ordinance. Floodplain zoning
maps adopted in Section 20.34.210 D.2. shall be used to determine the extent of
floodplain areas.
3. Determinations and Discrepancies.
a. Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark location
shall initially be made by the Director of Planning and Development.
When questions arise, the Director of Planning and Development shall
contact the appropriate district office of the Department of Natural
Resources for a final determination of navigability or ordinary high-water
mark.
b. When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland
district boundary shown on the official zoning maps and actual field
conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the Director of Planning and
Development shall contact the appropriate district office of the
Department to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as
mapped is in error. If Department staff concur with the City that a
particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the City shall have
the authority to immediately grant or deny building and site plan
approvals in accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct
zoning district. In order to correct wetland-mapping errors or
acknowledge exempted wetlands designated in Sections 20.34.210E.4. or
20.34.210E.5, the Director of Planning and Development shall be
responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period.
4. Filled Wetlands. Wetlands that are filled prior to the date on which the City
received final wetland inventory maps, in a manner that affects their wetland
characteristics to the extent that the area can no longer be defined as wetland, are
not subject to this ordinance.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 39
5. Wetlands Landward of a Bulkhead Line. Wetlands located between the original
ordinary high water mark and a bulkhead line established prior to May 7, 1982
under s. 30.11, Stats. are not subject to this ordinance.
F. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of chapters
30 and 31, Wis. Stats. and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if
applicable:
1. Activities and uses that do not require the issuance of building and site plan
approvals, provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
a. Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and boating;
b. The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice,
berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the
natural reproduction of such crops;
c. The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and
harvesting of timber;
d. The pasturing of livestock;
e. The cultivation of agricultural crops; and
f. The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
2. Uses which do not require the issuance of building and site plan approvals and
which may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided
below:
a. The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level
stabilization measures that are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or
dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of
silvicultural activities if not corrected;
b. The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations
necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries;
c. The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore
pre-existing levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling
necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is otherwise
permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where
possible;
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 40
d. The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock,
including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or
maintenance;
e. The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways, observation
decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and
filling necessary for such construction or maintenance;
f. The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of
draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district provided that
such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize
adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed
in Section 20.34.210J.3. of this ordinance; and
g. The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing
highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary
for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction.
3. Uses that are allowed upon the issuance of a permit and which may include
wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
a. The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the
continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility
and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under
Section 20.34.210F. of this ordinance, provided that:
i. The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland;
ii. The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts
Upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in Section
20.34.210J.3. of this ordinance;
iii. The road is designed and constructed with the minimum
cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended use;
iii. Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area
of the roadbed only; and
iv. Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or
Maintenance of the road.
b. The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings provided
that:
i. The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 41
shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl,
minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals;
ii. The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland;
iii. The building does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in
floor area; and
iv. Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural
support for the building is allowed.
c. The establishment and development of public and private parks and
recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific
areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat
improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and
public boat launching ramps, provided that:
i. Any private development allowed under this paragraph shall be
used exclusively for the permitted purpose;
ii. Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development
of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the
construction of park shelters or similar structures are allowed;
iii. The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the
uses permitted under this paragraph are allowed only where such
construction and maintenance meets the criteria in Section
20.34.210F.3.a. of this ordinance; and
iv. Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal f
arms and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving
wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values.
d. The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission
lines, water and gas distribution lines and sewage collection lines and
related facilities and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines
provided that:
i. The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad lines
cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
ii. Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction
or
maintenance is allowed; and
iii. Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 42
minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the
wetland listed in Section 20.34.210J.3. of this ordinance.
G. Prohibited Uses.
1. Any use not listed in Section 20.34.210F.of this ordinance is prohibited, unless the
wet-land or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this
ordinance in accordance with Sections 20.34.210J.1. - 6. of this ordinance.
2. The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or placement of a
boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high-water mark of any
navigable waters are prohibited.
H. Nonconforming Structures and Uses. The lawful use of a building, structure or
property which existed at the time this ordinance, or an applicable amendment to this
ordinance, took effect and which is not in conformity with the provisions of the
ordinance, including the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may be
continued, subject to the following conditions:
1. The shoreland-wetland provisions of this ordinance authorized by s. 62.231, Wis.
Stats. shall not limit the repair, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling or
expansion of a nonconforming structure in existence on the effective date of the
shoreland-wetland provisions, or of any environmental control facility in existence
on May 7, 1982 related to such a structure. All other modifications to
nonconforming structures are subject to s. 62.23(7) (h), Wis. Stats. which limits
total lifetime structural repairs and alterations to 50% of current fair market value.
2. If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, any future use of the building,
tructure or property shall conform to this ordinance.
3. Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a
structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment
of this ordinance adopted under sections 61.351 or 62.231, Wis. Stats. may be
continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of the
ordinance. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended.
4. The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are located below
the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the
requirements of section 30.121, Wis. Stats.
5. Uses that are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as
nonconforming uses
I. Administrative Provisions.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 43
1. Zoning Administrator. The Director of Building Inspections is appointed zoning
administrator for the purpose of administering and enforcing this ordinance. The
zoning administrator shall have the following duties and powers:
a. Advise applicants as to the provisions of the ordinance and assist them
in preparing permit applications and appeal forms.
b. Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for
compliance with this ordinance.
c. Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved
and other official actions.
d. Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8 a.m.
and 6 p.m. for the purposes of performing these duties.
e. Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits,
appeals for a map or text interpretation, and map or test amendments
within 10 days after they are granted or denied, to the appropriate
district office of the Department.
f. Investigate and report violations of this ordinance to the appropriate
municipal planning agency and the district attorney, corporation
counsel and municipal attorney.
2. Building and Site Plan Approvals; When Required. Unless another section of
This ordinance specifically exempts certain types of development from this
requirement, building and site plan approvals shall be obtained from the Director
of Building Inspection before any new development, as defined in Section
20.34.210L.6. of this ordinance, or any change in the use of an existing building
or structure is initiated.
3. Application. An application for building and site plan approval shall be made to
the Director of Building Inspections upon forms furnished by the municipality,
and shall include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations,
the following information:
a. Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, property owner and
contractor, where applicable.
b. Legal description of the property and a general description of the proposed
use or development.
c. Whether or not a private water supply or sewage system is to be installed.
4. Site Development Plan. A site development plan shall be submitted as a part of
the permit application and shall contain the following information drawn to scale:
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 44
a. Dimensions and area of the lot;
b. Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and
center line of all abutting streets or highways;
c. Description of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private
water supply systems;
d. Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting navigable
waterways;
e. Boundaries of all wetlands;
f. Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative
cover;
g. Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined
from floodplain zoning maps;
h. Location of existing or future access roads; and
i. Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration.
5. Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this ordinance shall expire
one (1) year from the date of issuance.
6. Certificate of Compliance. Except where no building and site plan approvals or
conditional use permits are required, no land shall be occupied or used, and no
building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or
replaced shall be occupied, until a certificate of compliance is issued by the
Director of Building Inspection subject to the following provisions:
a. The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or
part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, conform to the provisions of
this ordinance.
b. Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for
building and site plan approvals or a conditional use permit.
c. The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten (10) days after
notification of the completion of the work specified in the building and
site plan approvals or conditional use permit, providing the building or
premises and proposed use thereof conform to all the provisions of this
ordinance.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 45
d. The Director of Building Inspection may issue a temporary certificate of
compliance for a building, premises or part thereof pursuant to rules and
regulations established by the Common Council.
e. Upon written request from the owner, the Director of Building Inspection
shall issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises
existing at the time of ordinance adoption, certifying after inspection, the
extent and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or
not such use conforms to the provisions of this ordinance.
7. Conditional use permits. Any use listed as a conditional use in this ordinance shall
be permitted only after an application has been submitted to the Director of
Planning and Development and a conditional use permit has been granted by the
Common Council upon recommendation of the Plan Commission, following the
procedures in Sections 20.34.210 I.13. and 14. of this ordinance.
a. Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the
standards applicable to the conditional uses designated in Section
20.34.210F.3. of this ordinance, the Plan Commission may recommend
and the Common Council shall attach such conditions to a conditional use
permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this ordinance, as are
necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance as listed in Section
20.34.210B. Such conditions may include specifications for, without
limitation because of specific enumeration: type of shore cover; erosion
controls; increased setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water supply
facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation;
operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks,
parking areas and signs; and type of construction. To secure information
upon which the Plan Commission may base its recommendation and the
Common Council may base its determination, the Plan Commission or
Common Council may require an applicant to furnish, in addition to the
information required for building and site plan approvals, other pertinent
information that is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent
with the purpose of this ordinance.
8. Fees. The municipal governing body may, by resolution, adopt fees for the
following:
a. Building and site plan approvals.
b. Certificates of compliance.
c. Public hearings.
d. Legal notice publications.
e. Conditional use permits.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 46
f. Rezoning petitions.
9. Recording. Where building and site plans or conditional use permits are approved,
the Director of Planning and Development shall make an appropriate record of the
land use and structures permitted.
10. Revocation. Where the conditions of approved building and site plans or
conditional use permits are violated, the Common Council upon recommendation
of the Plan Commission shall revoke the permit.
11. Board of Appeals. The city mayor shall appoint a Zoning Board of Appeals under
section 62.23(7) (e), Wis. Stats., consisting of five members subject to
confirmation by the municipal governing body. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business as required by section 62.23(7) (e)
3., Wis. Stats. The Zoning Board of Appeals:
a. Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
b. May authorize upon appeal a variance from the dimensional standards of
this ordinance where an applicant convincingly demonstrates:
i. That literal enforcement of the terms of the ordinance will
result in unnecessary hardship for the applicant.
ii. That the hardship is due to special conditions unique to the
property; and is not self-created or based solely on economic
gain or loss;
iii. That such variance is not contrary to the public interest as
expressed by the purpose of this ordinance and;
iv. That such variance will not grant or increase any use of
property which is prohibited in the zoning district.
12. Appeals to the Board. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
community affected by any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
zoning administrator or other administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken
within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board by filing with the
official whose decision is in question, and with the Board of Appeals, a notice of
appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The zoning administrator or other
official whose decision is in question shall transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record on the matter appealed.
13. Public Hearings.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 47
a. Before making a decision on an application for a conditional use permit
the Common Council shall, and before making a decision on an appeal the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall, within a reasonable period of time, hold a
public hearing. The Common Council and Board shall give public notice
of the hearing by publishing a Class 2 notice under ch. 985, Stats.,
specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come
before the Common Council or the Board. At the public hearing, any
party may present testimony in person, by agent or by attorney.
b. A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the
appropriate district office of the Department at least 10 days prior to all
public hearings on issues involving shoreland-wetland zoning.
14. Decisions.
a. The final disposition of an application for a conditional use permit before
the Common Council or an appeal before the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be in the form of a written decision, made within a reasonable time
after the public hearing and signed by the Common Council or Board
chairperson. Such decision shall state the specific facts which are the
basis of the Common Council’s or Board’s determination, and in the case
of an appeal shall either affirm, reverse, or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, or dismiss the
appeal for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution.
b. A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the
appropriate district office of the Department within 10 days after the
decision is issued.
J. Amending Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Regulations. The City of Port Washington may
alter, supplement or change the district boundaries and the regulations contained in this
ordinance in accordance with the requirements of section 62.23(7) (d) 2., Wis. Stats.
and NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code.
1. A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the
appropriate district office of the Department within five (5) days of the submission
of the proposed amendment to the office of the Director of Planning and
Development;
2. All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning
regulations shall be referred to the Director of Planning and Development, and a
public hearing shall be held after publication of a Class 2 public notice as required
by section 62.23(7) (d) 2., Wis. Stats. The appropriate district office of the
Department shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten
(10) days prior to such hearing.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 48
3. In order to insure that this ordinance will remain consistent with the shoreland
protection objectives of section 144.26, Wis. Stats. the City may not rezone a
wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the
proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the
following wetland functions:
a. Storm and flood water storage capacity;
b. Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to
a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or
the flow of groundwater through a wetland;
c. Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic
compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
d. Shoreline protection against erosion;
e. Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
f. Wildlife habitat; or
g. Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including scarce
wetland types and habitat of endangered species.
4. Where the district office of the Department determines that a proposed rezoning
may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in Section
20.34.210J.3. of this ordinance, the Department shall so notify the City of its
determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed
amendment.
5. The appropriate district office of the Department shall be provided with:
a. A copy of the recommendation and report, if any, by the Director of
Planning and Development on a proposed text or map amendment, within
ten (10) days after the submission of those recommendations to the
Common Council.
b. Written notice of the action on the proposed text or map amendment
within ten (10) days after the action is taken.
6. If the Department notifies the City in writing that a proposed amendment may have
a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in Section 20.34.210J.3.
of this ordinance, that proposed amendment, if approved by the City, shall not
become effective until more than thirty (30) days have elapsed since written notice
of the municipal approval was mailed to the Department, as required by Section
20.34.210J.5.b. of this ordinance. If within the thirty (30) day period, the
Department notifies the City that the Department intends to adopt a superseding
shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the City of Port Washington as provided
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 49
by sections 62.231(6) and 61.351(6), Wis. Stats. the proposed amendment shall not
become effective until the ordinance adoption procedure under section 62.231(6)
or 61.351(6), Wis. Stats., is completed or otherwise terminated.
K. Enforcement and Penalties. Any development, building or structure or accessory
building or structure constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced or any
use or accessory use established after the effective date of this ordinance in violation of
the provisions of this ordinance, by any person, firm, association, corporation
(including building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed a violation. The
Building Inspector shall refer violations to the City Attorney who shall prosecute such
violations. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of
not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 per offense, together with the taxable
costs of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate
offense. Every violation of this ordinance is a public nuisance and the creation thereof
may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the
municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to section 87.30(2), Wis. Stats.
L. Definitions. For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, the terms or
words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the present tense
include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number; words in
the plural number include the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory, not
permissive. All distances unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally.
1. "Accessory structure or use" means a detached subordinate structure or a use which
is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, the principal
structure or use to which it is related and which is located on the same lot as that of
the principal structure or use.
2. "Boathouse" as defined in Wisconsin Statutes Section 30.121(1), means a
permanent structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and
includes all structures that are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls or any
combination of structural parts.
3. "Class 2 public notice" means publication of a public hearing notice under
Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 985, in a newspaper of circulation in the affected area.
Publication is required on two consecutive weeks, the last at least seven (7) days
prior to the hearing.
4. "Conditional use" means a use which is permitted by this ordinance provided that
certain conditions specified in the ordinance are met and that a permit is granted by
the zoning board of appeals or, where appropriate, the municipal governing body.
5. "Department" means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
6. "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 50
accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial alterations to
buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of buildings or
structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of earthen materials.
7. "Drainage system" means one or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar
devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of
discharge.
8. "Environmental control facility" means any facility, temporary or permanent,
which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention,
measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste
and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed
principally to supplement or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting
or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be
supplemented or replaced by other pollution control facilities.
9. "Fixed houseboat" as defined in Wisconsin Statutes Section 30.121(1), means a
structure not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary highwater
mark of a navigable waterway and is retained in place either by cables to the
shoreline or by anchors or spud poles attached to the bed of the waterway.
10. "Navigable waters" means Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes
within Wisconsin, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters
within the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion of
boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state. Under
Wisconsin Statutes Section 144.26(2)(d), not withstanding any other provision of
law or administrative rule promulgated there under, shoreland ordinances required
under Wisconsin Statutes Sections 61.351 or 62.221, and Chapter NR 117,
Wisconsin Administration Code, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage
ditches if:
a. Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river;
b. Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not
navigable streams before ditching. Wisconsin's Supreme Court has
declared navigable bodies of water that have a bed differentiated from
adjacent uplands and levels or flow sufficient to support navigation by a
recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis
[Muench v. Public Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492 (1952) and
DeGaynor and Co., Inc., v. Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis. 2d
936 (1975)]. For example, a stream, which is navigable by skiff or canoe
during normal spring high water, is navigable, in fact, under the laws of
this state though it may be dry during other seasons.
11. “Ordinary high-water mark" means the point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 51
such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
12. “Planning agency” means the municipal plan commission created under section
62.23(1), Wis. Stats., a board of public land commissioners or a committee of the
municipality’s governing body which acts on matters pertaining to planning and
zoning.
13. “Shorelands" means lands within the following distances from the ordinary highwater
mark of navigable waters; one thousand (1,000) feet from a lake, pond or
flowage; and three hundred feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of
the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
14. "Shoreland-wetland district" means the zoning district, created in this shorelandwetland
zoning chapter, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands
on the wetlands inventory maps that have been adopted and made a part of this
ordinance.
15. "Unnecessary hardship" means that circumstance where special conditions, which
were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with
restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage height or density unnecessarily
burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this chapter.
16. "Variance" means an authorization granted by the zoning board of appeals to
construct or alter a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the
dimensional standards of this ordinance.
17. "Wetlands" means those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface
long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils
indicative of wet conditions.
18. "Wetland alteration" means any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching,
tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam
construction in a wetland area.
20.34.215 SHORELAND ZONING FOR CERTAIN ANNEXED LANDS
A. Statutory Authorization. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in
sections 62.23 and 62.233, Wis. Stats.
B. Findings of Fact and Purpose. Uncontrolled use of shorelands and pollution of the
navigable waters of the City would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience,
and general welfare and impair the tax base. The Wisconsin legislature has delegated
responsibility to all municipalities to:
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 52
1. Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
2. Limit certain land use activities detrimental to shorelands; and
3. Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by controlling the location of structures in
shoreland areas and restricting the removal of natural shoreland vegetation.
C. General Provisions.
1. Compliance. The use of shorelands within the shoreland area of the City shall be in
full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable local, state or federal
regulations. All permitted development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit unless
otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this ordinance.
2. Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated. Unless specifically exempted by law,
all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with this ordinance and obtain
all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if section 13.48(13), Wis. Stats.,
applies.
3. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
a. This ordinance supersedes all the provisions of any other applicable municipal
ordinance except that where another municipal ordinance is more restrictive than this
ordinance, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater
restrictions, but not otherwise.
b. This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed
restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this ordinance imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
4. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the
City and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the
Wisconsin Statutes or Wisconsin Constitution.
5. Severability. Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall
not be affected.
D. Applicability. These Shoreland Zoning District regulations apply only to a shoreland
that was annexed by the City after May 7, 1982, and that prior to annexation was subject to a
county shoreland zoning ordinance under section 59.692, Wis. Stats.
E. Definitions. The following terms used in this section have the meanings indicated:
1. “Principal building” means the main building or structure on a single lot or parcel of
land and includes any attached garage or attached porch.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 53
2. “Shorelands” has the meaning given in section 59.692(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
3. “Shoreland setback area” has the meaning given in section 59.692(1)(bn), Wis. Stats.
F. District Boundaries. The Shoreland District areas regulated by this ordinance shall
include all the lands (referred to herein as shorelands) in the City of Port Washington that
are:
1. Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary highwater mark of navigable lakes, ponds or
flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed in
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources Surface Water Data viewer available on the
DNR website, or are shown on United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other
zoning base maps.
2. Within 300 feet of the ordinary highwater mark of navigable rivers or streams, or to
the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall
be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as continuous waterways or intermittent
waterways on United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps. Flood hazard boundary
maps, flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary-floodway maps, county soil survey maps or
other existing county floodplain zoning maps shall be used to delineate floodplain areas.
3. Determinations of navigability and ordinary highwater mark location shall initially be
made by the Zoning Administrator. When questions arise, the Zoning Administrator shall
contact the appropriate district office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for
a final determination of navigability or ordinary highwater mark.
4. Pursuant to section 62.233, Wis. Stats., the Shoreland Zoning District does not
include lands adjacent to an artificially constructed drainage ditch, pond, or retention basin if
the drainage ditch, pond or retention basin is not hydrologically connected to a natural
navigable water body.
G. Effect of Existing Land Division, Sanitary, Zoning and Other Regulations. The lands
within the Shoreland Zoning District are subject to all applicable provisions of the City’s
Municipal Code. Where the provisions of this ordinance are more restrictive than other
regulations in the Municipal Code, the provisions of this ordinance shall apply.
H. Setbacks from the Water.
1. Principal Building Setbacks.
a. All principal buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from the ordinary high-water
mark.
b. Adjustment of Shore Yards. A setback less than that required by subsection H.1.a.
may be allowed if all of the following apply:
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 54
i. The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel of land that is
immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel of land containing a principal building;
and
ii. The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance equal to the average
setback of the principal building on the adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water
mark, whichever distance is greater.
I. Vegetative Buffer Zone. Pursuant to section 62.233, Wis. Stats., a landowner must
maintain a vegetative buffer zone, as follows:
1. A person who owns shoreland property that contains vegetation must maintain that
vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone along the entire shoreline of the property and
extending 35 feet inland from the ordinary high-water mark of the navigable water, except as
provided in subsection 2.
2. If the vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone contains invasive species or dead or
diseased vegetation, the owner of the shoreland property may remove the vegetation, except
that if the owner removes all of the vegetation in the vegetative buffer zone, the owner shall
establish a vegetative buffer zone with new vegetation.
3. A person who is required to maintain or establish a vegetative buffer zone under
subsection 1. may remove all of the vegetation in a part of that zone in order to establish a
viewing or access corridor that is no greater than 30 feet wide for every 100 feet of shoreline
frontage and extends no more than 35 feet inland from the ordinary high-water mark.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 55
20.34.220 PUL PUBLIC & UTILITY LANDS DISTRICT.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to eliminate the ambiguity of
maintaining an unrelated use district for areas which are under public or public utility
ownership and where the use for public purpose is anticipated to be permanent.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. The following are subject to approval by the Plan Commission of building,
site and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000)
a. Public schools, libraries, museums, auditoriums, art galleries, concert
halls or similar facilities designed to serve the educational or cultural
needs of the community.
b. Public administrative offices and public service buildings including
fire and police stations.
c. Public parks and recreational areas, but not including facilities for
organized athletics except as a permitted conditional use.
d. Public parking lots.
e. Public utility offices, installations, buildings and structures including
municipal water towers, pump houses, water and wastewater treatment
plants, and related public utility facilities and uses.
f. Dog parks.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Residential quarters for employees or caretaker.
2. Garages for storage of vehicles used in conjunction with the operation of the
permitted use.
3. Parking and service areas and structures serving the employees or for public
using the permitted facility.
4. Signs identifying the facility or the activities involved subject to the approval
of size and appearance by the Plan Commission.
5. Service buildings and facilities normally accessory to the principal use
permitted.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 56
6. Leasing of surplus public space to other public or private uses, where the
character of lease use has impacts on the property and on adjacent properties
similar to the principal use.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 57
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant.
1. Public service yards
2. Public parking structures
3. Public penal, reform, disciplinary and mental institutions
4. Public hospitals, sanatoriums, and homes for the aged
5. Military installations
6. Public outdoor recreational facilities for organized athletics
7. Leasing of surplus public space to other public or private uses, where the
character of lease use has impacts substantially different, though not adverse,
on the property or on adjacent properties than the principal use.
8. Public utility generating and transmission facilities and offices.
E. Special Regulations.
To qualify for this district, land must be owned by the municipal, county, state or
federal government or an agency thereof or by a public utility subject to the
jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 58
20.34.230 OOS OFFICE & SPECIAL SERVICE.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for individuals or limited
office, professional, and special services uses where such use would maintain the
basic character of the underlying use district in terms of building appearance and
where the degree of activity and other aspects of the operation would be compatible
with the area, and subject to such regulatory standards as are necessary to insure such
compatibility.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. Any use as permitted by right in the underlying basic district.
2. The following are subject to approval by the Plan Commission of building site
and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000)
a. Administrative and public service offices
b. Professional offices of an architect, landscape architect, lawyer,
doctor, Christian Science practitioner, dentist, minister, professional
engineer, or other similar recognized profession.
c. Studio of photography, painting, music, sculpture, dance or other
recognized art.
d. Real estate and insurance offices
e. Specialized retail or customer service establishments of a restrictive
nature including but not limited to the following:
i. Boarding, lodging, or tourist homes
ii. Delicatessen
iii. Florist Shop
iv. Funeral Home
v. Gift Shop
vi. Interior Decorator
vii. Tea Room or restaurant not serving liquor
viii. Beauty and barber shops
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 59
1. Any accessory use as permitted in the underlying basic district.
2. Any other use normally incident or accessory to the overlay use subject to
approval by the Plan Commission of building site, and operational plans. (See
20.31.000)
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant.
1. Any conditional use permitted in the underlying basic district.
2. Dental and medical clinics
1. Nursing and rest homes and homes for the aged
4. Existing taverns and bars, or restaurants serving liquor.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 60
20.34.240 OIP INSTITUTIONAL & PUBLIC SERVICE.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to predetermine and provide in those
basic districts in which such uses are appropriate, specifically defined areas where
churches, schools, libraries, and other uses of a public or institutional nature shall be
permitted subject to such regulatory standards as will insure compatibility with the
underlying basic district uses.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
1. Any use as permitted by right in the underlying district.
2. The following uses are subject to approval by the Plan Commission of the
building, site and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000)
a. Public and private schools
b. Churches and religious institutions
c. Libraries, museums, art galleries and concert halls
d. Public administrative offices and public service buildings
e. Public utility offices and installations
f. Private lodges and clubs
g. Public and private non-commercial group outdoor recreational
facilities. (See Section 20.25.000)
h. Cemeteries and mausoleums
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Any accessory use as permitted in the underlying district.
2. The following are subject to approval by the Plan Commission of building,
site and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000)
a. Bar, restaurant or other service facilities accessory to a permitted use
and intended solely for the convenience of members and guests and
not operated as a business nor open to the general public. Where such
facilities are accessory but are open to the public, they may be
permitted as a conditional use as hereinafter specified.
b. Any other structures or uses normally incident to the permitted overlay
use.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 61
D. Permitted Uses by Conditional Grant.
1. Any conditional use permitted in the basic underlying district.
2. Penal, reform, disciplinary, and mental institutions
3. Military installations
4. Public service yards
5. Radio and television transmission and relay towers
6. Hospitals, nursing homes and rest homes for the aged
7. Bar, restaurant or other service facilities basically accessory to a permitted
principal use but open to the public and operated as a business.
8. Day care centers providing care for nine (9) or more children.
9. Adult day care centers providing services for part of the day ina group setting
to adults who need an enriched health-supportive or social experience and
who may need assistance with activities of daily living or protection.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 62
20.34.250 OPD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to allow for greater freedom,
imagination, and flexibility in the development of land while insuring substantial
compliance to the intent of the normal district regulations of this Ordinance. To this
extent it allows diversification and variation in the relationship of uses, structures,
open spaces, and heights of structures in developments conceived and planned as
comprehensive and cohesive unified projects. It is further intended to encourage
more rational and economic development with relationship to public services, and to
encourage the preservation of open land.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
Any use permitted in the underlying district subject to the conditional regulation as to
the manner in which permitted as provided in Section 20.21.000.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
Any accessory use permitted in the underlying basic district but subject to the
conditional regulations as to the manner in which permitted as provided in Section
20.21.000.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant.
1. Any conditional use permitted in any district
2. Any use permitted by right in any district
3. Any accessory use permitted in any district
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 63
20.34.260 OHS HIGHWAY SERVICE DISTRICT.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide along portions of major
traffic routes, designated areas in which certain uses particularly suited to and
compatible with the highway traffic shall be permitted subject to such regulatory
standards as will insure compatibility with the underlying basic district uses.
B. Permitted Uses by Right.
1. Any use permitted by right in the underlying basic district.
2. The following uses are subject to the approval by the Plan Commission of the
building, site and operational plans. (See Section 20.31.000)
a. Motels
b. Restaurants not serving alcoholic beverages
c. Tourist homes
d. Public, and private non-commercial group outdoor recreational
facilities. (See Section 20.25.000)
e. Commercial entertainment facilities not serving alcoholic beverages.
f. Gasoline service and convenience retail stations.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Any accessory use as permitted in the underlying basic district.
2. Any other use normally incident or accessory to the permitted overlay use
subject to approval by the Plan Commission of building, site, and operational
plans.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant.
1. Any conditional use permitted in the underlying basic district.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 64
20.34.270 ODF DENSITY FACTOR.
A. Statement of Intent. This district is intended to provide for a sliding scale of
increased density based on the size of parcels 25,000 square feet or over, in order to
permit economically realistic utilization of the mixed use potential of the CCM
District, by preventing over inflation of land values based on maximum density
expectation regardless of the size of parcels and thereby making economically
feasible the assembly of larger parcels for development.
B. Permitted Uses By Right.
Any use as permitted by right in the CCM District.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
Any accessory use as permitted in the CCM District.
D. Permitted Uses By Conditional Grant.
Any conditional use permitted in the CCM District
E. Density Factor Alteration.
Where a parcel of land at least 25,000 square feet in area is in single ownership for
the purpose of development, the minimum density and open space requirements may
be reduced 2 square feet for every 100 square feet of total parcel area in excess of
25,000 square feet, but in no case shall the density requirement be reduced to less
than 1500 square feet per family nor the open space to less than 500 square feet per
family.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 65
20.34.280 OB4 CENTRAL BUSINIESS DISTRICT (DELETED)
20.34.290 OB5 CENTRAL BUSINIESS DISTRICT (DELETED)
20.34.300 OAG ARTERIAL GATEWAY DISTRICT.
A. Statement of Intent. This overlay district is intended to provide for higher standards
of design and site development along the high-visibility arterial gateways into the
City.
B. Applicability. This overlay district shall apply to all non-residential properties
having frontage on the following named streets and a base zoning of B-1, B-2 or B-3:
1. State Highway 32 from the south city limits to Portview Drive.
2. State Highway 32 from the north city limits to Norport Drive.
3. State Highway 33 from the west city limits to County Highway LL.
4. County Highway C from the south city limits to Western Avenue.
C. Permitted Uses by Right. The following uses are permitted, subject to approval by
the
Plan Commission of the building, site and operational plans: (See Section 20.31.000)
1. Offices.
2. Retail stores and shops.
3. Community and customer service establishments.
4. Commercial studios, display galleries, and vocational training schools.
5. Public utility offices and installations with no outside storage.
6. General merchandizing establishments.
7. Printing and publishing houses and related activities.
8. Any use which the Plan Commission determines to be consistent with the
intent of this overlay district, and compatible with and similar to the permitted
uses by right set forth herein, at a special meeting held pursuant to Section I.
hereof.
D. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Any use normally accessory to a permitted principal use.
2. All garbage and refuse containers shall be from view from streets and adjacent
sites by the use of walls, fences, or landscaping.
E. Permitted Uses by Conditional Grant.
1. Restaurants, taverns, theaters, bowling alleys, nightclubs and other indoor
commercial entertainment facilities, subject to Section 9.22.000 regulating
sexually oriented businesses.
2. Sales and service of new and used motor vehicles, provided that any outdoor
display area is appropriately landscaped with areas containing sod, native
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 66
grasses, shrubs, bushes, and trees. A body shop may be included inside the
building.
3. Lawn and garden centers, nurseries and greenhouses.
4. Boat sales and service operations.
5. Lumber and building supply yards. All outdoor storage must be screened by
the use of walls, fences, or landscaping, and all loading and unloading
activities must be done in the back of the building.
6. Indoor self-storage facilities.
7. Animal hospital or veterinary clinic.
8. Experimental, testing and research laboratories.
9. Private commercial outdoor recreational facilities.
10. Gas/service station or convenience store.
11. Outdoor eating and drinking facilities.
12. Hotels and motels.
13. Lodges and private clubs.
F. Prohibited Uses and Activities.
1. Transportation terminals.
2. Commercial parking facilities.
3. Warehousing.
4. Trailer and/or truck rentals.
5. Sexually oriented businesses, subject to Section 9.22.000.
6. Check cashing stores.
7. Pawn shops.
8. Any uses that generate significant dust, odor, or noise.
9. Any uses not permitted by right, as an accessory use, or as a conditional use
hereunder.
G. Setback and Area Requirements.
1. As specified in the underlying district, except as follows:
a. Minimum Open Space shall be the greater of 30 percent or the amount
specified in the underlying district.
b. Maximum Floor Area to Lot ratio shall be the lesser of 60 percent or
the amount specified in the underlying district.
H. Miscellaneous Requirements; Relief from Strict Application. The following
requirements shall also apply to properties within this overlay district. However, the
City recognizes that due to unique site conditions or design limitations, strict
application of these requirements may impede the maximum use of the proposed
development. Therefore, in such cases the Plan Commission may, in its discretion,
consider tradeoffs within and among these requirements to facilitate development and
increase the benefits to the City.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 67
1. Predominant exterior building materials shall be durable materials that can be
economically maintained and are of a high quality that will retain their
appearance over time such as, but not limited to: fiber-cement siding, wood
lap siding, brick, stone, concrete masonry units, or such other materials as
may be approved.
2. Buildings shall be designed with consistent and/or compatible details on all
sides visible from public rights-of-way.
3. Prohibited exterior building materials include: tilt-up concrete panel systems,
and metal panel systems.
4. Garage and overhead doors shall be screened from view from public rights-ofway
by the use of walls, fences, or landscaping.
5. All on-site utilities shall be located underground.
6. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall not be located in the front yard,
and shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way by the use of
walls, fences, or landscaping.
7. All roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened to minimize visual
impact from public rights-of-way, where such screening will be effective.
Where screening will not be effective, the color of such equipment shall be
the same as or complementary to the color of the building.
8. To the extent practicable, parking shall not be in the front of a building, but in
the back.
I. Administrative Review; Special Meeting. If an applicant submits a proposal for the
use of a property which is not listed as a Permitted Use by Right under Section C.
hereof, the City Planner shall promptly review and give written notice of the proposal
to the Plan Commission. A special meeting of the Plan Commission shall be held as
soon as practicable, upon prior public notice, to discuss such proposal and determine
whether the proposed use is consistent with the intent of this overlay district, and
compatible with and similar to the permitted uses by right set forth herein so as to be
a Permitted Use by Right.
20.34.310 ONP NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION OVERALAY DISTRICT.
A. Statement of Intent. This overlay district is intended to preserve and protect the
quality and character of established neighborhoods, recognizing that a cohesive
appearance retains the community’s image, identity and history. It serves to stabilize
and enhance property values, reducing conflict between new construction and
existing structures.
B. General Provisions.
1. This overlay district does not replace the underlying zoning district, which
shall remain the source of the minimum applicable restrictions on structures,
use and development. It may, however, further limit, but not expand, the
structures, uses and development allowed in the underlying zoning district.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 68
2. All new development, complete redesign of the exterior of existing structures,
or razing must comply with the standards set forth in Section 20.30.040. The
Design Review Board shall consider, among other things, the following in
reviewing the proposal:
(a) Building design, size and scale.
(b) Exterior building materials.
(c) Neighborhood character and compatibility.
(d) Visual impact on existing natural features and hillsides.
(e) Compatibility with existing topography and vegetation.
(f) Landscaping and screening.
(g) Drainage patterns, site disturbance, erosion, and runoff.
(h) Historic or archaeological features.
(i) Impact on natural and historic landmarks.
3. The Design Review Board shall also consider the impact of new development
in relation to views enjoyed by the owners or occupants of existing structures
and properties, and, in particular, public property and public rights-of-way.
4. Action by the Design Review Board shall take the form of advisory
recommendations to the Plan Commission.
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 69
20.34.320 OCP CONSERVATION PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT.
A. Statement of Intent. This overlay district is intended to prevent the destruction of
valuable natural resources, particularly woodlands, wildlife habitat areas, significant
water recharge and discharge areas, prairies, recreational and scenic areas, natural
scientific areas, areas with poor soils or high groundwater, and areas of steep
topography (e.g., hillsides, bluffs, etc.). Regulation of these areas – including
environmental corridors – should serve to control runoff, erosion and sedimentation,
protect the natural resource base, promote and maintain the natural beauty of the area,
and promote the health, safety and welfare of City residents.
B. General Provisions.
1. This overlay district does not replace the underlying zoning district, which
shall remain the source of the minimum applicable restrictions on structures,
use and development. It may, however, further limit, but not expand, the
structures, uses, activities and development allowed in the underlying zoning
district.
2. This overlay district is intended to be applied to those lands identified as
having significant combinations of natural features or features not conducive
to development, and is to be applied to primary environmental corridors,
secondary environmental corridors, and isolated natural areas delineated in the
City’s Comprehensive Plan (or the components thereof), or identified on plats
and approved plans, or shown on soils maps.
C. Permitted Uses by Right.
1. Preservation of scenic, historic, and scientific areas or properties.
2. Controlled studies of ecosystems for educational purposes.
3. Forest and game management.
4. Harvesting of wild crops.
5. Hiking, fishing, trapping, and swimming, unless restricted or prohibited by
other ordinances or laws.
6. Stormwater management.
7. Park, open space, and recreation areas.
8. Recreational trails, bicycle trails, cross-country skiing trails, and equestrian
trails.
9. Sustained yield forestry.
10. Municipal and public utility work
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 70
11. Wildlife and plant life preserves.
C. Accessory Uses.
1. Off-street parking serving a permitted principal use, when located on the same
lot as the permitted use.
2. Public shelters, benches, and miscellaneous support structures and equipment.
D. Miscellaneous Permitted or Prohibited Uses and Activities.
1. Filling, removal of topsoil, and the damming or relocating of any watercourse, is
prohibited except with the approval of the Plan Commission.
2. Clear cutting of trees and shrubs is prohibited; however vegetation may be
partially removed as necessary to accommodate any permitted use. Vegetation
may also be selectively pruned or removed to reduce screening so as to achieve
a filtered view from a principal structure, or for reasonable access to a
watercourse or wetland.
20.34.330 LAND USE TRANSITION OVERLAY DISTRICT (OLUT).
20.34.000 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
34 - 71
A. Statement of Intent: This overlay district is intended to identify those areas in the
City where the Land Use Map 2035 recommends uses that are different from existing uses as
identified on the Official City Zoning Map. Section 66.1001 (3) WI Statutes requires that a
zoning ordinance and map shall be consistent or not contradictory to the approved land use
map.
B. General Provisions.
1. Existing uses may continue until such time they are ready to be rezoned to
accommodate new development or redevelopment consistent with the land use plan.
2. Existing uses may be enlarged, reconstructed, or other changes made only by
conditional use approval.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-1
20.35.010 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in ss. 61.35 and 62.23, for
villages and cities; 59.69, 59.692, and 59.694 for counties; and the requirements in s.
87.30, Stats.
20.35.020 FINDING OF FACT
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality
would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base.
20.35.030 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
This ordinance is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
(1) Protect life, health and property;
(2) Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
(3) Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
(4) Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
(6) Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
(7) Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers;
(8) Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and
result in conflicts between property owners; and
(9) Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative
to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain.
25.35.040 TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance of the City of Port
Washington, Wisconsin.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-2
20.35.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) Areas to be Regulated
This ordinance regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional
flood or base flood.
Note: Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study. Regional flood elevations may be derived from other
studies. Areas covered by the base flood are identified as A-Zones on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(2) Official Maps & Revisions
The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as floodplains or
A-Zones on the maps listed below and the revisions in the City of Port
Washington Floodplain Appendix. Any change to the base flood elevations
(BFE) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA before
it is effective. No changes to regional flood elevations (RFE's) on non-
FEMA maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and
revisions are on file in the office of the Department of Planning &
Development, City of Port Washington. If more than one map or revision is
referenced, the most current approved information shall apply.
Officia
(a) Flood Insurance Rate MAP (FIRM), parcel number 5589C0117,
0118F, 0119F, 0136F, 0138F and 0181F, dated June 4, 2007, with
corresponding profiles that are based on the Flood Insurance Study FIS
dated June 4, 2007.
Approved by: The DNR and FEMA
(3) Establishment of Districts
The regional floodplain areas are divided into four districts as follows:
(a) The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry
the regional floodwaters.
(b) The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion of the floodplain between
the regional flood limits and the floodway.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-3
(c) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that have been or
may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood.
(d) The Flood Storage District (FSD) is that area of the floodplain where
storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the regional flood
discharge.
(4) Locating Floodplain Boundaries
Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and
actual field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in paragraphs (a) or
(b) below. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended
according to Sections 20.35.350 – 20.35.370. The zoning administrator can
rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a permit, or
building or site plan approval, whether or not a map amendment is required.
The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual predevelopment
field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary
was determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this
section. Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant over the
district boundary line shall be settled according to Section 20.35.310(3) and the
criteria in (a) and (b) below.
(a) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall
determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations
shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
(b) Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be
determined by the map scale, visual on-site inspection and any
information provided by the Department.
Note: Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood
elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must also approve any map amendment
pursuant to Section 20.35.360(6).
(5) Removal of Lands from Floodplain
Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall not be grounds for
removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above
the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the
floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to Sections 20.35.350 –
20.35.370.
Note: This procedure does not remove the requirements for the mandatory
purchase of flood insurance. The property owner must contact FEMA to
request a Letter of Map Change (LOMC).
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-4
(6) Compliance
Any development or use within the areas regulated by this ordinance shall be
in compliance with the terms of this ordinance, and other applicable local,
state, and federal regulations.
(7) Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties
are required to comply with this ordinance and obtain all necessary permits.
State agencies are required to comply if s. 13.48(13), Stats., applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and
bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt when
s. 30.2022, Stats., applies.
(8) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
(a) This ordinance supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under ss. 59.69, 59.692 or 59.694 for counties;
s. 62.23 for cities; or s. 61.35 for villages; or s. 87.30, Stats., which
relate to floodplains. If another ordinance is more restrictive than this
ordinance, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the
extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(b) This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this ordinance
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall
prevail.
(9) Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance are the
minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body
and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the
Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this ordinance, required by ch. NR 116,
Wis. Adm. Code, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the
standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this ordinance or in effect
on the date of the most recent text amendment to this ordinance.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-5
(10) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The flood protection standards in this ordinance are based on engineering
experience and scientific research. Larger floods may occur or the flood
height may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance
does not imply or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain
uses will be free from flooding and flood damages. Nor does this ordinance
create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from
reliance on this ordinance.
(11) Severability
Should any portion of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not
be affected.
(12) Annexed Areas for Cities and Villages
The Ozaukee County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of
annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality
for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance
which meets the requirements of ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code and the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are
described on the municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain
zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for the purpose of
administering this section and are on file in the office of the municipal
zoning administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the regional
flood elevation and the location of the floodway.
(13) General Development Standards
The community shall review all applications for permits or approvals to
determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damages; and be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above
standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks)
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-6
shall include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any
development that meets the subdivision definition of this ordinance.
20.35.060 GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN
DISTRICTS
20.35.070 HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC ANALYSES
(1) Except as allowed in sub. (3) below, no floodplain development shall:
(a) Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance
of floodwaters by itself or with other development, increasing regional
flood height; or
(b) Increase regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost,
which equals or exceeds 0.01 foot.
(2) The zoning administrator shall deny permits or approvals if it is determined
the proposed development will obstruct flow or increase regional flood
heights 0.01 foot or more, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other
adopted map, unless the provisions of sub. (3) are met.
(3) Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be
permitted if amendments are made to this ordinance, the official floodplain
zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with
Sections 20.35.350 – 20.35.370.
Note: This section refers to obstructions or increases in base flood
elevations as shown on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map.
Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the
DNR.
20.35.080 WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS
No permit or building or site plan approval to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped
floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent
municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional offices and required the applicant to
secure all necessary state and federal permits. The flood carrying capacity of any altered
or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. As soon as is practicable, but not later than
six months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, the zoning
administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting appropriate technical or
scientific data in accordance with NFIP guidelines that shall be used to revise the FIRM,
risk premium rates and floodplain management regulations as required.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-7
20.35.090 CHAPTER 30, 31, WIS. STATS., DEVELOPMENT
Development which requires a permit from the Department, under chs. 30 and 31, Wis.
Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may
be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodway lines,
water surface profiles, BFE's established in the FIS, or other data from the officially
adopted FIRM, or other floodplain zoning maps or the floodplain zoning ordinance are
made according to Sections 20.35.350 – 20.35.370.
20.35.100 PUBLIC OR PRIVATE CAMPGROUNDS
Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the
following provisions:
(1) The campground is approved by the Department of Health and Family
Services.
(2) Building and site plan approvals for the campground are issued by the zoning
administrator.
(3) The character of the river system and the elevation of the campground are
such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all
campground occupants.
(4) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers
the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the
campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the
campground owner, the municipal emergency government coordinator and
the chief law enforcement official which specifies the flood elevation at
which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood
elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the procedures for
notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for
conducting the evacuation.
(5) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time
the agreement shall be reviewed and updated - by the officials identified in
sub. (4) - to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including
those of the state department of health and family services and all other
applicable regulations.
(6) Only camping units are allowed.
(7) The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more than
180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-8
the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours.
(8) All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a
limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is
kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of
a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure
compliance with all the provisions of this section.
(9) The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the
campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this section.
(10) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days
must meet the applicable requirements in either Sections 20.35.110 –
20.35.150 or Sections 20.35.160 – 20.35.190 for the floodplain district in
which the structure is located.
(11) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of
the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is
issued.
(12) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection, electrical
service, natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be
properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
20.35.110 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW)
20.35.120 APPLICABILITY
This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those
identified pursuant to Section 20.35.210(4).
20.35.130 PERMITTED USES
The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the floodway
areas of the general floodplain district, if
- they are not prohibited by any other ordinance;
- they meet the standards in Sections 20.35.140 and 20.35.150; and
- all permits, approvals or certificates have been issued according to Section
20.35.290:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture,
viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-9
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking
areas and airport landing strips.
(3) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and
nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet
activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails,
subject to the fill limitations of Section 20.35.140(4).
(4) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic
structures that comply with Sections 20.35.140 and 20.35.150.
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with Section
20.35.140(4).
(6) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams,
flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission
lines, and pipelines that comply with chs. 30, 31, Stats.
(7) Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with Section 20.35.140(3).
20.35.140 STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENTS IN FLOODWAY AREAS
(1) General
(a) Any development in floodway areas shall comply with Sections
20.35.060 - 20.35.100 and have a low flood damage potential.
(b) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of
the proposal according to Section 20.35.070:
1. A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to
the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will
obstruct flow; or
2. An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional
flood height.
(c) The zoning administrator shall deny the application for a permit or
building or site plan approval if the project will increase flood
elevations upstream or downstream 0.01 foot or more, based on the
data submitted for par. (b) above.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-10
(2) Structures
Structures accessory to permanent open space uses, classified as historic
structures, or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be
allowed by permit or building and site plan approval if the structures comply
with the following criteria:
(a) The structures are not designed for human habitation and do not have a
high flood damage potential;
(b) The structures are constructed and placed on the building site so as to
increase flood heights less than 0.01 foot and minimally obstruct the
flow of floodwaters. Structures shall be constructed with the long axis
parallel to the flow of floodwaters and on the same line as adjoining
structures;
(c) The structures are properly anchored to prevent them from floating
away and restricting bridge openings or other restricted sections of the
stream or river; and
(d) The structures have all service facilities at or above the flood
protection elevation.
(3) Public Utilities, Streets and Bridges
Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit or building and
site plan approval, if:
(a) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection
elevation; and
(b) Construction meets the development standards of Section 20.35.070.
(4) Fills or Deposition of Materials
Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit or building and site
plan approval, if:
(a) The requirements of Section 20.35.070 are met;
(b) No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit is
issued by the Department pursuant to ch. 30, Stats., and a permit
pursuant to s. 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344 has been issued, if applicable,
and the other requirements of this section are met;
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-11
(c) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap,
vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
(d) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
20.35.150 PROHIBITED USES
All uses not listed as permitted uses in Section 20.35.130 are prohibited, including the
following uses:
(1) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those
not associated with permanent open-space uses;
(2) Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to
property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life;
(3) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining
districts;
(4) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are
removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and
Department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of
local ordinances and ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm. Code.
(5) Any public or private wells which are used to obtain portable water, except
those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances
and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
(6) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(7) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under s.
NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code;
(8) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or
proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the
regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
20.35.160 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF)
20.35.170 APPLICABILITY
This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and
those identified pursuant to Section 20.35.210(4).
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-12
20.35.180 PERMITTED USES
Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the floodfringe district if the
standards in Section 20.35.190 are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other
ordinance or regulation and all permits, building and site plan approvals, or certificates
specified in Section 20.35.290 have been issued.
20.35.190 STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODFRINGE AREAS
Section 20.35.070 shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the
use requested.
(1) Residential Uses
Any habitable structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or moved into the floodfringe
area, shall meet or exceed the following standards;
(a) The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or crawlway,
shall be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill. The fill shall
be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at
least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. The Department may
authorize other floodproofing measures if the elevations of existing
streets or sewer lines makes compliance impractical and the Zoning
Board of Appeals grants a variance;
(b) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood
elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No
basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood
elevation;
(c) Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land
outside of the floodplain, except as provided in par. (d).
(d) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make
compliance with par. (c) impractical, the municipality may permit new
development and substantial improvements where access roads are at
or below the regional flood elevation, if:
1. The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and
emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the
structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event;
or
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-13
2. The municipality has a natural disaster plan approved by
Wisconsin Emergency Management and the Department.
(2) Accessory Structures or Uses
An accessory structure or use not connected to a principal structure shall be
constructed with its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation,
subject to flood velocities of no more than two feet per second, and shall
meet all the provisions of Sections 20.35.190 (1).
(3) Commercial Uses
Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the
floodfringe area shall meet the requirements of Section 20.35.190(1).
Subject to the requirements of sub. (6), storage yards, surface parking lots
and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate
warning system exists to protect life and property.
(4) Manufacturing and Industrial Uses
Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved
into the floodfringe area shall be protected to the flood protection elevation
using fill, levees, floodwalls, or other flood proofing measures in Section
20.35.330. Subject to the requirements of sub. (5), storage yards, surface
parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an
adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
(5) Storage of Materials
Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property,
water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or
above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with
Section 20.35.330. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such
materials will not enter the water body during flooding.
(6) Public Utilities, Streets and Bridges
All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with
comprehensive floodplain development plans; and
(a) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger
public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential,
construction of and substantial improvements to such facilities may
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-14
only be permitted or approved if they are floodproofed in compliance
with Section 20.35.330 to the flood protection elevation;
(b) Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower
elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional
flood elevation.
(7) Sewage Systems
All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be floodproofed, pursuant to
Section 20.35.330, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the
provisions of all local ordinances and ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm. Code.
(8) Wells
All wells shall be floodproofed, pursuant to Section 20.35.330, to the flood
protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of chs. NR 811 and
NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(9) Solid Waste Disposal Sites
Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas.
(10) Deposition of Materials
Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this ordinance.
(11) Manufactured Homes
Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare,
secure approval of and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access
and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities.
(a) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement
homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
1. have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation;
and
2. be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally
during a flood.
(b) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new
manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks,
all new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-15
shall meet the residential development standards for the floodfringe in
Section 20.35.190(1).
(12) Mobile Recreational Vehicles
All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or
more or are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the
elevation and anchoring requirements in Sections 20.35.190(11)(a) and (b).
A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities
and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
20.35.200 OTHER FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
Other floodplain districts may be established under the ordinance and reflected on the
floodplain zoning map. These districts may include general floodplain districts and flood
storage districts.
20.35.210 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP)
(1) Applicability
The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains for which flood
profiles are not available or where flood profiles are available but floodways
have not been delineated. Floodway and floodfringe districts shall be
delineated when adequate data is available.
(2) Permitted Uses
Pursuant to Section 20.35.210(4), it shall be determined whether the
proposed use is located within a floodway or floodfringe area. Those uses
permitted in floodway (Section 20.35.130) and floodfringe areas (Section
20.35.180) are allowed within the general floodplain district, according to
the standards of Section 20.35.210(3), provided that all permits, building and
site plan approvals, or certificates required under Section 20.35.290 have
been issued.
(3) Standards for Development in the General Floodplain District
Sections 20.35.110 – 20.35.150 apply to floodway areas, and Sections
20.35.160 – 20.35.190 apply to floodfringe areas. The rest of this ordinance
applies to either district.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-16
(4) Determining Floodway and Floodfringe Limits
Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain
district, the zoning administrator shall:
(a) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a
plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the
general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the
property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and flood
proofing measures;
(b) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the
proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation
and to determine floodway boundaries:
1. A typical valley cross-section showing the stream channel, the
floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, the cross-sectional
area to be occupied by the proposed development, and all
historic high water information;
2. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on the
site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and
sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information;
3. Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream;
4. Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
(c) Transmit one copy of the information described in pars. (1) and (2) to the
Department Regional office along with a written request for technical
assistance to establish regional flood elevations and, where applicable,
floodway data. Where the provisions of Section 20.35.290(2)(c) apply, the
applicant shall provide all required information and computations to
delineate floodway boundaries and the effects of the project on flood
elevations.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-17
20.35.220 FLOOD STORAGE DISTRICT
The flood storage district delineates that portion of the floodplain where storage of
floodwaters has been taken into account and is relied upon to reduce the regional flood
discharge. The district protects the flood storage areas and assures that any development
in the storage areas will not decrease the effective flood storage capacity which would
cause higher flood elevations.
(1) Applicability
The provisions of this section apply to all areas within the Flood Storage
District (FSD), as shown on the official floodplain zoning maps.
(2) Permitted Uses
Any use or development which occurs in a flood storage district must meet
the applicable requirements in Section 20.35.190.
(3) Standards For Development In Flood Storage Districts
(a) Development in a flood storage district shall not cause an increase
equal or greater than 0.01 of a foot in the height of the regional flood.
(b) No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage volume
unless an equal volume of storage as defined by the pre-development
ground surface and the regional flood elevation shall be provided in
the immediate area of the proposed development to compensate for the
volume of storage which is lost, (compensatory storage). Excavation
below the groundwater table is not considered to provide an equal
volume of storage.
(c) If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be
developed unless the entire area zoned as flood storage district – on
this waterway – is rezoned to the floodfringe district. This must
include a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the
waterway to revert to the higher regional flood discharge calculated
without flood plain storage, as per Section 20.35.360 of this ordinance.
(d) No area may be removed from the flood storage district unless it can
be shown that the area has been filled to the flood protection elevation
and is contiguous to other lands lying outside of the floodplain.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-18
20.35.230 NONCONFORMING USES
20.35.240 GENERAL
(1) Applicability
If these standards conform with s. 59.69(10), Stats., for counties or
s. 62.23(7)(h), Stats., for cities and villages, they shall apply to all
modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the
use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of this
ordinance or any amendment thereto.
(2) The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance may continue subject to the
following conditions:
(a) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure
shall be permitted or approved unless they comply with this ordinance.
The words "modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited
to, any alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding
or replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory
structure or use. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered an
extension, modification or addition; these include painting, decorating,
paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other
nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement
of existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to
public utilities. Ordinary maintenance repairs do not include any costs
associated with the repair of a damaged structure.
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and
that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an
extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may
extend over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and
egress to the principal structure.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and
any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon,
shall conform to the applicable requirements of this ordinance;
(c) The municipality shall keep a record which lists all
nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present
equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions
which have been permitted or approved, and the percentage of the
structure's total current value those modifications represent;
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-19
(d) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the
structure would equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed
value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently
changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with Section 20.35.190(1). The costs
of elevating a nonconforming building or a building with a
nonconforming use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from
the 50% provisions of this paragraph;
(e) Except as provided in subd. 2., if any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially
damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use
and the structure meet the current ordinance requirements. A structure
is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the
structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50% of the
structure’s present equalized assessed value.
For nonconforming buildings that are damaged or destroyed by a
nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such
nonconforming building may be permitted or approved in order to
restore it after the nonflood disaster, provided that the nonconforming
building will meet all of the minimum requirements under 44 CFR
Part 60, or under the regulations promulgated thereunder.
(f) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will
not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic
structure, the alteration will comply with Section 20.35.140(1), flood
resistant materials are used, and construction practices and
floodproofing methods that comply with Section 20.35.330 are used.
20.35.250 FLOODWAY AREAS
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure
or any structure with a nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such
modification or addition:
(a) Has been granted a permit, building and site plan approval, or variance
which meets all ordinance requirements;
(b) Meets the requirements of Section 20.35.240;
(c) Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height;
and
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-20
(d) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to
Section 20.35.330, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood
protection elevation.
(e) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is
enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
1. The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or
engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of floodwaters
without human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be
provided with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area. The lowest part of the
opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade;
2. The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection
elevation must be constructed of flood resistant materials;
3. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or flood proofed
to or above the flood protection elevations; and
4. The use must be limited to parking or limited storage.
(2) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site
sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a
government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in a
floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing
on-site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable
requirements of all municipal ordinances and ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(3) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water
shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance
of an existing well in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements
of all municipal ordinances and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
20.35.260 FLOODFRINGE AREAS
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure
or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or
addition has been granted a permit, building and site plan approval, or
variance by the municipality, and the modification or addition shall be placed
on fill or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance with
the standards for that particular use in Section 20.35.190, except where
Section 20.35.260(2) is applicable.
(2) Where compliance with the provisions of par. (1) would result in
unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for
human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-21
Zoning Board of Appeals, using the procedures established in Section
20.35.310, may grant a variance from those provisions of par. (1) for
modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications or
additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection
elevation may be permitted or approved if:
(a) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential
or commercial structures;
(b) Human lives are not endangered;
(c) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed;
(d) Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
(e) Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
(f) The structure will not be used for storage of materials as described in
Section 20.35.190(6).
(3) If neither the provisions of par. (1) or (2) above can be met, one addition to
an existing room in a nonconforming building or a building with a
nonconforming use may be allowed in the floodfringe, if the addition:
(a) Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit, building and
site plan approvals, or variance;
(b) Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and
(c) In combination with other previous modifications or additions to the
building, does not equal or exceed 50% of the present equalized
assessed value of the building.
(4) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair
or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the
applicable provisions of all local ordinances and ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(5) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well
shall meet the applicable provisions of this ordinance and ch. NR 811 and
NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
20.35.270 FLOOD STORAGE AREAS
No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure in a flood
storage area unless the standards outlined in Section 20.35.220(3) are met.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-22
20.35.280 ADMINISTRATION
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of appeals has already been
appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under ss. 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7),
Stats., these officials shall also administer this ordinance.
20.35.290 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
(1) The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this ordinance and shall
have the following duties and powers:
(a) Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing
applications for permits, building and site plan approvals, and appeals,
and assure that the regional flood elevation for the proposed
development is shown on all applications.
(b) Issue permits, approvals and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this ordinance, and issue certificates of compliance
where appropriate.
(c) Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a substantial
damage assessment to determine if substantial damage to the structures
has occurred.
(d) Keep records of all official actions such as:
1. All permits and approvals issued, inspections made, and work
approved;
2. Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations for floodplain development;
3. Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and
ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including
changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
4. All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures.
(e) Submit copies of the following items to the Department Regional
office:
1. Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text
amendments;
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-23
2. Copies of any case-by-case analyses, and any other information
required by the Department including an annual summary of the
number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken.
3. Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all
related correspondence concerning the assessments.
Note: Information on conducting substantial damage assessments is
available from DNR at: http://dnr.wi.gov/org/water/wm/dsfm/flood/title.htm
(f) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this ordinance to
the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of
the reports shall also be sent to the Department Regional office.
(g) Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to the
FEMA Regional office.
(2) Building and Site Plan Approval
Building and site plan approval shall be obtained before any new
development or any repair or change in the use of a building or structure,
including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the
zoning administrator shall include:
(a) General Information
1. Name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor;
2. Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification;
(b) Site Development Plan
A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the application form
and shall contain:
1. Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
2. Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
3. Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot
lines and street center lines;
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-24
4. Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems;
5. Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
6. Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from
the official floodplain zoning maps;
7. The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any
fill using National Geodetic and Vertical Datum (NGVD) or
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD);
8. Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to
determine whether or not the requirements of Sections 20.35.110
– 20.35.150 or Sections 20.35.160 – 20.35.190 are met; and
9. Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or
discharge according to Section 20.35.070. This may include any
of the information noted in Sections 20.35.140(1).
(c) Data Requirements to Analyze Developments
1. The applicant shall provide all survey data and computations
required to show the effects of the project on flood heights,
velocities and floodplain storage, for all subdivision proposals,
as "subdivision" is defined in s. 236, Stats., and other proposed
developments exceeding 5 acres in area or where the estimated
cost exceeds $125,000. The applicant shall provide:
a. An analysis of the effect of the development on the
regional flood profile, velocity of flow and floodplain
storage capacity;
b. A map showing location and details of vehicular access to
lands outside the floodplain; and
c. A surface drainage plan showing how flood damage will
be minimized.
The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all structural
development, landscaping, access and road development,
utilities, and other pertinent items, but need not include land
costs.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-25
(d) Expiration
All approvals issued under the authority of this ordinance shall expire
one (1) year after issuance.
(3) Certificate of Compliance
No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter
constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be
occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning
administrator, except where no permit or approval is required, subject to the
following provisions:
(a) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises
or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this
ordinance;
(b) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit or building and site plan approval;
(c) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall
be issued within 10 days after written notification that the permitted
work is completed;
(d) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor that the fill, lowest
floor and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit
or approvals issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification
by a registered professional engineer or registered architect that
floodproofing measures meet the requirements of Section 20.35.330.
(4) Other Permits
The applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local
agencies, including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
under s. 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344.
20.35.300 ZONING AGENCY
(1) The City Plan Commission shall:
(a) oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; and
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-26
(b) review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments to
this ordinance, maps and text.
(2) The City Plan Commission shall not
(a) grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action by the
Zoning Board of Appeals; or
(b) amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the
governing body.
20.35.310 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
The Zoning Board of Appeals, created under s. 59.694, Stats., for counties or
s. 62.23(7)(e), Stats., for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to
act for the purposes of this ordinance. The Board shall exercise the powers conferred by
Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The zoning administrator
may not be the secretary of the Board.
(1) Powers and Duties
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall:
(a) Appeals - Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this
ordinance.
(b) Boundary Disputes - Hear and decide disputes concerning the district
boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map.
(c) Variances - Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
ordinance standards.
(2) Appeals to the Board
(a) Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the municipality affected
by any decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative
officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise
provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the official whose
decision is in question, and with the Board, a notice of appeal
specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in
question shall transmit to the board all records regarding the matter
appealed.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-27
(b) Notice and Hearing for Appeals Including Variances
1. Notice - The Zoning Board of Appeals shall:
a. Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
b. Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing;
c. Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the Department Regional office at least 10 days in
advance of the hearing.
2. Hearing - Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
Board shall:
a. Resolve boundary disputes according to Section
20.35.310(3).
b. Decide variance applications according to Section
20.35.310(4).
c. Decide appeals of denials of permits or building and site
plan approvals according to Section 20.35.320.
(c) Decision: The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
1. Be made within a reasonable time;
2. Be sent to the Department Regional office within 10 days of the
decision;
3. Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary
of the Zoning Board of Appeals;
4. State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's
decision;
5. Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss
the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance
application;
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-28
6. Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance,
clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the Board proceedings.
(3) Boundary Disputes
The following procedure shall be used by the Zoning Board of Appeals in
hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries:
(a) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or
detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail
in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be
examined.
(b) In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall be given
a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence
to the Board.
(c) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the
zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location to
petition the governing body for a map amendment according to
Sections 20.35.350 – 20.35.370.
(4) Variance
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals may, upon appeal, grant a variance from
the standards of this ordinance if an applicant convincingly
demonstrates that:
1. Literal enforcement of the ordinance provisions will cause
unnecessary hardship;
2. The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and
unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or
premises. In such case the ordinance or map must be amended;
3. The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
4. The variance is consistent with the purpose of this ordinance in
Section 20.35.030.
(b) In addition to the criteria in par. (a), to qualify for a variance under
FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be met:
1. The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation;
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-29
2. Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half
acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below
the RFE;
3. Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not
cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not
increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be
contrary to the purpose of the ordinance.
(c) A variance shall not:
1. Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district.
2. Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or
loss.
3. Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
4. Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the
area.
5. Allow actions without the amendments to this ordinance or
map(s) required in Section 20.35.360.
6. Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use,
which would preclude its continued designation as an historic
structure.
(d) When a floodplain variance is granted the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase flood
insurance premiums and risks to life and property. A copy shall be
maintained with the variance record.
20.35.320 TO REVIEW APPEALS OF DENIALS OF PERMITS OR
APPROVALS
(1) The Plan Commission (Section 20.35.300) or Zoning Board of Appeals shall
review all data related to the appeal. This may include:
(a) Permit application data listed in Section 20.35.290(2).
(b) Floodway/floodfringe determination data in Section 20.35.210(4).
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-30
(c) Data listed in Section 20.35.140(1)(b)2. where the applicant has not
submitted this information to the zoning administrator.
(d) Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the Board
with the appeal.
(2) For appeals of all denied permits or approvals the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall:
(a) Follow the procedures of Section 20.35.310;
(b) Consider zoning agency recommendations; and
(c) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
(3) For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall:
(a) Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing an
increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot
may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map and all
appropriate legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected
property owners.
(b) Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly
demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase equal to or
greater than 0.01 foot provided no other reasons for denial exist.
20.35.330 FLOODPROOFING
(1) No permit, approval or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a
plan certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing measures will protect the structure or development to the flood
protection elevation.
(2) Floodproofing measures shall be designed to:
(a) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces
and other regional flood factors;
(b) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
(c) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement; and
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-31
(d) Insure that structural walls and floors are watertight to the flood
protection elevation, and the interior remains completely dry during
flooding without human intervention.
(3) Floodproofing measures could include:
(a) Reinforcing walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse caused by
water pressure or floating debris.
(b) Adding mass or weight to prevent flotation.
(c) Placing essential utilities above the flood protection elevation.
(d) Installing surface or subsurface drainage systems to relieve foundation
wall and basement floor pressures.
(e) Constructing water supply wells and waste treatment systems to
prevent the entry of flood waters.
(f) Putting cutoff valves on sewer lines or eliminating gravity flow
basement drains.
20.35.340 PUBLIC INFORMATION
(1) Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the
regional flood.
(2) All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely
distributed.
(3) All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any real
property is in.
20.35.350 AMENDMENTS
20.35.360 GENERAL
The governing body may change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries
and this ordinance in the manner provided by law. Actions which require an amendment
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Any change to the official floodplain zoning map, including the floodway
line or boundary of any floodplain area.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-32
(2) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and
floodplain zoning maps.
(3) Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled area to a
height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land
lying outside the floodplain.
(4) Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs flow, increasing regional
flood height 0.01 foot or more.
(5) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by s. NR 116.05,
Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the
municipality.
(6) All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to
remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base
flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
Note: Consult the FEMA web site - www.fema.gov - for the map change
fee schedule.
20.35.370 PROCEDURES
Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any interested party according to
the provisions of s. 62.23, Stats., for cities and villages, or 59.69, Stats., for counties.
Such petitions shall include all necessary data required by Sections 20.35.210(4) and
20.35.290(2).
(1) The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public
hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and
notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the Department Regional office
for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with
the provisions of s. 62.23, Stats., for cities and villages or s. 59.69, Stats., for
counties.
(2) No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the
Department.
(3) All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow, increasing
regional flood height 0.01 foot or more, shall obtain flooding easements or
other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property
owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can be
approved by the governing body.
(4) For amendments in areas with no water surface profiles, the zoning agency
or board shall consider data submitted by the Department, the zoning
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-33
administrator's visual on-site inspections and other available information.
(See Section 20.35.050(4).)
20.35.380 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance by any person shall be unlawful and
shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such
violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not
less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00, together with a taxable cost of such action.
Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of
this ordinance is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance
may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof
pursuant to s. 87.30, Stats.
20.35.390 DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this ordinance shall have their common
law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their common usage. Words used
in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the
plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory
and is not discretionary.
(1) "A-ZONES" - Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map which
would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or
unnumbered A-Zones. The A-Zones may or may not be reflective of flood
profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area.
(2) "ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE" - A facility, structure, building or use
which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or
building.
(3) "BASE FLOOD" - Means the flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS
and depicted on a FIRM.
(4) "BASEMENT" - Any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e.,
below ground level, on all sides.
(5) "BUILDING" - See STRUCTURE.
(6) "BULKHEAD LINE" - A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that
has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the Department
pursuant to s. 30.11, Stats., and which allows limited filling between this
bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark, except where such
filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this ordinance.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-34
(7) "CAMPGROUND" - Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended
or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by 4 or
more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area.
(8) "CAMPING UNIT" - Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area,
used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer, motor
home, bus, van, pick-up truck, tent or other mobile recreational vehicle.
(9) "CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE" - A certification that the construction and
the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure
is in compliance with all of the provisions of this ordinance.
(10) "CHANNEL" – A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks
to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
(11) "CRAWLWAYS" OR "CRAWL SPACE" - An enclosed area below the first
usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to
plumbing and electrical utilities.
(12) “DECK” – An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a
permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
(13) "DEPARTMENT" - The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(14) "DEVELOPMENT" - Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or
accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the
improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage
or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and
site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and
the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or
water supply facilities.
(15) "DRYLAND ACCESS" - A vehicular access route which is above the regional
flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside
the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and
wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
(16) "ENCROACHMENT" - Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or
development in the floodway.
(17) "EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION" - A
parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale,
on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-35
the effective date of this ordinance. At a minimum, this would include the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or
the pouring of concrete pads.
(18) "EXPANSION TO EXISTING MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK"
- The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes
installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the
pouring if concrete pads.
(19) "FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA)" - The
federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
(20) "FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP" (FIRM) - A map of a community on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special flood
hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(21) "FLOOD" or "FLOODING" – A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following
conditions:
? The overflow or rise of inland waters,
? The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source,
? The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake
Superior, or
? The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural
body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated
force of nature, such as a seethe, or by some similarly unusual event.
(22) "FLOOD FREQUENCY" - The probability of a flood occurrence which is
determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is
usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified number of
years or as a percent (%) chance of occurring in any given year.
(23) "FLOODFRINGE" - That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway
which is covered by flood waters during the regional flood and associated with
standing water rather than flowing water.
(24) "FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP" - A map designating approximate
flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A-Zones
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-36
and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms
the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood Insurance Study and a
Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(25) "FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY" - A technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps
designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood
insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines.
The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A-Zones.
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, that accompany the Flood Insurance Study, form the
basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(26) "FLOODPLAIN" - Land which has been or may be covered by flood water
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may
include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
(27) "FLOODPLAIN ISLAND" - A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional
flood.
(28) "FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT" - Policy and procedures to insure wise use
of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and
administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
(29) "FLOOD PROFILE" - A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land
surface elevations along a stream or river.
(30) "FLOODPROOFING" - Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents
of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood
damage.
(31) "FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION" - An elevation of two feet of
freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional
flood. (Also see: FREEBOARD.)
(32) "FLOOD STORAGE" - Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters
has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood
discharge.
(33) "FLOODWAY" - The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-37
(34) "FREEBOARD" - A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of
feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that
cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris
accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the
effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development
and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
(35) "HABITABLE STRUCTURE" - Any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
(36) "HEARING NOTICE" - Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Ch.
985, Stats. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (7
days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments,
a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a
week (7 days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require
additional notice, exceeding these minimums.
(37) "HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL" - Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss
to a structure or building and its contents.
(38) "HISTORIC STRUCTURE" - Any structure that is either:
? Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register,
? Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or
a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district,
? Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior, or
? Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an
approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
(39) "INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT" - A calculated upward rise in
the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot, based on a
comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly
attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-38
of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction
coefficients and discharge.
(40) "LAND USE" - Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real
estate. (Also see DEVELOPMENT.)
(41) “MANUFACTURED HOME" - A structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does not include a "mobile
recreational vehicle."
(42) "MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE" - A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently tow able by a licensed, lightduty
vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed
or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or
carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile
recreational vehicles."
(43) "MUNICIPALITY" or "MUNICIPAL" - The county, city or village
governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing this zoning ordinance.
(44) “NAVD” ” or “North American Vertical Datum” – Elevations referenced to
mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment;
(45) "NGVD" or "NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM" - Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
(46) "NEW CONSTRUCTION" - For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an
initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
(47) "NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE" - An existing lawful structure or
building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural
requirements of this ordinance for the area of the floodplain which it occupies.
(For example, an existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a
conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection
elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-39
(48) "NONCONFORMING USE" - An existing lawful use or accessory use of a
structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence in
the floodway.)
(49) "OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW" - Any development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any
future development will cause an increase in regional flood height.
(50) "OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP" - That map, adopted and made
part of this ordinance, as described in Section 20.35.050(2), which has been
approved by the Department and FEMA.
(51) "OPEN SPACE USE" - Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
(52) "ORDINARY HIGHWATER MARK" - The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristic.
(53) "PERSON" - An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality or state agency.
(54) "PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM" - A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the
same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved
by the Department of Commerce, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil
absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a
system located on a different parcel than the structure.
(55) "PUBLIC UTILITIES" - Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and
collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
(56) "REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING" - Means base flood waters will
not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood
hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not
damage existing or proposed buildings.
(57) "REGIONAL FLOOD" - A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a
one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if
depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-40
(58) "START OF CONSTRUCTION" - The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(59) "STRUCTURE" - Any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream
bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or
liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
(60) "SUBDIVISION" - Has the meaning given in s. 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
(61) "SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE" - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
(62) "UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP" - Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with
restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily
burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the ordinance.
(63) "VARIANCE" - An authorization by the zoning board of appeals for the
construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is
inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain
zoning ordinance.
(64) "VIOLATION" - The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other
development without required permits, approvals, lowest floor elevation
documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway encroachment
calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation
is provided.
20.35.000 FLOODPLAINS_______________________________
35-41
(65) "WATERSHED" - The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
(66) "WATER SURFACE PROFILE" - A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of
river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional
flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
(67) "WELL" - means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended
use.