Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Construction and Penalties
[Adopted 5-2-1988 as §§ 25.01, 25.02(1), 25.03 and 25.04 of the
1988 Code]
§ 1-1. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
ordinance:
§ 1-2. Conflicting provisions.
If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all
matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of such chapter.
§ 1-3. Clerk to file documents incorporated by reference.
Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written
or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated
in this Code as if fully set forth herein, and the Clerk shall file, deposit and
keep in his office a copy of the code, standard, rule, regulation or other
written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept
shall be public records open for examination with proper care by any person
during the Clerk's office hours, subject to such orders or regulations which
the Clerk may prescribe for their preservation.
A. Wisconsin Statutes. All references to "Wisconsin Statutes" or "Wis.
Stats." shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes in effect at the time of
publication of this Code and any amendments thereto. [Amended
4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13]
B. Gender; singular and plural. Every word in this Code and in any
ordinance imparting the masculine gender may extend and be applied
to females as well as males, and every word imparting the singular
number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as
well as to one person or thing, provided that these rules of construction
shall not be applied to any provision which contains any express
language excluding such construction or when the subject matter or
context of such provision may be repugnant thereto.
C. Person. The word "person" extends and applies to natural persons,
firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic
and to all entities capable of being sued, unless plainly inapplicable.
D. Acts of agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which may
by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such
requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 1-5. Alternative juvenile dispositions and sanctions. [Added
5-5-1997]
A. General penalty. Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall
violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of such
violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows:
(1) First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $5 nor
more than $500, together with a penalty assessment and the costs
of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture,
assessment and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the
county jail until such forfeiture, assessment and costs are paid, but
not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance
or part of an ordinance of this Code who has previously been
convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall,
upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10 nor more than
$500 for each such offense, together with a penalty assessment and
the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such
forfeiture, assessment and costs shall be imprisoned in the county
jail until such forfeiture, assessment and costs are paid, but not
exceeding six months.
B. Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues
or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall
preclude the Village from maintaining any appropriate action to
prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code.
C. Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails to
pay any forfeiture, penalty assessment and costs of prosecution upon
the order of any court for violation of any ordinance of the Village, the
court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after
the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution
against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture, assessment
and costs.
D. Violation of Chapter 250, §§ 250-1 and 250-4A(12). Any person who
shall violate Chapter 250, § 250-1 or 250-4A(12) of this Code as those
sections relate to prostitution, patronizing prostitutes or pandering,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 1,
§ 1-4A to C, provided that the forfeitures for these violations shall be
$2,000 for his or her first offense, $3,000 for his or her second offense
within a calendar year of the first offense, and $5,000 for each
additional offense within a calendar year of the first offense. [Added
1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-03]
§ 1-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 1-5
1:4
A. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance, the Municipal
Court is authorized to imposed any of the dispositions listed in
§§ 938.343 and 938.344, Wis. Stats., in accordance with the provision of
those statutes.
B. For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates a
condition of a disposition order of the court under § 938.343 or
938.344, Wis. Stats., the Municipal Court is authorized to impose any of
the sanctions listed in § 938.355(6)(d), Wis. Stats., in accordance with
the provisions of those statutes.
C. This section is enacted under the authority of § 938.17(2)(cm), Wis.
Stats.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:5

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13]
§ 1-6. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., the ordinances of the Village of Pleasant
Prairie of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Village Board
of the Village of Pleasant Prairie, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 420, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Village of Pleasant
Prairie," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-7. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-8. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-9. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of
the Village Clerk and has remained there for use and examination by the
public for at least two weeks, in accordance with § 66.0103, Wis. Stats.,
and until final action is taken on this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Village Clerk, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Village Clerk to be
made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Village Board
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Code of the Village of Pleasant Prairie"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:7
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Village of Pleasant Prairie, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be posted, in the manner required by law, a copy of this Adoption Ordinance.
Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk
for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and posting of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of a
copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-12. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-13. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Village Board. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section
or any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of
not less than $10 nor more than $500 for each such offense, together with a
penalty assessment and the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
of such forfeiture, assessment and costs shall be imprisoned in the county
jail until such forfeiture, assessment and costs are paid, but not exceeding
six months.
§ 1-15. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
§ 1-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 1-15
1:8
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-16. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-17. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adoption Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-18. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-17 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 20, 2004.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9
§ 1-19. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Village of Pleasant Prairie, no changes in the meaning or intent of
such ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsections
B and C hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other
minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces
of legislation. It is the intention of the Village Board that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. The following changes are made throughout the Code:
(1) References to specific chapters and sections of the Wisconsin
Statutes are revised to reflect the numbering of the statutes as of
the publication of this Code.
(2) References to the State Department of Health and Social Services
(HSS) are amended to refer to the Department of Health and
Family Services (HFS).
(3) References to the State Department of Industry, Labor and Human
Relations (ILHR) are amended to refer to the Department of
Commerce (COMM).
(4) References to the "Town" of Pleasant Prairie are amended to refer
to "Village"; references to the "Town Chairman" are amended to
read "Village President."
(5) References to the "School Committee" are amended to read
"School Commission."
(6) References to the "Planning Commission" are amended to read
"Plan Commission."
(7) References to the "Board of Police and Fire Commissioners" are
amended to read "Police and Fire Commission."
§ 1-18 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 1-19
1:10
§ 1-20. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
(8) References to the "Board of Appeals" are amended to read "Zoning
Board of Appeals."
(9) References to the "Board of Park Commissioners" are amended to
read "Park Commission."
(10) References to the "Superintendent of Highways," "Director of
Public Works," "Superintendent of Public Works" and "Highway
Foreman" are amended to read "Superintendent of Streets" except
in §§ 305-42 and 305-45, where "Superintendent of Highways" is
amended to read "Village Engineer."
C. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section
number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
D. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule B
related to Chapter 395 are attached hereto and made a part hereof and
are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance as recommended by the Village Plan Commission at a public
hearing held on February 28, 2005.2
E. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule C
related to Chapter 420 are attached hereto and made a part hereof and
are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance as recommended by the Village Plan Commission at a public
hearing held on March 14, 2005.3
F. The amendments set forth in Schedule D attached hereto and made a
part hereof are made herewith, as adopted by the Village Board of
Trustees of the Village of Pleasant Prairie from January 17, 2005,
through March 7, 2005. Said ordinances will be renumbered and
included during future supplementation.4
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-19C, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added or amended by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine supplementation,
footnotes indicating amendments or additions will be replaced with the following history:
"Amended (added) 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13." Schedule A, which contains a complete
description of all changes, is on file in the Village offices.
2. Editor's Note: Schedule B is on file in the Village offices.
3. Editor's Note: Schedule C is on file in the Village offices.
4. Editor's Note: Schedule D is on file in the Village offices.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATIONS REVIEW
§ 5-1. Purpose.
Any person aggrieved by an administrative determination of the Village
Board or a board, commission, committee, agency, official or employee of
the Village or an agent acting on its behalf may have such determination
reviewed as provided in this chapter. The remedies under this chapter shall
not be exclusive, but an election to proceed hereunder shall be an election
of remedies.
§ 5-2. Determinations reviewable.
The following determinations are reviewable under this chapter:
§ 5-3. Determinations not subject to review.
The following determinations are not reviewable under this chapter:
A. The grant or denial, in whole or in part, after application, of an initial
permit, license, right, privilege or authority, except a fermented malt
beverage or intoxicating liquor license.
B. The suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an existing permit,
license, right, privilege or authority, except as provided in § 5-3D.
C. The denial of a grant of money or other thing of value under a statute or
ordinance prescribing conditions of eligibility for such grant.
D. The imposition of a penalty or sanction upon any person except a
municipal employee or officer, other than by a court.
E. The suspension or removal of a Village official or employee, except as
provided in § 5-3B and G.
A. A legislative enactment. A legislative enactment is an ordinance,
resolution or adopted motion of the Village Board.
B. Any action subject to administrative or judicial review procedures
under state statutes or other provisions of this Code.
C. The denial of a tort or contract claim for money required to be filed with
the Village pursuant to statutory procedures for the filing of such
claims.5
D. The grant, denial, suspension or revocation of a fermented malt
beverage or intoxicating liquor license under Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 1-20 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 5-3
5:12
§ 5-4. Municipal authority.
"Municipal authority" includes the Village Board and any commission,
committee, agency, official, employee or agent of the Village making a
determination under § 5-1 and every person, committee or agency of the
Village authorized to make an independent review under § 5-8B.
§ 5-5. Persons aggrieved.
"Person aggrieved" includes any individual, partnership, corporation,
association, public or private organization, and any official, department,
board, commission or agency of the Village whose rights, duties or
privileges are adversely affected by a determination of a municipal
authority. A department, board, commission, agency, official or employee of
the Village who or which is aggrieved may not initiate review under this
chapter of a determination of any other department, board, commission,
agency, official or employee of the Village but may respond or intervene in
a review proceeding under this chapter initiated by another.
§ 5-6. Reducing determination to writing.
If a determination subject to this chapter is made orally or, if in writing,
does not state the reasons therefor, the municipal authority making such
determination shall, upon written request of any person aggrieved by such
determination made within 10 days of notice of such determination, reduce
the determination and the reasons therefor to writing and mail or deliver
such determination and reasons to the person making the request. The
determination shall be dated and shall advise such person of his right to
have such determination reviewed, shall advise that such review may be
taken within 30 days and shall name the office or person to which or to
whom a request for review shall be addressed.
§ 5-7. Request for review of determination.
Any person aggrieved may have a written or oral determination reviewed
by written request mailed or delivered to the municipal authority which
made such determination within 30 days of notice to such person of such
E. Judgments and orders of a court.
F. Determinations made during municipal labor negotiations.
G. Determinations subject to grievance, arbitration or other procedures
provided in collective bargaining agreements.
H. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any action or
determination of a municipal authority which does not involve the
constitutionally protected right of a specific person or persons to due
process in connection with the action or determination.6
6. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 5-3 ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATIONS § 5-7
5:13
determination. The request for review shall state the grounds upon which
the person aggrieved contends that the determination should be modified
or reversed. A request for review shall be made to the official, employee,
agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body who or which made
the determination, but failure to make such request to the proper party
shall not preclude the person aggrieved from review unless such failure has
caused prejudice to the municipal authority.
§ 5-8. Review procedure.
§ 5-9. Administrative appeal.
A. Initial determination. If a request for review is made under § 5-7, the
determination to be reviewed shall be termed an "initial
determination."
B. Who shall make review. A review under this section may be made by the
official, employee, agent, agency, committee, board, commission or
body who or which made the initial determination. However, an
independent review of such determination by another person,
committee or agency of the Village, appointed by the Village President,
without confirmation, shall be provided if practicable.
C. When to make review. The municipal authority shall review the initial
determination within 15 days of receipt of a request for review. The
time for review may be extended by agreement with the person
aggrieved.
D. Right to present evidence and argument. The person aggrieved may file
with his request for review or within the time agreed with the municipal
authority written evidence and argument in support of his position with
respect to the initial determination.
E. Decision on review. The municipal authority may affirm, reverse or
modify the initial determination and shall mail or deliver to the person
aggrieved a copy of the municipal authority's decision on review, which
shall state the reasons for such decision. The decision shall advise the
person aggrieved of his right to appeal the decision, shall advise that
the appeal may be taken within 30 days and shall name the office or
person with which or with whom notice of appeal shall be filed.
A. From initial determination or decision on review.
(1) If the person aggrieved had a hearing substantially in compliance
with § 5-10 when the initial determination was made, he may elect
to follow §§ 5-6 through 5-8 but is not entitled to a further hearing
under § 5-10 unless granted by the municipal authority. He may,
however, seek judicial review under § 5-12.
(2) If the person aggrieved did not have a hearing substantially in
compliance with § 5-10 when the initial determination was made,
§ 5-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 5-9
5:14
§ 5-10. Hearing on administrative appeal.
§ 5-11. Final determination.
he shall follow §§ 5-6 through 5-8 and may appeal under this section
(§ 5-9) from the decision made under § 5-8.
B. Time within which appeal may be taken under this section. Appeal from
a decision on review under § 5-8 may be taken within 30 days of notice
of such decision.
C. How appeal may be taken. An appeal under this section may be taken
by filing with or mailing to the office or person designated in the
municipal authority's decision on review written notice of appeal.
A. Time of hearing. The Village shall provide the appellant a hearing on an
appeal under § 5-9 within 15 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and
shall serve the appellant with notice of such hearing by mail or personal
service at least 10 days before such hearing. The office or person with
which or with whom a notice of appeal is filed shall immediately notify
the Village Attorney, who shall forthwith advise the Village President of
such appeal.
B. Conduct of hearing. At the hearing, the appellant and the municipal
authority may be represented by counsel and may present evidence and
call and examine witnesses and cross-examine witnesses of the other
party. Such witnesses shall be sworn by the person conducting the
hearing. The Village President shall appoint, without confirmation, an
impartial decisionmaker, who may be an official, committee, board or
commission of the Village or the Village Board who or which did not
participate in making or reviewing the initial determination, who or
which shall make the decision on administrative appeal and who or
which may issue subpoenas. The hearing may, however, be conducted
by an impartial person, committee, board or commission designated by
the Village President to conduct the hearing and report to the
decisionmaker.
C. Record of hearing. The person conducting the hearing or a person
employed for the purpose of making a record of the hearing shall take
notes of the testimony and shall make and preserve all exhibits. The
person conducting the hearing may, and upon request of the appellant
shall, cause the proceedings to be taken by a stenographer or by a
recording device, the expense thereof to be paid by the Village.
D. Hearing on initial determination. Where substantial existing rights are
affected by an initial determination, the municipal authority making
such determination shall, when practicable, give any person directly
affected an opportunity to be heard in accordance with this section
before making such determination.
§ 5-9 ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATIONS § 5-11
5:15
§ 5-12. Judicial review.
§ 5-13. Legislative review.
Chapter 11
ASSESSMENTS
§ 11-1. Assessing Department.
A. Within 20 days of completion of the hearing conducted under § 5-10 and
the filing of briefs, if any, the decisionmaker shall mail or deliver to the
appellant its written determination, stating the reasons therefor. Such
determination shall be a final determination.
B. A determination following a hearing substantially meeting the
requirements of § 5-10, or a decision on review under § 5-8 following
such hearing, shall be a final determination, judicial review of which
may be obtained under § 5-12.
A. Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final determination may seek
review thereof by writ of certiorari within 30 days of receipt of the final
determination.
B. The record of the proceedings shall be transcribed at the expense of the
person seeking review. A transcript shall be supplied to anyone
requesting the same at his expense. If the person seeking review
establishes impecuniousness to the satisfaction of the reviewing court,
the court may order the proceedings transcribed at the expense of the
Village, and the person seeking review shall be furnished a free copy of
the transcript. By stipulation, the court may order a synopsis of the
proceedings in lieu of a transcript. The court may otherwise limit the
requirement for a transcript.
A. Seeking review pursuant to this chapter does not preclude a person
aggrieved from seeking relief from the Village Board or any of its
boards, commissions, committees or agencies which may have
jurisdiction.
B. If, in the course of legislative review under this section, a determination
is modified, such modification and any evidence adduced before the
Village Board, board, commission, committee or agency shall be made
part of the record on review under § 5-12.
C. The Village Board, board, commission, committee or agency conducting
a legislative review under this section need not conduct the type of
hearing required under § 5-10.
A. The Village Board of the Village of Pleasant Prairie does hereby ordain
and establish an Assessing Department.
§ 5-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 11-1
11:16
§ 11-2. Village Assessor.
Chapter 18
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics— See Ch. 47.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 75.
Village Board — See Ch. 98.
B. The Department may, with the approval of the Village Board and the
Village Administrator, provide contract services for other communities
as long as the Village does not subsidize the expenses for such service.
A. The Village Assessor shall be certified by the State of Wisconsin as an
Assessor III.
B. The office of Assessor is to be appointive. The Village Assessor shall be
appointed by the Village Administrator with the approval of the
President and the Village Board.
C. Functions of the Village Assessor. It is the duty of the Village Assessor
to carry out the functions and requirements as set forth in the position
description approved by the Village which is on file with the Village
Administrator and any and all statutory responsibilities that currently
exist or may come to exist.
§ 11-1 ASSESSMENTS § 11-2
11:17

ARTICLE I
Plan Commission
[Amended 12-6-2004 by Ord. No. 04-53]
§ 18-1. Establishment.
On April 10, 1989, the Village Board of Trustees established a Plan
Commission for the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
§ 18-2. Membership.
The Plan Commission shall consist of seven members and two alternates.
The members shall be citizens of recognized experience and qualifications,
appointed by the Village President. The Village President shall also appoint
a first alternate member and a second alternate member of the Plan
Commission, who shall attend all hearings and other proceedings of the
Plan Commission. The first alternate member shall vote whenever any
regular member is absent or has a conflict of interest. The second alternate
shall vote whenever two or more regular members are absent or have a
conflict of interest, or one regular member and the first alternate member
are absent or have a conflict of interest.
§ 18-3. Compensation.
The actual and necessary expenses incurred by Plan Commission in the
performance of its duties shall be paid and allowed as in cases of other
claims against the Village. The Village Board may likewise compensate
members of said Board and such assistants as may be authorized by the
Village Board.
§ 18-4. Officers.
The Plan Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Vice Chairman who shall
appoint a Secretary for the Commission.
§ 18-5. Terms of office.
Each member of the Commission shall serve a three-year term which shall
commence May 1 of the year of appointment. (The terms of the existing
Commission members shall expire when their terms as Town Plan
Commission members would have expired.) The alternate members of the
Plan Commission shall serve a one-year term commencing on May 1 of the
year of their appointment. (The term of the initial alternate members shall
commence upon their appointment and shall end on the following April 30.)
§ 18-6. Vacancies.
The Village President shall promptly appoint a new member or alternative
member to fill any mid-term vacancy of the Plan Commission, and the newly
appointed member or alternative member shall serve the balance of his or
her predecessor's term.
§ 18-1 ASSESSMENTS § 18-7
11:19
§ 18-7. Rules.
The Plan Commission shall organize and adopt rules for its own government
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 18-8. Meetings. [Amended 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-52]
§ 18-9. Committees.
Standing and special committees may be appointed by the Commission
Chairman.
§ 18-10. Quorum.
Four members shall constitute a quorum, but all actions shall require
approval of a majority of the full Commission, except a motion to adjourn.
§ 18-11. Records.
A written record shall be kept showing all actions taken, resolutions,
findings, determinations, transactions, and recommendations made, and a
copy of such record shall be filed with the Village Clerk as a public record,
unless a closed session of the Plan Commission is permitted under § 19.85,
Wis. Stats. Records shall not be destroyed except as pursuant to law. When
necessary, conclusions and orders of the Plan Commission shall be filed with
the Kenosha County Register of Deeds Office.
§ 18-12. Powers and duties.
The Plan Commission shall have such powers and duties as may be
necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote Village
Planning. Such powers and duties shall include the following:
A. Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Plan Commission shall be
held on the second and fourth Mondays of each calendar month at 6:00
p.m. Any regular meeting falling on a legal holiday may be rescheduled.
[Amended 1-18-2010 by Ord. No. 10-03]
B. Special meetings. Special meetings of the Plan Commission may be
called by the Village President, the Plan Commission Chairperson, a
majority of the Commission or the Village Administrator.
C. All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held in the Village Hall
and shall be open to the public.
A. To employ experts and a staff and to pay for their services, supplies,
equipment and such other expenses as may be necessary and proper,
not to exceed the appropriations and regulations made by the Village
Board.
B. To recommend public improvement programs to the Village Board.
§ 18-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 18-12
11:20
C. To request available information from any public official to be furnished
within a reasonable time.
D. To make and adopt master plans, such as but not limited to land use,
transportation and other relevant plans for the physical development of
the Village, and any amendments thereto, in accordance with § 62.23(2)
and (3), Wis. Stats.
E. To hear and decide applications for conditional use permits in
accordance with the general and specific rules set out in Chapter 420,
Zoning Ordinance.
F. To hear and decide applications for site and operational plans and
residential development plans in accordance with Chapter 420, Zoning
Ordinance.
G. To prepare and make recommendations to the Village Board regarding
an official map, or amendments thereto, in accordance with § 62.23(6),
Wis. Stats.
H. To prepare and make recommendations to the Village Board regarding
zoning district maps and regulations, and amendments to such maps
and regulations, in accordance with § 62.23(7), Wis. Stats.
I. To prepare and make recommendations to the Village Board regarding
subdivision and other land division regulations in accordance with
§ 236.45, Wis. Stats.
J. To make recommendations to the Village Board relating to any changes
or amendments related to incorporations, annexations or consolidations
affecting the Village.
K. To make recommendations to the Village Board and the Community
Development Authority related to any redevelopment plans or
amendments thereto.
L. To prepare and make recommendations to the Village Board on any
changes or amendments that the Plan Commission deems necessary or
desirable concerning Chapter 180, Fire and Rescue Protection, Chapter
132, Blasting Regulations and Licensing, and Chapter 270, Quarries
and Nonmetallic Mining Operations, of the Village Code as may be
requested by Village Board.
M. To prepare and make recommendations to the Village Board regarding
the location and architectural design of any public building; the location
of any statue; or vacation, abandonment, change of use, sale,
acquisition of land for or lease of land for any street, alley or other
public way, park, playground, area for parking vehicles or other
memorial or public grounds as may be requested by the Village Board.
N. To consider and report or make recommendations on all matters
referred to the Plan Commission.
§ 18-12 ASSESSMENTS § 18-12
11:21
§ 18-13. Conflict of interest.
Any member of the Plan Commission having a conflict of interest in any
matter coming before the Commission shall refrain from any voting or
discussion either prior to, at or after the matter has been heard by the Plan
Commission.
O. To initiate, by resolution, a request for amendments and changes to
Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance.
§ 18-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 18-13
11:22
ARTICLE II
Park Commission
[Amended 1-17-2005 by Ord. No. 05-02]
§ 18-14. Creation.
There is hereby created a Park Commission for the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
§ 18-15. Membership; compensation for expenses. [Amended
2-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06]
The Park Commission shall consist of seven members, appointed by the
Village President. The members shall be citizens of recognized experience
and qualifications. All appointments to the Park Commission shall be in
writing and shall be filed with the Village Clerk. The Village President
shall also appoint two alternate members of the Park Commission who
shall attend all meetings, hearings and other proceedings of the Park
Commission. The first alternate member shall vote whenever any regular
member is absent or has a conflict of interest. The second alternate member
shall vote whenever two or more regular members are absent or have a
conflict of interest or whenever one regular member and the first alternate
member are absent or have a conflict of interest. The Village Board may
authorize members of said Board to be compensated for their expenses not
to exceed $20 per meeting.
§ 18-16. Terms of office; vacancies. [Amended 2-4-2008 by Ord. No.
08-06]
§ 18-17. Attendance.
Any Park Commissioner who does not attend three successive meetings
shall automatically become eligible to forfeit their seat, which will be
A. The members of the initial Park Commission appointed by the Village
President pursuant to this article shall be appointed, respectively, for
terms of either one or two years. Annually thereafter (beginning in
2005) and prior to May 1, the Village President shall appoint four
members one year and three members the following year for a two-year
term. Any vacancy on the Park Commission may be filled by a Village
Trustee for the balance of the term of the former member, or the Village
President may appoint a new Park Commission member to serve the
balance of the term of the former member.
B. The alternate members of the Park Commission shall serve a one-year
term which shall commence upon their appointment and shall end on
the following March April 30. Annually thereafter and prior to May 1,
the Village President shall appoint each alternate member for a oneyear
term.
§ 18-14 ASSESSMENTS § 18-17
11:23
vacated for appointment of another Park Commissioner by the Village
President.
§ 18-18. Officers.
The Park Commission shall elect officers who will include a Chairman,
whose duty is to facilitate the meetings, a Vice Chairman, who will facilitate
meetings in the absence of the Chairman, and a Secretary, who will keep
all correspondence. Elections for Park Commission officers shall be held
annually at the first meeting in May.
§ 18-19. Meetings. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-57;
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 11-15]
Meetings shall be held on the first Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. or
at the call of the Village President, the Park Commission Chairman or a
majority of the full Commission and shall be open to the public. A vote by
the full majority of Park Commission members shall establish meeting days
and time.
§ 18-20. Quorum.
Four members shall constitute a quorum, but all actions shall require
approval of a majority of the full Commission, except a motion to adjourn.
§ 18-21. Records.
A written record shall be kept showing all actions taken, resolutions,
findings, determinations, transactions, and recommendations made, and a
copy of such record shall be filed with the Village Clerk as a public record.
§ 18-22. Powers.
The Park Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable
it to perform its functions and duties and promote park and open space
planning. Such powers shall include the following and all others granted by
the Village Board:
§ 18-23. Duties.
The Park Commission shall have the following functions and duties:
A. To make recommendations to the Village Plan Commission in areas of
land use and park and open space development.
A. To ensure the quality of life for all members of the community by
facilitating the acquisition, development and preservation of parklands,
open space areas and recreational facilities in an orderly and uniform
process.
B. To create and maintain a Village Park and Open Space Plan and
recommend the plan's adoption to the Village Plan Commission and
§ 18-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 18-23
11:24
§ 18-24. Referrals.
The Village Board, having final authority thereon, may refer to the Park
Commission for its consideration and report, before final action is taken, the
following matters:
§ 18-25. (Reserved)
Village Board. The Park and Open Space Plan shall be in conformance
with the Village Comprehensive Land Use Plan for Development.
C. Upon the request of the Village Board, to review and update Chapter
242, Parks and Recreation, of this Code concerning standards for parks
and open space development.
D. To recommend to the Village Plan Commission and Village Board any
changes or amendments to subdivision conceptual plans which pertain
to parks and open space development.
E. To consider and report or recommend on all matters referred to the
Park Commission.
F. Until such time as the Village Board adopts a Village Park and Open
Space Plan, the Park Commission shall use the Kenosha County Park
and Open Space Plan prepared by the Southeastern Regional Planning
Commission and existing Village land use plans as guidelines for
recommendations.
A. Location, design and naming of any public parklands and open space
areas.
B. Acquisition, acceptance, extension, lease, sale, or abandonment of any
Village park, parkway or open space area.
C. All proposed or requested changes and amendments to the Village Park
and Open Space Plan or Chapter 242, Parks and Recreation, of this
Code.
§ 18-23 ASSESSMENTS § 18-25
11:25

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)7
§ 18-26. through § 18-27. (Reserved)
7. Editor's Note: Former Art. III, School Commission, was repealed 5-18-2009 by Ord. No.
09-38.
§ 18-26 ASSESSMENTS § 18-26
11:27

ARTICLE IV
Police and Fire Commission
[Amended 5-1-1989]
§ 18-28. Creation.
There is hereby created the Village of Pleasant Prairie Police and Fire
Commission.
§ 18-29. Membership; terms of office; vacancies.
The Police and Fire Commission shall consist of five citizens appointed by
the Village President. No appointment shall be made which will result in
more than three members of the Commission belonging to the same political
party. The members of the initial Commission appointed by the Village
President pursuant to this article shall be appointed, respectively, for terms
of one, two, three, four and five years. Annually thereafter (beginning in
1990), between the last Monday of April and the first Monday of May, the
Village President shall appoint one member of the Commission for a term
of five years. Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by the Village
President for the balance of the term of the former member whose place
is being filled. All appointments to the Commission shall be in writing and
shall be filed with the Secretary of the Commission.
§ 18-30. Quorum.
Three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
§ 18-31. Powers and duties.
A. All Commissioners shall faithfully attend all meetings, and three
consecutive unexcused absences shall constitute a resignation to the
Village President. [Added 3-4-1991]
B. All Commissioners shall adhere to the Code of Ethics adopted in
Commission Resolution No. 1-91. [Added 3-4-1991]
A. Chiefs. The Commission shall appoint the Chief of Police and the Chief
of the Fire Department, who shall hold their offices during good
behavior, subject to suspension or removal by the Commission for
cause. The Chiefs shall appoint subordinates, subject to approval by the
Commission. Such appointments shall be made by promotion when this
can be done with advantage, otherwise they shall be made from a list of
eligible individuals provided by examination and approval by the
Commission and kept on file with the Village Clerk.
B. Adoption of rules. For the purpose of choosing individuals on the
eligible list, the Commission shall adopt and may repeal or modify rules
calculated to secure the best service possible on the Village Police and
Fire Departments. Such rules shall provide for the examination of
physical qualifications, educational qualifications and experience of all
§ 18-28 ASSESSMENTS § 18-31
11:29
applicants for positions on the Village Police and Fire Departments
and may provide for such competitive examinations as the Commission
may determine are appropriate. Such rules may also provide for the
classification of positions and for special examinations for each such
classification. Such rules shall specify the date on which they take
effect. Thereafter, the selection of all persons to serve in positions on
the Village Police or Fire Department, the conduct of examinations for
positions in such Departments and the conduct of other matters dealt
with in such rules shall be done in accordance with such rules.
C. Printing and distribution of rules. The Commission shall cause the rules
adopted by it, and all amendments thereof, to be printed and
distributed as it deems necessary at Village expense. One copy of such
rules and any amendments shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
D. Record of proceedings. The Commission shall keep a record of its
proceedings.
E. The Commission is subject to § 62.13(2) through (12), Wis. Stats. In
accordance with § 61.65(3g)(d)2, Wis. Stats., the Commission shall be
subject to those provisions of § 62.13(2) through (12), Wis. Stats.,
pertaining to a board of police and fire commissioners or to
appointments, promotions, suspensions, removals, dismissals,
reemployment, compensation, rest days, exemptions, organization and
supervision of departments, contracts and audits, in accordance with
the terms thereof and to the extent that such provisions apply to second
or third class cities.
§ 18-31 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 18-31
11:30
ARTICLE V
Zoning Board of Appeals
[Added 4-10-1989; amended 12-6-2004 by Ord. No. 04-54]
§ 18-32. Establishment.
On April 10, 1989, the Village Board of Trustees established a Zoning Board
of Appeals for the Village of Pleasant Prairie for the purpose of hearing
and deciding appeals and applications for variances from the provisions of
the Village Zoning Ordinance and which are in harmony with the purpose
and intent of that ordinance. Furthermore on March 3, 1997, the Village
Board of Trustees granted to the Zoning Board of Appeals the authority
to decide applications for interpreting the Village Automatic Fire Sprinkler
Ordinance8 and Chapter 370, Building and Mechanical Code.
§ 18-33. Membership; terms of office; organization; compensation.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five members and two
alternates appointed by the Village President and confirmed by the
Village Board.
B. Terms for Zoning Board of Appeals members shall be for a period of
three years, except that of those first appointed, one shall serve for one
year, two for two years and two for three years. Terms for the alternate
members shall be for a period of three years, except that of those first
appointed, one shall serve for two years and one shall serve for three
years. Annually, the Village President shall designate one of the
alternates as first alternate and the other as second alternate.
C. Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be eligible for such
position only if they reside within the Village. In making appointments
to the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Village President and the Village
Board shall attempt to appoint individuals having a background in land
use planning, geography, urban affairs, or such other prior experience
in related areas whenever feasible. Prior membership on the Zoning
Board of Appeals or Plan Commission shall constitute prior experience.
Attempts should be made to ensure that individuals appointed to the
Zoning Board of Appeals have no conflict of interest with said
appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any
member whose seat becomes vacant in the same manner as
appointments for a full term.
D. The Village President shall designate one of the members Chairman.
E. The actual and necessary expenses incurred by Zoning Board of
Appeals in the performance of its duties shall be paid and allowed as in
cases of other claims against the Village. The Village Board may
likewise compensate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals and such
assistants as may be authorized by the Village Board.
8. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 180, Fire and Rescue Protection.
§ 18-32 ASSESSMENTS § 18-33
11:31
§ 18-34. Rules, meetings and records.
§ 18-35. Jurisdiction and powers.
F. Official oaths shall be taken by all members in accordance with § 19.01,
Wis. Stats., within 10 days of receiving notice of their appointments.
G. Four members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall constitute a
quorum.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals may adopt rules, not in conflict with either
state law or Village ordinances, as necessary to carry into effect the
regulations of the Village. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be held on the fourth Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. or at the
call of the Chairman and at such other time as the Zoning Board of
Appeals may determine. The Chairman, or in his/her absence the Acting
Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be open to
the public and tape recorded. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No.
09-57; 5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 11-15]
B. The concurring vote of a majority of the Zoning Board of Appeals
members present at the meeting shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative
official or to decide in favor of the applicant in any matter on which it is
required to pass under Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, or to effect any
variation in Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance [Amended 1-15-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-02]
C. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question, if a member is
absent or fails to vote, indicating such fact, the reasons for the
determination, and its findings of fact, examinations and other official
actions. All minutes shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Board of
Appeals and shall be a public record unless a closed session of the
Zoning Board of Appeals is permitted under § 19.85, Wis. Stats.
Records shall not be destroyed except pursuant to law. Where
necessary, conclusions and orders of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
be filed with the Register of Deeds Office. For purpose of this article,
the Community Development Department shall be deemed to be the
office of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals as may be authorized by § 62.23(7)(e)7,
Wis. Stats., and Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance.
(2) To hear and to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such
variance(s) from the terms of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, as
will not be contrary to the public interest or when, owing to special
circumstances, a literal enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance will
§ 18-33 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 18-35
11:32
result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done.
(3) To hear and grant applications for substitution of more or equally
restrictive nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming uses,
provided that no structural alterations are to be made. Whenever
the Zoning Board of Appeals permits such a substitution, the use
may not thereafter be changed without application and hearing.
(4) (Reserved)9
(5) To hear and to decide applications or interpretations, upon appeal
of the specific case, from § 180-16 of this Code, regarding
automatic fire sprinklers, when, owing to special circumstances, a
literal enforcement of the provision will result in an unnecessary
hardship and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed
and substantial justice done. The appeal shall not be contrary to the
public interest.
(6) To hear and to decide applications or interpretation, upon appeal of
the specific case, from Chapter 370, Building and Mechanical
Code, when, owing to special circumstances, a literal enforcement
of the provision will result in an unnecessary hardship and so that
the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice
done. The appeal shall not be contrary to any other Village, state or
other agency requirements or to the public interest.
(7) To hear and to decide applications or interpretations, upon appeal
of the specific cases, from Chapters 298 and 381 of this Code,
regarding stormwater management and stormwater drainage
system facilities and construction site maintenance and erosion
control, respectively, when, owing to special circumstances, a
literal enforcement of the provisions will result in an unnecessary
hardship and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed
and substantial justice done. The appeal shall not be contrary to the
public interest. [Added 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-32]
B. No variance shall have the effect of permitting any use in a zoning
district that is prohibited in that zoning district, nor shall a variance
have the effect of a rezoning.
C. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse, affirm wholly or partly or
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed
from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made.
D. The Zoning Board of Appeals may request assistance from other Village
officers, departments, commission, and boards.
9. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), concerning the power to hear and grant
applications for temporary uses, was repealed 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-46.
§ 18-35 ASSESSMENTS § 18-36
11:33
§ 18-36. Appeals and variances.
A. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any persons
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Village
affected by any order, requirement, decision or determination of an
administrative officer or body in the enforcement of § 62.23, Wis. Stats.,
Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, or any other ordinance adopted
pursuant to § 62.23, Wis. Stats. Such appeals shall be commenced by
filing with the administrative officer or body and with the Zoning Board
of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. Such
notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the date of written
notice of the decision or order. The administrative officer or body shall
forthwith transfer to the Zoning Board of Appeals all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
In addition, such appeals and application shall include the following as
deemed appropriate by the Zoning Board of Appeals:
(1) Names, addresses and phone numbers of the applicant, owner of
the site, architect, professional engineer, contractor, and
authorized agent if applicable.
(2) A description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded
subdivisions or by metes and bounds, address of the subject site,
tax parcel number, type of structure, existing or proposed use of
the structure or site, the zoning district within which the subject
site is located, classification of the subject site either being
conforming or nonconforming in its use, and whether or not the
property is located within a shoreland or floodplain area.
(3) A plat of survey and/or site plan consisting of a survey prepared by
a land surveyor registered by the State of Wisconsin or other map
drawn to scale and approved by the Community Development
Department showing all of the information required by Chapter
420, Zoning Ordinance, for a zoning permit. In addition, the plat of
survey or site plan shall show the location, elevation and use of any
abutting lands and the location and foundation elevations of
structures within 50 feet of the subject site, soil map, ordinary
high-water mark of any navigable waterway, and one-hundred-year
floodplain on or within 50 feet of the subject site, and the existing
and proposed landscaping. For variances located within the onehundred-
year floodplain see § 420-131 of Chapter 420, Zoning
Ordinance.
(4) The fees as specified in Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance.
B. Any application for a variance under this article shall be accompanied
by a sworn statement by the owner of the subject property or the
applicant for a variance for said property that said property and its use
will be operated in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 18-36 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 18-37
11:34
§ 18-37. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings and furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the administrative official or body whose decision is appealed
from shall certify to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the notice and appeal
shall have been filed that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, notice shall
be given to the appellant and proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals or by a court of record on application and notice to the
administrative official and for good cause shown.
§ 18-38. Notice.
§ 18-39. Public hearing.
In hearing a petition requesting an appeal or a variance, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall call the petition at the public hearing. Upon the call of
the petition, the petition shall be read by the Chairman of the Zoning
Board of Appeals, and, at the conclusion thereof, the Chairman shall hear
and receive any evidence or sworn testimony presented by the petitioner
or his authorized agent or attorney. At the conclusion of the petitioner's
presentation, the Chairman shall ask for any public comments related to the
petition. Any relevant and material evidence or sworn testimony presented
by interested individuals either in favor of or in opposition to the petition
shall be received by the Chairman; provided, however, that said evidence or
A. Upon receipt of a petition for a variance, the Zoning Administrator shall
place the matter on the agenda for a public hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals; provided, however, that such petition satisfies the
requirements of this article.
B. Notice of the aforementioned public hearing shall be published as a
Class 1 notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village
pursuant to Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., and the Wisconsin Open Meeting Law,
§ 19.81, Wis. Stats. Further, notice of such public hearing shall be
mailed by first class mail, not less than 10 days prior to the public
hearing, to the last known address of the applicant, the owners of the
subject lot or site, the owners of all real property located within 100
feet of the subject lot or site and to all other parties of interest as
defined in Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance. Failure to receive notice
shall not invalidate any action taken by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
After publication and notice, the petitioner may request the Zoning
Board of Appeals for a one-month postponement of the public hearing
for good cause and no further publication or notice shall be required;
provided, however, that notice of the adjourned hearing date is given in
the record at the time of the published hearing. With respect to
properties located within the floodplain areas, a copy of the application
for a variance shall be given to the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
§ 18-37 ASSESSMENTS § 18-39
11:35
sworn testimony is properly identifiable for the record. Lastly, the Chairman
may ask for a recommendation from a representative of the Community
Development Department.
§ 18-40. Continuances.
Upon receiving the recommendation of the Community Development
Department, the Zoning Board of Appeals may table the petition for a
period of up to three months from the date of public hearing so as to allow
the petitioner an opportunity to provide any further information deemed
pertinent by the Zoning Board of Appeals or so as to allow the Zoning Board
of Appeals members an opportunity to view the site or similar situations
already in existence if a comparison is warranted in accordance with the
guidelines set forth in § 18-41 below or to consider the conditions for
allowing the appeal or variance.
§ 18-41. Site views.
En route to view a site as provided for in § 18-40 of this article, Zoning
Board of Appeal members traveling together or visiting the site at the
same time shall refrain from discussing Zoning Board of Appeals business.
Furthermore, testimony shall not be received during such view nor shall
any argument be heard. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, however, gather
information and ask questions, provided that information, data, and
questions and answers are recited into the record if that information will
not be entered by testimony or exhibits.
§ 18-42. Findings and conclusions.
Upon having received all evidence and hearing all sworn testimony relating
to the petition, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the site plan,
existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring land
and water uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access, traffic
generation and circulation, drainage, sewage and water systems, the
proposed operation, the effects of the proposed use, structure, operation
and improvement upon flood damage protection, water quality, shoreland
cover, natural beauty and wildlife habitat, and any other pertinent
requirements deemed necessary by the Zoning Board of Appeals when
considering the standards set forth in this article. Upon completion of said
review, the Zoning Board of Appeals Chairman shall entertain a motion that
the Zoning Board of Appeals either grant or deny the appeal or application
for a variance based upon specific findings and conclusions which shall be
part of the Zoning Board of Appeals written decision and minutes.
§ 18-43. Standards and guidelines.
A. In determining whether a variance is to be granted, the following
standards and guidelines shall be met. In making its decision, these
standards and guidelines shall be addressed by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
§ 18-39 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 18-43
11:36
(1) The existence of special conditions or exceptional circumstances on
the land in question.
(2) The experiencing of unnecessary hardships or practical difficulties
on the land in question either presently or in the future.
(3) That these hardships or difficulties are the result of the
aforementioned special conditions existing on the land and are not
self-inflicted.
(4) That the existence of these special conditions will restrict the use of
the land if the Zoning Ordinance is applied literally so as to render
land useless.
(5) That the limitation on the use of the land does not apply generally
to other properties in the district.
(6) That limiting the use of the property will not afford compensating
gains to the public health, safety and welfare.
(7) That the variance(s) requested is (are) the minimum variance(s)
needed to alleviate difficulties or hardships.
(8) That the use of the parcel in question presently does conform to
Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance.
(9) That granting the variance(s) applied for will not affect the public
health, safety, morals welfare of the community and other
properties in the area.
B. With respect to those areas lands located within the Floodplain Overlay
District, see § 420-131 of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance.
C. A variance may be granted, for example, for reasons of topography,
environmental protection or where permitted by state statute, but in no
event may a variance be granted where the primary reason for
obtaining a variance is to obtain a more profitable use of the property,
personal inconvenience, construction errors, economic reasons, selfcreated
hardships, or where the property is presently a nonconforming
use. Furthermore, variances may not be granted for the purpose of
altering the sanitary requirements of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance,
except for existing structures.
D. The Zoning Board of Appeals, in considering the propriety of granting a
variance, shall not consider the number of persons for or against the
granting of a variance.
E. Variances may be granted in the form of an area or distance variance;
however, use variances shall be specifically prohibited under this
article.
§ 18-43 ASSESSMENTS § 18-44
11:37
§ 18-44. Conditions.
In order to ensure that any variance so granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals is consistent with the spirit of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance,
and recognizing that there could be situations where the spirit of the
Zoning Ordinance could be observed only if conditions were imposed upon
the granting of the variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals is specifically
empowered to grant a variance upon conditions, such as, but not limited
to, landscaping, type of construction, hours of operation, traffic patterns,
parking requirements, yard sizes, time periods, deed restrictions, bonds,
etc., and further provided that in the absence of said conditions being met,
said variance shall be null and void.
§ 18-45. Decisions.
§ 18-46. Order on appeal.
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all
the powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken.
§ 18-47. Conflict of interest.
Any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals having a conflict of interest in
any matter coming before the Zoning Board of Appeals shall refrain from
any voting or discussion either prior to, at or after the matter has been
heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
A. The concurring vote of a majority of the Zoning Board of Appeals
members present at the meeting shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrate
official or body appealed from, or to decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to
effect any variation in Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance. [Amended
1-15-2007 by Ord. No. 07-02]
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals and applications
in compliance with the Wisconsin Open Meeting Law10 and within 30
days after final hearing and shall transmit a signed copy of the Zoning
Board of Appeals decision and order to the appellant or applicant and
the administrative official or body whose decision was appealed along
with the Zoning Board of Appeals findings and conclusions and a
statement as to which members of the Zoning Board of Appeals viewed
the property in question and the date of such viewing.
10.Editor's Note: See §§ 19.81 to 19.89, Wis. Stats.
§ 18-44 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 18-48
11:38
§ 18-48. Notice of variances to floodplain regulations.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall transmit a copy of each application
for a variance to floodplain regulations to the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (WI DNR) and to the Army Corps of Engineers (ACOE)
for review and comment. Final action on the application shall not be taken
for 30 days or until such time as the WI DNR and ACOE have made their
recommendations, whichever comes first. A copy of all decisions relating to
variances to floodplain regulations shall be transmitted to the WI DNR and
ACOE within 10 date of such decision.
§ 18-49. Motion to reconsider; new petition.
§ 18-50. Appeal of decision.
Any decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be appealed as provided
in § 62.23(7)(e)10, Wis. Stats.
§ 18-51. Recording of variances.
Any variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of law
shall not be valid unless recorded by the Village with the Kenosha County
Register of Deeds. Any recording fees shall be paid by the applicant. In
addition, the Community Development Department shall keep a record of
all such variances.
A. Where an error in judgment or procedure resulted in granting an
improper variance or in denying an appeal, a motion to reconsider
made by a Zoning Board of Appeals member or upon motion of any
interested party may be considered and the prior action of the Zoning
Board of Appeals rescinded if vested rights are not violated.
B. A petition for a variance having been denied or a decision or order of an
administrative official or body having been affirmed, a petition seeking
a similar variance or relief shall not be entertained by the Zoning Board
of Appeals until the expiration of a minimum of one year.
§ 18-48 ASSESSMENTS § 18-51
11:39

ARTICLE VI
Board of Review
[Added 3-18-1996; amended 4-19-1999; 5-15-2006 by Ord. No.
06-20; 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 15-28]
§ 18-52. Established.
The Village Board of the Village of Pleasant Prairie does hereby ordain and
establish a citizen Board of Review.
§ 18-53. Membership; terms; clerk; records.
The Board of Review of the Village shall consist of five citizen members
appointed to five-year terms by the Village President with the approval of
the Village Board. Alternate members may be appointed to serve on the
Board of Review when standing members are removed or unable to serve
for any reason. Initial appointments shall be for one, two, three, four and
five years and annually thereafter, with terms effective May 1. The Village
Clerk shall act as the Clerk of the Board and shall keep accurate records of
all its proceedings.
§ 18-54. Powers and duties.
The Board shall have the powers and duties prescribed in § 70.47, Wis.
Stats.
§ 18-55. Compensation.
Each Board member shall receive a maximum per diem of $125 for each full
day. Any time less than eight hours per day shall be prorated.
§ 18-56. Hearing procedure.
Board of Review proceedings and appeals shall be as governed by Chs. 70
and 74, Wis. Stats., including, without limitation by enumeration herein,
§ 70.47 as from time to time amended.
§ 18-57. Confidentiality of income and expense information.
Whenever the Assessor, in the performance of his or her duties, requests
and obtains income and expense information pursuant to § 70.47(7)(af),
Wis. Stats., or any successor statute thereto, then such income and expense
information that is provided to the Assessor shall be held by the Assessor on
a confidential basis, except, however, that said information may be revealed
to and used by persons in the discharge of duties imposed by law; in the
discharge of duties imposed by office, including but not limited to use
by the Assessor in performance of official duties of the Assessor's office
and use by the Board of Review in performance of its official duties; or
pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense information provided to
the Assessor under § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., unless a court determines
§ 18-52 ASSESSMENTS § 18-57
11:41
that it is inaccurate, is per § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., not subject to the right
of inspection and copying under § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 18-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 18-57
11:42
ARTICLE VII
Recreation Commission
[Added 1-17-2005 by Ord. No. 05-03]
§ 18-58. Creation.
There is hereby created a Recreation Commission for the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
§ 18-59. Membership; compensation for expenses. [Amended
2-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08-06]
The Recreation Commission shall consist of seven members, appointed
by the Village President. The members shall be citizens of recognized
experience and qualifications. All appointments to the Recreation
Commission shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
The Village President shall also appoint two alternate members of the
Recreation Commission who shall attend all meetings, hearings and other
proceedings of the Recreation Commission. The first alternate member shall
vote whenever any regular member is absent or has a conflict of interest.
The second alternate member shall vote whenever two or more regular
members are absent or have a conflict of interest or whenever one regular
member and the first alternate member are absent or have a conflict of
interest. The Village Board may authorize members of said Board to be
compensated for their expenses not to exceed $20 per meeting.
§ 18-60. Terms of office; vacancies. [Amended 2-4-2008 by Ord. No.
08-06]
§ 18-61. Attendance. [Amended 11-7-2011 by Ord. No. 11-33]
Any Recreation Commissioner who during his/her term accrues three
unexcused meetings shall automatically become eligible to forfeit his/her
A. The members of the initial Recreation Commission appointed by the
Village President pursuant to this article shall be appointed,
respectively, for terms of either one or two years. Annually thereafter
(beginning in 2005) and prior to May 1, the Village President shall
appoint four members one year and three members the following year
for a two-year term. Any vacancy on the Recreation Commission may be
filled by a Village Trustee for the balance of the term of the former
member, or the Village President may appoint a new Recreation
Commission member to serve the balance of the term of the former
member.
B. The alternate members of the Recreation Commission shall serve a oneyear
term which shall commence upon their appointment and shall end
on the following April 30. Annually thereafter and prior to May 1, the
Village President shall appoint each alternate member for a one-year
term.
§ 18-58 ASSESSMENTS § 18-61
11:43
seat, which will be vacated for appointment of another Recreation
Commissioner by the Village President.
§ 18-62. Officers.
The Recreation Commission shall elect officers who will include a Chairman,
whose duty is to facilitate the meetings, a Vice Chairman, who will facilitate
meetings in the absence of the Chairman, and a Secretary, who will keep all
correspondence. Elections for Recreation Commission officers shall be held
annually at the first meeting in May.
§ 18-63. Meetings. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-57;
5-16-2011 by Ord. No. 11-15]
Meetings shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. or
at the call of the Village President, the Recreation Commission Chairman or
a majority of the full Commission and shall be open to the public. A vote by
the full majority of Recreation Commission members shall establish meeting
days and time.
§ 18-64. Quorum.
Four members shall constitute a quorum, but all actions shall require
approval of a majority of the full Commission, except a motion to adjourn.
§ 18-65. Records.
A written record shall be kept showing all actions taken, resolutions,
findings, determinations, transactions, and recommendations made, and a
copy of such record shall be filed with the Village Clerk as a public record.
§ 18-66. Powers.
The Recreation Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary
to enable it to perform its functions and duties and promote recreational
planning. Such powers shall include the following and all others granted by
the Village Board:
§ 18-67. Duties.
The Recreation Commission shall have the following functions and duties:
A. To make recommendations to the Village Board on items concerning
recreational activities and facilities.
A. To ensure the quality of life for all members of the community by
facilitating the acquisition, development and preservation of
recreational facilities in an orderly and uniform process.
B. Upon the request of the Village Board, to make recommendations to the
Village Board regarding the operation of recreational programs and
activities and development of recreational facilities.
§ 18-61 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 18-67
11:44
§ 18-68. Referrals.
The Village Board, having final authority thereon, may refer to the
Recreation Commission for its consideration and report, before final action
is taken, the following matters:
§ 18-69. (Reserved)
C. Upon the request of the Village Board, to review and update Chapter
242, Parks and Recreation, of this Code concerning standards for
recreational activities.
D. To consider and report or recommend on all matters referred to the
Recreation Commission.
A. Location, design and naming of any recreational facilities.
B. Acquisition, acceptance, extension, lease, sale, or abandonment of any
Village recreational facility.
C. All proposed or requested changes and amendments to Chapter 242,
Parks and Recreation, of this Code.
§ 18-67 ASSESSMENTS § 18-69
11:45

ARTICLE VIII
Convention and Tourism Commission
[Added 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-70]
§ 18-70. Creation.
There is hereby created a Convention and Tourism Commission as
permitted by Wisconsin State Statutes § 66.0615(1m).
§ 18-71. Membership; compensation for services.
The Convention and Tourism Commission shall consist of six members,
appointed by the Village President, one of which shall be a representative
from a Village hotel or motel enterprise. The members shall be citizens
of recognized experience and qualifications. All appointments to the
Convention and Tourism Commission shall be in writing and shall be filed
with the Village Clerk. There shall be no compensation for service on this
Commission.
§ 18-72. Terms of office; vacancies.
The members of the initial Convention and Tourism Commission shall be
appointed by the Village President pursuant to this article for terms of
either one or two years. Annually thereafter (beginning in 2019) and prior
to May 1, the Village President shall appoint three members for one-year
terms and three members for two-year terms. The Village President shall
appoint another individual if a midterm vacancy occurs for any Commission
seat.
§ 18-73. Regular meetings.
The Commission shall meet on a monthly basis, or as needed.
§ 18-74. Transition to Convention and Visitors Bureau.
Transition to a Convention and Visitors Bureau, Inc., a Wisconsin nonstock
corporation, acting pursuant to Wisconsin State Statutes § 181.0821, shall
be undertaken prior to December 31, 2018. Upon approval of the
application for a U.S. Code § 501(1)(6) organization, in approximately six
months, the Convention and Tourism Commission shall transfer Commission
appointments to the nonprofit corporation.
§ 18-75. Receipts of room taxes.
The Commission shall adopt a budget for the revenues and expenses for the
Commission operations with funds collected by the Village Treasurer. Upon
receipt of the approval of § 501(1)(6) organization status, 90% of all net
revenues collected shall be forwarded to the Pleasant Prairie Convention
and Visitors Bureau, Inc.
§ 18-70 ASSESSMENTS § 18-76
11:47
§ 18-76. Records.
A written record shall be kept of all actions taken, resolutions, findings,
determinations, transactions, and recommendations made by the
Commission. A copy of such records shall be filed with the Village Clerk
and ultimately forwarded to the Pleasant Prairie Convention and Visitors
Bureau, Inc.
§ 18-77. Duties.
The Convention and Tourism Commission shall have the following functions
and duties:
§ 18-78. through § 18-79. (Reserved)
A. To ensure the quality of life and the economic vitality of the Village's
convention and tourism businesses.
B. To create an environment to facilitate a smooth and orderly transition to
the Pleasant Prairie Convention and Vistors Bureau, Inc.
§ 18-76 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 18-78
11:48
ARTICLE IX
Sex Offender Residence Board
[Added 1-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-01]
§ 18-80. Board established.
The Village Board of the Village of Pleasant Prairie does hereby ordain and
establish a citizen Sex Offender Residence Board.
§ 18-81. Membership; terms.
The members of the Sex Offender Residence Board shall be citizens residing
in the Village of Pleasant Prairie and shall be selected by the Village
President and approved by the Village of Pleasant Prairie Board of Trustees
pursuant to this chapter. Members shall serve for a term of five years and
shall serve no more than two consecutive terms. The terms for the initial
members of the Residence Board shall be staggered, with one member
serving one year, a second member serving three years and the third
member serving five years.
§ 18-82. Vacancies.
The Village President shall promptly appoint a new member or alternate
member to fill any midterm vacancy of the Board, and the newly appointed
member or alternate member shall serve the balance of his or her
predecessor's term.
§ 18-83. Conflict of interest.
Any member of the Sex Offender Residence Board having a conflict of
interest in any matter coming before the Board shall refrain from any voting
or discussion either prior to, at or after the matter has been heard by the
Board. Said Board member that has a conflict shall recuse him/herself from
all proceedings, and the alternate member shall preside.
§ 18-84. Compensation.
The actual and necessary expenses incurred by the Sex Offender Residence
Board in the performance of its duties shall be paid and allowed as in
cases of other claims against the Village. The Village Board may likewise
compensate members of said Board and such assistants as may be
authorized by the Village Board.
§ 18-85. Powers, duties and decision.
The Sex Offender Residence Board shall hold a hearing on each appeal filed
with the Village Clerk's office. The Board's decision shall be based upon
factual information supplied by the appellant, oral or written statements
from any person, and it shall render its decision with the Village's interest
in promoting, protecting and improving the health, safety and welfare of the
§ 18-80 ASSESSMENTS § 18-85
11:49
community, pursuant to applicable factors described in § 287-6m(3)11 of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie Municipal Code.
§ 18-86. Confidentiality of Health Information.
To the extent it can reasonably do so, the Sex Offender Residence Board
shall have the opportunity to go into closed session to consider any medical
history of alcohol, drug and sex offender treatment, juvenile conviction
records and other health information, to the extent allowed by applicable
state laws. By petitioning to the Residence Board, however, a designated
offender thereby acknowledges that success or failure in treatment
programs may form a central part of the case such that members of the
public should have an opportunity to hear and respond. The designated
offender waives, therefore, by his/her application, such confidentiality
rights as may apply pursuant to applicable state and federal laws for
records arising after the date of conviction, and provided further that this
waiver shall not apply to the release of juvenile conviction records.
§ 18-87. Meetings.
Appeal Board hearings shall be held on an as-needed basis. When the
Village Clerk's office receives an appeal form, said office shall schedule a
hearing within 45 days of receipt. A hearing notice shall be sent at least 10
days via United States Postal Service to the appellant of the date, time and
location of the appeal hearing.
§ 18-88. Records.
A written record shall be kept showing all actions taken, findings and
determinations, and a copy of such record shall be filed with the Village
Clerk as a public record, unless a closed session of the Sex Offender
Residence Board is permitted under § 19.85, Wis. Stats. Records shall not
be destroyed except as pursuant to law.
11.Editor's Note: See § 287-6.1.
§ 18-85 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 18-88
11:50
Chapter 23
BUDGET AND FINANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessments — See Ch. 11. Taxation — See Ch. 320.
§ 23-1. Fiscal year. [Amended 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-26]
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year.
§ 23-2. Budget procedure. [Amended 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-26]
A. Policy guidelines. The Village Administrator shall annually prepare a
budget policy guideline for the department heads to use in the
preparation of their annual operating and capital budgets. The policy
guidelines shall serve to help the department heads to focus their
budgets to coincide with any changes in policies that have been
established by the Village Board. The Village Administrator shall
establish a schedule for the preparation, submission, review, and
approval of the budget.
B. Base budget documents. The Village Administrator shall provide each
department head with base budget preparation materials that identify
expenditure and revenue levels from January 1 through June 30 of the
current fiscal year as well as any fixed expenses that must be included
in their departmental budget.
C. Submission of departmental budgets. Department heads shall submit
their department operating and capital budgets to the Village
Administrator for review in accordance with the established schedule.
D. Review of proposed departmental budgets. The Village Administrator
shall review and provide comment on the proposed departmental
budgets.
E. Preparation of the proposed budget.
(1) Village Administrator to prepare. The Village Administrator shall
review the proposed departmental budgets and compile and
prepare proposed operating, capital, debt service, special fund, and
enterprise budgets that present a financial plan for conducting the
affairs of the Village for the next fiscal year.
(2) Information required. The following information shall be provided:
(a) A description of the overall goals and objectives for the
proposed budget as well as a similar summary for each
department, activity, fund, or enterprise.
§ 18-88 ASSESSMENTS § 23-2
11:51
§ 23-3. Changes in budget. [Amended 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-26]
(b) A report delineating the proposed expenses required to meet
the goals and objectives set forth in the budget, as well as a
review of the current adopted budget and the current expenses
to date, as well as a presentation of the previous year's actual
expenditures.
(c) A report delineating the proposed revenues required to meet
the goals and objectives set forth in the budget other than
general property taxes and bond issuance, as well as a review
of the current adopted budget and the current revenues to
date, as well as a presentation of the previous year's actual
revenues.
(d) An itemization of the amount of revenue to be raised from
general property taxes that, combined with revenue from other
sources, will be necessary to fund proposed expenditures.
(e) Such other information that may be determined to be
necessary by the Village Administrator or be required by the
Village Board or by Wisconsin State Statutes.
F. Public hearing. A public hearing prior to consideration of the budget
shall be held pursuant to § 65.04(7), Wis. Stats.
G. Action by the Village Board. The Village Board, subsequent to the public
hearing on the proposed budget, shall consider adoption of the
proposed budget and may amend the budget following the hearing and
before adoption by the Village Board. The budget may be adopted by a
simple majority of the Village Board.
A. Changes to tax levy. The amount of the tax to be levied or certified shall
not be changed after approval of the budget except by a four-fifths vote
of all the members of the Village Board. Notice of such change shall be
provided by posting the change within 15 days thereafter.
B. Changes in total departmental, fund or enterprise budgets. The
amounts of the various appropriations that would change the total
budget for any one department, fund, or enterprise and the purposes
thereof shall not be changed after approval of the budget except by a
majority vote of all the members of the Village Board. Notice of such
change shall be provided by posting the change within 15 days
thereafter.
C. Authority of Village Administrator to adjust departmental or enterprise
fund appropriations. The Village Administrator shall have the authority
to approve changes in appropriations within approved line item
appropriations, within a department's operating or capital budget, or
within an enterprise budget if the change does not increase or decrease
the total revenues or expenditures within the approved budget for the
department, fund, or enterprise. Such transfers shall be completed on a
§ 23-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 23-3
11:52
§ 23-4. Funds to be spent in accordance with appropriations.
[Amended 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-26]
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the Village, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance
of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as
authorized by § 23-3. At the close of each fiscal year, any unencumbered
balance of an appropriation shall revert to its respective fund balance and
shall be subject to reappropriation. Said appropriations may be made by the
Village Board, to be paid out of income of the current year, in furtherance
of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed
within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until
the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned.
§ 23-5. Claims procedure. [Amended 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-26]
§ 23-6. Duplicate Treasurer's bond.
form that identifies the exact amount of funds to be transferred from
specific accounts affected and further describes the specific accounts
to be enriched by the transfer. The Village Administrator shall sign
and file with the Village Treasurer an affidavit of the transfer with
a corresponding signature from the Village Finance Director that
sufficient unencumbered funds were available for the fund transfer.
A. Village Administrator to audit accounts. Except as provided in
Subsection C, no account or demand shall be paid until it has been
audited by the Village Administrator and an order drawn on the Village
treasury therefor. After auditing, the Village Administrator shall
specifically list any claims not to be paid by name, voucher number, and
the amount of the claim. After auditing the Village Administrator shall
also provide an itemized listing of all claims paid for review and
approval by the Village Board and attesting by the Village Clerk. Every
account that shall be drawn against shall be itemized listing the
account number and fund, the vendor to be paid, the services or goods
provided, and the amount paid.
B. Claims to be verified. All accounts, demands or claims against the
Village shall be verified by the Village Finance Department.
C. Payment of regular wages or salaries. Regular wages or salaries of
Village officers and employees shall be paid by a payroll prepared by
the Finance Department, verified by the Village Administrator, Village
Treasurer, and Village Clerk. The payroll shall be completed in time for
payment by 1:00 p.m. on every other Friday, with the exception being
official holidays.
A. Eliminated. The Village elects not to give the bond on the Village
Treasurer provided for by § 70.67(1), Wis. Stats.
§ 23-3 ASSESSMENTS § 23-6
11:53
§ 23-7. Temporary investment of funds not immediately needed.
The Clerk or Treasurer may invest any Village funds not immediately
needed pursuant to § 66.0603(2), Wis. Stats.
§ 23-8. Worthless payment charge; overpayments. [Added
11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-41]
Chapter 30
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 30-1. Municipal Judge. [Amended 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-42]
B. Village liable for default of Treasurer. Pursuant to § 70.67(2), Wis.
Stats., the Village shall pay, if the Treasurer fails to do so, all state and
county taxes required by law to be paid by such Treasurer to the County
Treasurer.
A. Purpose. It is the intent of the Village of Pleasant Prairie Board that this
section will promote the efficient collection of money owed to the
Village, or handling minor overpayments, thereby promoting the public
welfare by eliminating wasteful expenditures of time and tax dollars
incurred as the result of the return of a worthless check or minor
overpayment.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Includes any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, joint venture or association.
WORTHLESS CHECK — A check which is returned unpaid by the bank
on which it is drawn.
WORTHLESS PAYMENT — A debit card or credit card transaction
which is not paid by the bank upon which demand is made.
C. Additional charge; amount. Any person who tenders a worthless check
or worthless payment to any Village of Pleasant Prairie official,
employee, department, or office shall be liable to the Village for
payment of the amount for which the check or payment was tendered
and an additional charge of up to $50. This additional charge shall be
uniform in amount and application and shall be comparable to charges
for worthless checks and payments made by establishments in the
private sector.
D. Overpayments. The Village may retain overpayments made when such
overpayment does not exceed $10, unless a written request for a refund
of such overpayment is made within 90 days.
§ 23-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 30-1
11:54
§ 30-2. Court established. [Amended 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-42]
The Municipal Court for the Village of Pleasant Prairie is established
pursuant to § 755.01, Wis. Stats.
§ 30-3. Court procedure. [Amended 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-42]
A. Office created. Pursuant to § 755.01, Wis. Stats., there is created the
office of Municipal Judge for the Village.
B. Election; term. The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large at the
spring election in odd-numbered years for a term of two years, or until
his successor is elected and qualifies, commencing on May 1 next
succeeding his election.
C. Salary. The Municipal Judge shall receive, when present, $440 per court
session, plus an additional payment for two sessions per year when not
able to attend (vacation pay), which shall be in lieu of fees and costs. No
salary shall be paid to the Judge for any time during his term for which
he has not executed and filed his official bond and oath as required by
Subsection D of this section. [Amended 4-24-2017 by Ord. No.
17-21]
D. Bond; oath. The Municipal Judge shall execute and file with the Clerk of
the Circuit Court for Kenosha County the oath prescribed by § 755.03,
Wis. Stats., and a bond in the penal sum of $10,000.
E. Jurisdiction. The Municipal Judge shall have jurisdiction as provided by
law and § 755.045, Wis. Stats., and exclusive jurisdiction of violations of
Village ordinances.
A. The Municipal Court of the Village shall be open as determined by order
of the Municipal Judge and approved by the Village Board.
B. The Municipal Judge shall keep his/her office and hold court in the
Municipal Court room located at the Village Hall.
C. The procedure in Municipal Court for the Village shall be as provided by
this chapter and state law, including, without limitation because of
enumeration, §§ 23.66 to 23.99, 778.14, 778.15, 778.18 and 345.20 to
345.53 and Chs. 755 and 800, Wis. Stats.
D. The Village Treasurer shall receipt all forfeitures, penalty assessments,
fees and taxable costs in any action or proceeding before the Municipal
Judge. The Municipal Judge shall reconcile monthly receipts and pursue
enforcement of any unpaid citations.
E. The Municipal Judge shall submit a report monthly to the Village
Treasurer. This monthly reporting shall include the State of Wisconsin
"Municipal Court Monthly Financial Report" and a financial accounting
of the Court's receivables for all citations issued by the Village in a
format acceptable to the Village Treasurer. The Municipal Court's
§ 30-1 ASSESSMENTS § 30-3
11:55
§ 30-4. Contempt of court. [Amended 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 15-20]
Chapter 47
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 18.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 75
Village Board — See Ch. 98.
§ 47-1. Statement of purpose.
financial records shall be maintained per the Government Accounting
Standards Board (GASB).
A. Contempt of the Municipal Court is defined and may be punished as
provided for in § 800.12, Wis. Stats.
B. Any person who resists or disobeys any lawful order or process made or
issued by the Municipal Court shall be punished as provided for in § 1-4.
A. The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to
the people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper
channels of the governmental structure; that the public office not be
used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the
integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is
hereby established in this chapter a Code of Ethics for all Village of
Pleasant Prairie officials and employees, whether elected or appointed,
paid or unpaid, including members of boards, committees and
commissions of the Village, as well as any individuals who are
candidates for elective office as soon as such individuals file nomination
papers with the Village.
B. The purpose of this Ethics Code is to establish guidelines for ethical
standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting
forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests
of the Village of Pleasant Prairie and by directing disclosure by such
officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters
affecting the Village. The Village Board believes that a Code of Ethics
for the guidance of elected and appointed officials and employees will
help them avoid conflicts between their personal interests and their
public responsibilities, will improve standards of public service and will
promote and strengthen the faith and confidence of the citizens of this
Village in their elected and appointed officials and employees. The
Village Board hereby reaffirms that each elected and appointed Village
official and employee holds his or her position as a public trust, and any
§ 30-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 47-1
47:56
§ 47-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANYTHING OF VALUE — Any gift, favor, loan, service or promise of future
employment, but does not include reasonable fees and honorariums or the
exchange of seasonal, anniversary or customary gifts among relatives and
friends.
BUSINESS — Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual or
any other legal entity which engages in profit-making activities.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest that shall yield, directly or indirectly,
a monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee or to any
person employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee.
PERSONAL INTEREST — The following specific blood or marriage
relationships:
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Any person excluded from the definition of "public
official" whom the Village employs.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL — Those persons serving in statutory elected or
appointed offices provided for in Ch. 61, Wis. Stats., and all members
appointed to boards, committees and commissions established or appointed
by the Village President and/or Village Board pursuant to this Code,
whether paid or unpaid. In addition, "public official" shall mean any
individuals who are candidates for elective office as soon as such individuals
file nomination papers with the Village.
SIGNIFICANT INTEREST — Owning or controlling, directly or indirectly, at
least 10% of the outstanding stock of any business.
§ 47-3. Statutory standards of conduct.
There are certain provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes which should, while
not set forth herein, be considered an integral part of any Code of Ethics.
Accordingly, the provisions of the following sections of the Wisconsin
Statutes, as from time to time amended, are made a part of this Code
intentional effort to realize substantial personal gain through official
conduct is a violation of that trust. The provisions and purpose of this
Ethics Code and such roles and regulations as may be established are
hereby declared to be in the best interests of the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
A. A person's spouse, mother, father, child, brother or sister; or
A person's relative by blood or marriage who receives, directly or
indirectly, more than 1/2 of his or her support from such person or from
whom such person receives, directly or indirectly, more than 1/2 of his
or her support.
B.
§ 47-1 ETHICS, CODE OF § 47-3
47:57
of Ethics and shall apply to public officials and employees whenever
applicable:
§ 47-4. Responsibility of public office.
Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office
for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of this state and carry out impartially
the laws of the nation, state and municipality, to observe in their official
acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties
of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the
public interest must be their prime concern.
§ 47-5. Dedicated service.
§ 47-6. Fair and equal treatment.
A. Section 946.10, Bribery of public officers and employees.
B. Section 946.11, Special privileges from public utilities.
C. Section 946.12, Misconduct in public office.
D. Section 946.13, Private interest in public contract prohibited.
A. Officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and
performance established as the standard for their positions by the
appropriate authority.
B. Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the
law or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with
other public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by
law or by officially recognized confidentiality for their work.
C. Members of the Village staff are expected to follow their appropriate
professional code of ethics.
A. Use of public property. No official or employee shall use or permit the
unauthorized use of Village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or
property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services
are available to the public generally or are provided as Village policy for
the use of such official or employee in the conduct of official business,
as authorized by the Village Board or authorizes board, commission or
committee.
B. Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to anyone beyond that which is
available to every other person. No official or employee shall use or
attempt to use his or her position with the Village to secure any
advantage, preference or gain, over and above his or her rightful
remuneration and benefits, for himself or herself or for a member of his
or her immediate family.
§ 47-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 47-6
47:58
§ 47-7. Conflicts of interest.
C. Political contributions. No official shall personally solicit from any
Village employee, other than an elected official, a contribution to a
political campaign or committee for which the person subject to this
chapter is a candidate or treasurer.
A. Financial and personal interest prohibited.
(1) No official or employee of the Village, whether paid or unpaid, shall
engage in any business or transaction or shall act in regard to
financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is
incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties in the
public interest contrary to the provision of this chapter or which
would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the
performance of official duties.
(2) Any member of the Village Board who has a financial interest or
personal interest in any proposed legislation before the Village
Board shall disclose on the records of the Village Board the nature
and extent of such interest; such official shall not participate in
debate or vote for adoption or defeat of such legislation. If the
matter before the Board involves a member's personal interest with
persons involved, the member may participate in debate or
discussion and vote on the matter following disclosure, unless an
ordinance or contract is involved; if an ordinance or contract is
involved, such official shall not participate in debate or discussion
and vote on the matter.
(3) Any nonelected official, other than a Village employee, who has a
financial interest or personal interest in any proposed legislative
action of the Village Board or any board, commission or committee
upon which the official has any influence or input or of which the
official is a member that is to make a recommendation or decision
upon any item which is the subject of the proposed legislative
action shall disclose on the records of the Village Board or the
appropriate board, commission or committee the nature and extent
of such interest. Such official shall not participate in debate or
discussion or vote for adoption or defeat of such legislation.
(4) Any Village employee who has a financial interest or personal
interest in any proposed legislative action or the Village Board or
any board, commission or committee upon which the employee has
any influence or input or of which the employee is a member that is
a make to recommendation or decision upon any item which is the
subject of the proposed legislative action shall disclose on the
records of the Village Board or the appropriate board, commission
or committee the nature and extent of such interest.
B. Disclosure of confidential information. No official or employee shall,
without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information
§ 47-6 ETHICS, CODE OF § 47-7
47:59
concerning the property, government or affairs of the Village, nor shall
such information be used to advance the financial or other private
interests of the official or employee or others.
C. Gifts and favors.
(1) No official or employee, personally or through a member of his or
her immediate family, may solicit or accept, either directly or
indirectly, from any person or organization, money or anything of
value if it could be expected to influence the employee's official
actions or judgments or be considered a reward for any action or
inaction on the part of the official or employee.
(2) No official or employee, personally or through a member of his or
her immediate family, shall accept any gift, whether in the form of
money, service, loan, thing or promise, from any person which may
tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the
performance of his or her duties or grant in the discharge of his or
her duties any improper favor, service or thing of value. However, it
is not a conflict of interest for any public official or employee to
receive a gift or gratuity that is an unsolicited item of nominal
intrinsic value, such as a meal, and that is not intended to influence
the official. Any official or employee who receives, directly or
indirectly, any gift or gifts from any person who is known by said
official or employee to be interested, directly or indirectly, in any
manner whatsoever in business dealings with the Village upon
which the official or employee has any influence or input or over
which the official or employee has any jurisdiction, discretion or
control shall disclose the nature and value of such gifts to the
Village Board by January 15 next following the year in which the
gift or gifts are received.
(3) An official or employee is not to accept hospitality if, after
consideration of the surrounding circumstances, it could
reasonably be concluded that such hospitality would not be
extended were it not for the fact that the guest, or a member of the
guest's immediate family, was a Village official or employee.
Participation in celebrations, grand openings, open houses,
informational meetings and similar events are excluded from this
prohibition. This subsection further shall not be construed to
prevent candidates for elective office from accepting hospitality
from citizens for the purpose of supporting the candidate's
campaign.
(4) Gifts received by an official or employee or his or her immediate
family under unusual circumstances shall be referred to the Village
Board within 10 days of receipt for recommended disposition. Any
person subject to this chapter who becomes aware that he is or has
been offered any gift, the acceptance of which would constitute a
violation of this section, shall, within 10 days, disclose the details
surrounding said offer to the Village Board. Failure to comply with
§ 47-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 47-7
47:60
Chapter 68
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES
this reporting requirement shall constitute an offense under this
chapter.
§ 47-7 ETHICS, CODE OF § 47-7
47:61

ARTICLE I
Smoking
[Adopted 5-17-1993 (§ 11.10 of the 1988 Code)]
§ 68-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of this article that the health, safety, and
welfare of the public and the employees of the Village of Pleasant Prairie be
promoted by the prohibition of smoking in all municipal facilities. It is the
purpose of this article to prohibit smoking in all municipal facilities within
the jurisdiction of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
§ 68-2. Definitions.
In this article, the following words shall have the following meanings:
MUNICIPAL FACILITY — Any building or structure located on land owned
or leased by the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
SMOKING — The burning of any tobacco material by manner of cigarette,
pipe or any form of cigar.
§ 68-3. Smoking prohibited.
Smoking is prohibited in all municipal facilities.
§ 68-4. Enforcement.
The Village Administrator shall develop rules for the implementation and
enforcement of this article.
§ 68-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this article
shall forfeit not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each such offense and
in default of the payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the Kenosha County
Jail for a period of not more than 30 days.
§ 68-1 ETHICS, CODE OF § 68-5
47:63

ARTICLE II
Rental of Fire Station No. 2 Training Room12
[Adopted 12-15-1997 (§§ 3.13 to 3.18 of the 1988 Code)]
§ 68-6. Application.
A person shall obtain and file a complete application and required fee(s)
with the Village at least 72 hours prior to the proposed event. At a minimum,
each application shall state the following:
§ 68-7. Fee and bond.
Each application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee and bond as
required per § 68-12 of this article.
§ 68-8. Compliance with rules and regulations.
Each renter shall be bound by all of the rules and regulations set forth on
the application and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were
inserted in such application, to the extent that the application otherwise
specifies.
§ 68-9. Liability.
The person or persons to whom the application is issued shall be liable for
any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatsoever by reason of
the negligence of the person or persons to whom such application has been
issued.
§ 68-10. Revocation.
The Village Board and Village Administrator shall have the authority to
revoke an application upon finding a violation of any rule or ordinance or
upon good cause shown.
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name and address of the person, corporation or association sponsoring
the activity, if any.
C. The day and hours for which the proposed event is scheduled.
D. The facility for which the application is desired.
E. An estimate of the attendance, if applicable.
F. Any other information which, in the opinion of the Village
Administrator, is reasonably necessary to a fair determination of
whether an application should be issued.
12.Editor's Note: The former title of Art. II, Rental of Roger Prange Municipal Center, was
amended to Rental of Fire Station No. 2 Training Room 2-6-2012 by Ord. No. 12-10.
§ 68-6 ETHICS, CODE OF § 68-11
47:65
§ 68-11. Appeal.
The applicant may appeal to the Village Board if his or its application was
denied by the Village Administrator. The applicant's request for appeal must
be submitted in writing to the Village Administrator no later than 10:00 a.m.
the Wednesday prior to the next scheduled Village Board meeting.
§ 68-12. Rental fees and security deposit.
§ 68-13. Rental hours.
Except with special permission granted by the Village Administrator, no
person shall remain in either rental facility from 10:30 p.m. until 8:00 a.m.
§ 68-14. Prohibited activities.
The following activities are prohibited in the Village facilities:
A. Rental.
(1) Village nonprofit organization: no charge.
(2) Village resident or Village business: $25 per hour.
(3) Nonresident or non-Village organizations: $50 per hour.
B. Refundable security deposit (applies to any organization): $100.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, group or organization to:
(1) Remove, destroy, break, injure, mutilate or deface in any way any
structure, monument, walls, furniture, amenities, or other property
in or upon the facility.
(2) Indulge in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous,
unreasonably loud, or otherwise disturbing conduct under
circumstances in which such conduct tends to cause or provoke a
disturbance.
(3) Be in any other areas of the building except for the designated
rental area.
(4) Operate any loudspeaker, sound system or any other device that
produces undue or unnecessary noises in any Village facility unless
permission is granted by the Village Administrator.
(5) Be intoxicated or engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous,
vulgar, lewd, obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct, tending to
create a breach of peace, or to disturb or annoy others, in or upon
any Village facility.
(6) Park, stop or leave standing, whether attended or unattended, any
vehicle in any manner so as to block, obstruct or limit the use of any
§ 68-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 68-14
47:66
§ 68-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $500 for each violation, plus the
costs of prosecution. The penalty for default of payment of any such
forfeiture and costs shall be imprisonment in the Kenosha County Jail until
payment thereof, but not exceeding six months. Each day a violation exists
or continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 68-16. Other requirements.
All other Village ordinances or other local, state or federal regulations that
are relevant shall also apply.
road, or outside any designated parking area, or contrary to posted
notices
(7) Have attendance which exceeds the maximum capacity limit set
forth by the Fire Code.13
(8) Possess or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises.
B. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter in any way any
building or area that may be locked or closed to public use or contrary
to a posted notice.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, group or organization, other than
duly appointed law enforcement officers, to have in his or its possession
or under his or its control any firearm, air gun, bow and arrow or other
weapon, explosives or fireworks, as defined by §§ 250-3 and 250-5 of
this Code, of any kind or discharge any of the same while in or upon any
of the Village facilities except as set forth in § 175.60, Wis. Stats.
[Amended 2-6-2012 by Ord. No. 12-10]
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Fire and Rescue Protection.
§ 68-14 ETHICS, CODE OF § 68-16
47:67
Chapter 75
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 18.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 47.
§ 75-1. Elected officials. [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-29]
A. General organization. The government of the Village of Pleasant Prairie
is organized and constituted under Ch. 61, Wis. Stats.
B. Elected officers. The elected officers of the Village of Pleasant Prairie
shall be a President, four Trustees and a Municipal Judge.
C. Election and term. At the annual spring election in odd-numbered years
there shall be elected a President and two Trustees, each with a twoyear
term of office. At the annual spring election in even-numbered
years there shall be elected two Trustees, each with a two-year term of
office. The Municipal Judge shall be elected in an odd-numbered year
with a two-year term.
D. Compensation. Pursuant to the provisions of § 61.32, Wis. Stats., the
salaries of the President, Trustees and Municipal Judge are hereby fixed
at the annual rates hereinafter indicated and shall not be increased or
decreased during the term for which such officers are elected:
(1) President: $12,000.
(2) Trustees: $5,000.
(3) Municipal Judge: $440 per court session attended plus an
additional payment for two sessions per year when not able to
attend (vacation pay). [Amended 3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-10;
3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 15-11; 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 17-22]
E. Expense allowance. The President of the Village Board shall be paid an
expense allowance of $133.33 monthly. Trustees of the Village Board
shall be paid an expense allowance of $100 monthly.
F. Powers and duties. The Village President shall have such powers and
duties as set forth in § 61.24, Wis. Stats. The Village Board shall have all
powers of the Village not specifically given to some other body or
officer. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Village Board shall
have the management and control of the Village property, finances,
highways, streets, utilities, public service and the recreation
enterprises and may act for the government and good order of the
Village, for its commercial benefit and for the health, safety and welfare
and convenience of the public and may carry its powers into effect by
§ 68-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 75-1
47:68
§ 75-2. Appointed officials. [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-29]
license, regulations, suppression, borrowing, taxation, special
assessment, appropriation, imposition of forfeitures and other
necessary or convenience means. The Village Board may appoint such
officials from time to time as may be deemed necessary for the benefit
of the community. In addition, the Village Board shall have the powers
enumerated in § 61.34, Wis. Stats. The powers hereby conferred shall
be in addition to all other grants and shall be limited only by express
language.
G. Oaths and bonds. Elected and appointed officials shall take and file the
official bond as required by Wisconsin State Statutes and this Code.
H. Removals.
(1) Elected officials. Elected officials may be removed by the Village
Board for cause pursuant to § 17.13(2), Wis. Stats., or as provided
by § 17.16, Wis. Stats.
(2) Appointed officials. Appointed officials may be removed as provided
in § 17.13(1) and (3) and 17.16, Wis. Stats., except as provided
below:
(a) The Village Board may remove any member of any board,
commission or committee upon being advised in writing by the
secretary of the respective commission or committee that a
member has missed three consecutive meetings or six
meetings in one calendar year or has been convicted of any
offense involving moral turpitude.
(b) Any member of the board, commission or committee so
removed shall not be entitled to receive any further expense
payment after such removal, except that such removed
member shall be entitled to be reimbursed for actual expenses
incurred by him prior to such removal.
(c) After any member of the board, commission or committee has
been so removed, the Village Board shall appoint a new
member to fill the vacancy within a reasonable time.
I. Vacancies. Vacancies in elective offices shall be filled by appointment by
a majority vote of the Village Board for the remaining term of said
office. Vacancies in appointive offices shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term or
for an indefinite term.
A. Appointments by Village Board. The following offices shall be filled by
appointment by a majority vote of the Village Board for an indefinite
term, subject to removal as provide by law by a two-thirds vote of the
Village Board:
§ 75-1 ETHICS, CODE OF § 75-2
47:69
§ 75-3. Village Administrator. [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-29]
(1) Village Administrator.
(2) Village Clerk.
(3) Village Treasurer.
(4) Village Attorney.
B. Appointments by the Village Administrator. The Village Administrator
shall appoint all heads of departments, subordinates and Village
employees, with the exception of members of boards, commissions and
committees. All department heads, subordinates and employees
appointed by the Village Administrator shall be appointed for an
indefinite term and shall serve during good behavior and satisfactory
service. The Village Administrator shall determine the compensation for
each position at the time of hiring.
C. Appointment by Police and Fire Commission. The offices of Police Chief
and Fire & Rescue Chief shall be appointed by the Police and Fire
Commission subject to Wisconsin State Statutes, as well as all sworn
and uniformed officers of each department.
A. Office creation and purpose. In order that the various officers, officials
and employees and departments executing policy and administering the
affairs of the Village of Pleasant Prairie be operated as efficiently as
possible under a system of President and Trustees, and to better ensure
competent, expeditious, efficient and harmonious administration and
action in respect to any activity common to any one or more of the
Village's officers, officials and departments, and in order that there may
be a uniform administration of policy, there is hereby created the office
of Village Administrator for the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
B. Appointment and term of office. The Administrator shall be appointed
as provided in § 75-2 for a term of indefinite duration, subject to
removal by a three-fourths majority vote of the Village Board at any
time. The Administrator and the Village Board shall, at their mutual
discretion, enter into a contract relating to the terms of employment.
C. Residency. The Village Administrator shall become a resident of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie within one year following the date of
appointment.
D. Power to inquire. The Village Administrator shall examine or inquire
into the affairs or operations of any department.
E. Functions and duties of Village Administrator. The Village
Administrator, subject to the limitations defined in resolutions and
ordinances of the Village of Pleasant Prairie, shall be the chief
administrative officer of the Village, responsible only to the Village
§ 75-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 75-3
47:70
Board for the proper administration of the business and affairs of
the Village pursuant to the Statutes of the State of Wisconsin, the
ordinances of the Village of Pleasant Prairie and the resolutions and
directions of the Village Board, with powers and duties as follows.
F. General duties. The Village Administrator shall:
(1) Coordinate the administrative activities of Village departments.
(2) Establish such methods of handling details of administration as
will, in his opinion, best promote efficiency in municipal
government.
(3) Stay informed on the latest county, state and federal legislation and
the availability of obtaining funds from the above-mentioned
sources.
(4) Meet regularly with the Village President.
(5) Attend all official meetings of the Village Board, unless excused by
the board, and make recommendations from time to time for
improving the quality and efficiency of the services performed by
the Village.
(6) Effectuate all action of the Village Board that requires
administrative action and report any problems or difficulties in
connection therewith to the Village Board.
(7) File with the Village Board such reports at such times as the Village
Board may require concerning the activities of his office so that the
Village Board may be currently apprised of any actions of the
Village Administrator and the nature and reason for such actions
taken by him.
(8) Act as press officer for the Village. As such, he shall be the
spokesman on all matters within his authority and responsibility
and shall assure that the news media are kept fully informed about
the operations of the Village.
(9) Represent the Village in intergovernmental and legislative
functions.
(10) See that all Village ordinances are efficiently and equally enforced.
(11) Supervise the bookkeeping and accounting system in all
departments so as to increase the efficiency of the operations of
each.
(12) Perform such other administrative duties and powers not
inconsistent with law as may be prescribed by the Village Board
from time to time.
(13) Take charge of all Village-owned buildings and grounds, to
administer the operation and maintenance of all Village-owned
§ 75-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 75-3
47:71
property, lands, buildings and equipment and all public ways,
ditches, drains, sewer and water systems, recreation facilities and
construction or improvements undertaken either directly or
indirectly by the Village.
G. Personnel.
(1) The Village Administrator shall be entitled to the cooperation and
assistance of all officers and employees of the Village so that the
affairs of the Village will be most economically and harmoniously
administered.
(2) The Village Administrator shall act as personnel officer for the
Village and recommend salary and wage scales and working
conditions for those officers, officials or employees not covered by
collective bargaining agreements, develop job classifications and
periodically evaluate job classifications, and, when necessary,
formulate and propose new job classifications.
(3) Except as otherwise required by statute or ordinance, the Village
Administrator shall recommend to the Village Board appointment
of and, when necessary or desirable for the good of the service,
suspension or removal of an employee of the Village; provided,
however, that neither any statutory officer of the Village nor the
Village Attorney may be appointed, suspended or removed except
by action of the Village Board.
(4) The Village Administrator shall assist in labor contract negotiations
and all collective bargaining matters.
(5) The Village Administrator shall submit to the Board a plan of
administrative procedure, including an organization chart. This
administrative plan shall be constructed so as to define authority
and responsibility as clearly as possible. Upon approval by the
Village Board, such plan and any amendments and changes thereof
shall constitute the official administration and organization plan.
H. Budget and purchasing.
(1) The Village Administrator shall prepare annually and submit to the
Village Board a financial budget of anticipated income and
expenditure for the ensuing fiscal year and supervise and control
the expenditures of money and the administration of such budget
as adopted.
(2) Subject to the limitations contained in § 61.51, Wis. Stats., the
Village Administrator is authorized and empowered to make the
following purchases in behalf of the Village without the prior
approval of the Village Board: supplies and services in the sum of
the budgeted amounts.
§ 75-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 75-3
47:72
§ 75-4. Weed Commissioner. [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-29]
The Village Board shall appoint the Weed Commissioner on or before May
15 of each year for a term of one year. The duties and powers of the Weed
Commissioner are as prescribed in § 66.0517, Wis. Stats.
§ 75-5. Village Clerk.14 [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-29]
§ 75-6. Village Treasurer.15 [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-29]
§ 75-7. Village Assessor. [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-29]
(3) The Village Administrator shall have the power to delegate the
authority to make purchases to duly appointed department heads
for operating supplies, provided that the proper purchase order
forms are prepared and circulated, and provided further that the
purchase is of sufficient urgency to make it impractical to follow
regular procedure, and provided further that the purchase amount
is within the departmental operating budget for the fiscal year.
A. Appointment. The Village Board shall appoint the Village Clerk for an
indefinite term.
B. Duties. The Village Clerk shall perform the duties prescribed in § 61.25,
Wis. Stats., and such other duties as the Village shall prescribe.
C. Deputy Clerk. The Village Administrator may appoint a Deputy Village
Clerk, who shall act under the Clerk's direction and in the Clerk's
absence or disability or in case of a vacancy shall perform his duties and
shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations. The Clerk and
his sureties shall be liable on his official bond for the acts of such
Deputy.
A. Appointment. The Village Board shall appoint the Village Treasurer for
an indefinite term.
B. Duties. The Treasurer shall perform the duties prescribed in § 61.26,
Wis. Stats., and such other duties as the Village shall prescribe as
contained within this Code.
C. Deputy Treasurer. The Village Administrator may, in writing filed in the
office of the Clerk, appoint a Deputy who shall act under the Treasurer's
direction and, in his absence or disability or in case of a vacancy, shall
perform his duties. The official bond shall cover the acts of the Deputy
as the Village may direct.
A. The Village Assessor shall be appointed by the Village Administrator for
an indefinite term.
14.Editor's Note: See also Charter Ordinance No. 1, Ch. A500, Art. I.
15.Editor's Note: See also Charter Ordinance No. 2, Ch. A500, Art. II.
§ 75-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 75-7
47:73
§ 75-8. Carryover of functions and duties after incorporation.
[Added 4-10-1989]
All officials, employees or administrative bodies of the Town of Pleasant
Prairie, as of the incorporation of the Town as the Village of Pleasant
Prairie on April 5, 1989, which are not encompassed within the reference to
"officers" in § 66.011(10), Wis. Stats.,16 shall continue to serve in the same
capacity as officials, employees or administrative bodies of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, with the same term of office as before the incorporation,
and shall, subject to the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes and the
ordinances of the Village of Pleasant Prairie, continue during such term
to exercise on behalf of the Village all of the powers and duties that they
previously exercised on behalf of the Town.
Chapter 98
VILLAGE BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Budget and finance — See Ch. 23.
Code of Ethics— See Ch. 47
Officers and employees — See Ch. 75.
§ 98-1. Membership.
The Village Board shall consist of the Village President and four Trustees
who shall be elected for two-year terms.17
§ 98-2. Meetings.
B. Duties. The Village Assessor shall perform the duties prescribed by
state statutes, particularly Ch. 70, Wis. Stats., and such other duties as
the Village Administrator shall prescribe.
C. Deputy Assessor. The Village Administrator may, in writing filed in the
office of the Clerk, appoint a Deputy who shall act under the Assessor's
direction and, in his absence or disability or in case of a vacancy, shall
perform his duties.
A. Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Village Board shall be held
on the first and third Mondays of each calendar month at 6:00 p.m. Any
regular meeting falling on a legal holiday shall be rescheduled by the
Village Board. [Amended 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-55; 1-18-2010
by Ord. No. 10-02]
16.Editor's Note: Section 66.011, Wis. Stats., was repealed by 1991 Act 315.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 75, Officers and Employees, § 75-1, Elected officials, for additional
provisions regarding the Village President and Trustees.
§ 75-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 98-2
47:74
§ 98-3. Presiding officer.
§ 98-4. Roll call; quorum.
B. Special meetings. Special meetings of the Village Board may be called
by the Village President, Village Administrator or any two Trustees in
writing filed with the Clerk at least 24 hours prior to the time specified
for such meeting. The Clerk shall immediately notify each Trustee of the
time and purpose of such meeting by causing a written notice thereof to
be delivered to each Trustee personally, if he can be found, or, if he
cannot be found, then by leaving a copy of such notice at the home of
such Trustee. The Clerk shall cause an affidavit showing service of such
notice as herein provided to be filed in his office prior to the time fixed
for such special meeting. Special meetings may be held without such
notice when all members of the Board are present in person or consent
in writing to the holding of such meeting, such written consent to be
filed with the Clerk prior to the beginning of the meeting. Any special
meeting attended by all the Trustees shall be a regular meeting for the
transaction of any business that may come before such meeting.
C. Adjournments. The Board may, by a majority vote of those present, but
not fewer that three affirmative votes, adjourn from time to time to a
specific date and hour.
A. Designated. The Village President shall preside. The Village Board, at
the first meeting in each May, shall elect a President Pro Tem to preside
in the absence of the Village President. In the absence of the President,
the President Pro Tem shall preside. If the President Pro Tem is also
unavailable, the Clerk shall call the meeting to order and the Trustees
present shall elect one of their number President Pro Tem.
B. Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, decide
all questions of order and conduct the proceedings of the meeting in
accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of
Order, Newly Revised, unless otherwise provided by statute or by these
rules.
C. Appeals from decisions. Any member may appeal from a decision of the
presiding officer. An appeal shall be sustained by a two-thirds vote of
the members excluding the presiding officer.
A. Roll call; procedure when quorum not in attendance. As soon as the
Board is called to order, the Clerk shall proceed to call the names of the
members in alphabetical order, noting who is present and who is
absent, and record the same in the proceedings of the Board. If there is
not a quorum present, that fact shall entered on the journal and the
Board may adjourn or the President or, in his absence, the Clerk may
issue a process to any Village policeman commanding him forthwith to
summon the absentees.
§ 98-2 ETHICS, CODE OF § 98-4
47:75
§ 98-5. Order of business.
The business of the Village Board shall be conducted in the following order
and manner:
B. Quorum. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. The
Chairman shall be counted in computing a quorum.
A. Call to order by the Village President.
B. Roll call of Trustees. If a quorum is not present, the meeting may
thereupon adjourn, which may be to a specific date and hour pursuant
to § 98-2C, or the absentees may be summoned as provided by § 98-4A.
C. Presentation of the minutes of preceding meetings by the Village Clerk
and approval of said minutes if correct, rectifying mistakes if any exist.
D. Public hearings, if any are scheduled.
(1) All persons wishing to speak at public hearing shall identify
themselves by name and address, and address the Village Board on
the issue that is the subject of the hearing.
(2) If the Village Board determines that a significant number of people
are in attendance to be heard at a public hearing, a time limit of
three minutes per speaker may be set to guarantee all present have
a reasonable chance to be heard. The time limit must be approved
by a two-thirds majority of the Village Board.
E. Citizen comments.
(1) All persons wishing to address the Village Board during the citizen
comment portion of the agenda may do so in the following manner:
(a) Each such person shall register at the signup sheet at the
speaker's podium prior to the beginning of the meeting by
printing his or her name, as well as signing it.
(b) Each person may speak only once.
(c) Each speaker may talk for five minutes, unless more than five
individuals sign up to speak, then the time limit shall be three
minutes.
(2) The Village Board cannot take any official action at the meeting on
an item presented for consideration at citizen comments.
(3) The rules for citizen comments may be waived by the Village Board
with a two-thirds vote of the quorum present.
F. Administrator's report. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-30]
G. Consideration of correspondence presented to the Village Board.
H. Old or unfinished business from previous meetings.
§ 98-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 98-5
47:76
§ 98-6. Clerk Pro Tem.
In the absence of the Clerk, the Deputy Clerk shall act as Clerk Pro Tem.
§ 98-7. Conduct of deliberations.
The deliberations of the Village Board shall be conducted in the following
manner:
I. New business for consideration by the Village Board.
J. Village Board comments and those comments by Village staff that are
requested by the Village Board. [Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No.
07-30]
K. Adjournment.
A. When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the
presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak first.
B. No person other than a member shall address the Board, except by vote
of a majority of the members present.
C. No motion shall be discussed or acted upon until it has been seconded,
unless the rules permit one Trustee to initiate action. No motion shall
be withdrawn without the consent of the person making the same and
the person seconding it.
D. When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in order except
the following motions, which shall have precedence in the order listed:
(1) To adjourn;
(2) To lay on the table;
(3) To move the previous question;
(4) To postpone to a certain day;
(5) To refer to a committee;
(6) To amend; or
(7) To postpone indefinitely.
E. Any member desiring to terminate debate may move the previous
question, in which event the presiding officer shall announce the
question as "Shall the main question now be put?" If a majority of the
members present vote in the affirmative, the main question shall be
taken without further debate, its effect being to put an end to all debate
and bring the Board to a direct vote, first upon any pending
amendments and then upon the main question.
§ 98-5 ETHICS, CODE OF § 98-7
47:77
§ 98-8. Reconsideration of question.
Any member voting with the majority may move for a reconsideration of
the vote on any question at that meeting or at the next succeeding regular
meeting. A motion to reconsider being put and lost shall not be renewed. A
Trustee may not change his vote on any question after the result has been
announced.
§ 98-9. Call of the Board.
A call of the Board may be requested at any time by two or more members,
and absent members shall be sent for, but a call shall not be made after
voting has commenced. When a call of the Board has been requested and
ordered, the door shall be closed until the report of the policeman has been
received and acted upon or until further proceedings under the call are
dispensed with by a majority of the entire Board.
§ 98-10. Disturbances and disorderly conduct.
Whenever any disturbance or disorderly conduct occurs in any meeting
of the Board, the presiding officer may cause the room to be cleared of
all persons guilty of such disorderly conduct except the Trustees. If any
Trustee is guilty of disorderly conduct, the presiding officer may order the
police to take him into custody for the time being or until the meeting
adjourns. Such member may appeal from such order to the Board as in other
cases.
§ 98-11. Appropriates and accounts.
All demands or accounts shall be acted upon at the time of presentation
unless one or more members demand a reference.
§ 98-12. Publication and effect of ordinances.
F. Any Trustee may demand a roll call vote on any matter, and such vote
shall be entered in the proceedings. Every member shall vote when a
question is put unless the Board, by a majority vote of those present,
excuses him for special cause. A majority vote of all members of the
Board in favor of any proposed ordinance, resolution or appointment
shall be necessary for passage or approval unless a larger number is
required by statute. Except as otherwise provided by these rules, a
majority vote of those present shall prevail in other cases.
G. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, and a motion to adjourn or
to lay on the table and a call for the previous question shall be decided
without debate.
A. Publication. All general ordinances of the Village and all regulations
imposing a penalty shall be posted and shall be immediately recorded,
with the affidavit of posting, by the Clerk in a book kept for that
purpose.
§ 98-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 98-12
47:78
§ 98-13. Consent agenda.
§ 98-14. Amendment of rules.
These rules shall not be rescinded or amended unless the proposed
amendment or motion to rescind has laid over from a regular meeting, and
then it shall require a vote of 2/3 of all the members of the Board.
§ 98-15. Suspension of rules.
These rules or any part thereof may be temporarily suspended in connection
with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of 2/3 of the
members present.
B. Effective date. Unless otherwise provided, all ordinances shall take
effect and be in force from and after passage and posting, and posted
copies thereof shall have appended the date of first posting.
A. Clerk's responsibilities. The Village Clerk may create a subsection on
any Board agenda titled "Consent Agenda." In a consent agenda, the
Clerk shall place matters that, in the Clerk's judgment, are routine and
noncontroversial and do not require a special vote or specific action of
the Board.
B. Procedure. The following procedure shall apply when a consent agenda
is used:
(1) No separate discussion or debate may be permitted on any matter
listed on the consent agenda.
(2) A single motion, seconded and adopted by a majority vote of all
members of the Board, shall be required to approve, adopt, enact
or otherwise favorably resolve all matters listed on the consent
agenda.
(3) Any Trustee may request removal of any item or part of an item
included in the consent agenda. At the time the consent agenda is
considered, that item, as requested by the Trustee, shall be
removed without debate or vote.
(4) If an item or any part of the item has been removed from the
consent agenda in accordance with this rule, the Board shall
consider that item at an appropriate time during the Board's
regular order of business
§ 98-12 ETHICS, CODE OF § 98-16
47:79
§ 98-16. Polling places. [Added 7-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-33;
amended 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 02-65; 7-7-2008 by Ord. No. 08-39;
7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-37;
11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-39; 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-5018]
The polling places for the wards shall be at the following locations:
Wards Polling Places Addresses
1, 2 and 3 Village Hall - Auditorium 9915 - 39th Avenue
4 and 5 Village Hall - Courtroom 9915 - 39th Avenue
6, 7 and 12 Caterpillar College
Preschool
8411 Old Green Bay Road
8, 9, 10 and 11 RecPlex 9900 Terwall Terrace
13 and 14 The Addison of Pleasant
Prairie
9651 Prairie Ridge
Boulevard
§ 98-17. Central canvassing of absentee ballots. [Added 6-20-2016
by Ord. No. 16-21]
Pursuant to §§ 7.53(2m) and 7.52 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the Village
Board of the Village of Pleasant Prairie hereby creates a Municipal Board
of Absentee Ballot Canvassers and authorizes the centralized counting of
absentee ballots on election days as follows:
A. The Municipal Board of Absentee Ballot Canvassers shall be composed
of the Municipal Clerk, or a qualified elector of the municipality
designated by the Clerk, and two other qualified electors of the
municipality appointed by the Clerk for a term of two years
commencing on January 1 of each odd-numbered year. The Clerk may
appoint additional inspectors under § 7.30(2)(a), Wis. Stats., to assist
the absentee ballot Board of Canvassers in canvassing absentee ballots
under this section.
B. The Village of Pleasant Prairie declares that, in lieu of canvassing
absentee ballots at polling places under § 6.88 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, the Municipal Board of Absentee Ballot Canvassers shall
canvass all absentee ballots at all elections held in the municipality.
C. The Municipal Clerk shall give at least 48 hours' notice of any meeting
of the Municipal Board of Absentee Ballot Canvassers under this
section.
D. The Municipal Clerk, no later than the closing hour of the polls, shall
post at his or her office and on the Internet at a site announced by the
Clerk before the polls open, and shall make available to any person
upon request, a statement of the number of absentee ballots that the
Clerk has mailed or transmitted to electors and that have been returned
by the closing hour on election day.
18.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2019.
§ 98-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 98-17
47:80
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 108
ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cabarets — See Ch. 139.
Indecent conduct in premises selling
alcohol — See Ch. 194, § 194-6J.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 214.
Zoning Ordinance — See Ch. 420.
§ 108-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes, including, without limitation, §§ 61.34(1) and 66.0415(1), Wis.
Stats.
§ 108-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate, prevent, combat, control and
mitigate the harmful secondary effects of adult-oriented uses and
establishments operated within the Village, in a manner that is fully
consistent with the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.
§ 108-3. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village. Any
word, term or phrase that is defined in this chapter shall have the meaning
stated in its definition. Any undefined word, term or phrase shall have its
common, ordinary meaning unless some other particular meaning is clearly
suggested by the context in which it appears. As used in this chapter,
"shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Headings are provided in this
chapter only for convenience and ease of reference, and such headings shall
not be used to interpret the meaning, purpose or effect of any provision
of this chapter. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing statements regarding
interpretation, this chapter shall be interpreted so as to be fully consistent
with the requirements of the First Amendment of the United States
Constitution.
§ 108-4. License required; display.
A. After the effective date of this chapter:
(1) The operator of a proposed new or relocated adult-oriented use or
establishment in the Village shall obtain from the Village and
possess a valid adult-oriented use license issued pursuant to this
§ 98-17 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-4
108:81
§ 108-5. Preapplication staff conference.
Prior to filing an application for an initial or amended (or amended and
renewed) adult-oriented use license, or for a minor modification of an
adult-oriented use license, the operator or an authorized representative
of the operator shall request and participate in a face-to-face conference
with the Village's Community Development Director, or the Director's staff
designee, to discuss the proposed adult-oriented use(s), the requirements
of this chapter and how the requirements of this chapter interface with
the requirements of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable
Village ordinances, for the purpose of ensuring an efficient application
review and decision-making process. The requirement of a preapplication
staff conference shall be deemed to be waived by the Village if the operator
has participated during the past 180 days in a preapplication staff
conference pursuant to this section, or pursuant to § 420-55D of Chapter
420, Zoning Ordinance, regarding the same proposed adult-oriented use(s)
and the same other use(s) as are proposed by the operator to be located and
chapter before commencing the operation of such use or
establishment; and
(2) The operator of an adult-oriented use or establishment already
existing in the Village on the effective date of this chapter which
proposes to expand or shift the area occupied by its operations, or
to which a new or additional adult-oriented use is proposed to be
added, shall obtain from the Village and possess a valid adultoriented
use license issued pursuant to this chapter before
commencing the operation of such new or additional use or before
expanding or shifting the area occupied by its operations; and
(3) The operator of an adult-oriented use or establishment to whom a
valid adult-oriented use license has been issued shall obtain and
possess a valid amendment or minor modification of such license
issued pursuant to this chapter before making any change or
modification to the nature, operation or physical layout of the
use(s) provided for in such license; and
(4) The operator of an adult-oriented use or establishment to whom a
valid adult-oriented use license has been issued shall obtain and
possess a valid renewed or new adult-oriented use license before
continuing to operate such use or establishment after the
expiration of the issued license.
B. The operator of an adult-oriented use or establishment in the Village
licensed pursuant to this chapter shall prominently display at all times a
valid adult-oriented use license within the physically separate defined
area of the building occupied by the adult-oriented use. Possession of a
valid adult-oriented use license shall not entitle the operator of an
adult-oriented use or establishment to operate an adult-oriented use or
establishment in violation of applicable requirements of Chapter 420,
Zoning Ordinance, or any other Village ordinance.
§ 108-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-5
108:82
conducted together with such adult-oriented use(s) in the same physically
separate defined area of a building. The Community Development Director
or the Director's staff designee may waive in writing the requirement of a
preapplication staff conference whenever such requirement is determined
to be not necessary to achieve an efficient application review and
decisionmaking process.
§ 108-6. License application.
A. Filing. An application for an adult-oriented use license, or for any
renewal, amendment or minor modification of such a license, shall be
filed with the Village's Community Development Department, on a form
provided by the Village and dated and signed by the operator, together
with the application fee provided for in § 108-7 of this chapter.
B. Contents. An application shall only deal with the adult-oriented use(s)
and any other use(s) that are proposed by the operator to be located
and conducted together in a single physically separate defined area of a
building. The application for an initial adult-oriented use license shall
contain or have attached to it the following information and documents
or shall explain why any such particular requirement is not applicable
to the application. (For the required contents of a renewal, amendment
or minor modification application, see §§ 108-11, 108-12 and 108-13 of
this chapter, respectively):
(1) Name (and any aliases), street address (a post office box without a
street address is not sufficient) and telephone number of the
operator (and, at the option of the operator, the operator's fax
number and/or e-mail address if the operator consents to receive
notices or other communications relating to the application or
license by such means), and any other name under which the
operator is currently doing business or has done business at any
time during the five years immediately preceding the date of
application;
(2) If the operator is an individual, his or her date of birth, sex, race,
and state of residence currently and at any time during the five
years immediately preceding the date of the application;
(3) If the operator is not an individual, the type of entity it is (e.g.,
corporation, general partnership, limited partnership, limited
liability company, joint venture, etc.), the state in which it was
formed, each state in which it is currently doing business or has
done business during the five years immediately preceding the date
of application, and the name and address of its registered agent;
(4) If the operator is not an individual, the name and the information
specified in Subsection B(2) or (3) above, whichever is applicable,
for each of the following:
§ 108-5 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-6
108:83
(a) If the operator is a corporation, for each officer and director
and for each shareholder owning at least a 25% interest in the
operator;
(b) If the operator is a partnership, for each general partner;
(c) If the operator is a limited partnership, for any general partner,
and for any limited partner owning at least a 25% interest in
the operator;
(d) If the operator is a joint venture, for each joint venturer;
(e) If the operator is a limited liability company managed by one or
more managers, for each manager and for each member
owning at least a 25% interest in the operator; if the operator
is a limited liability company managed by the members, for
each member;
(f) If the operator is any other type of entity, for each person who
or which exercises or is authorized to exercise any control over
the operations of the entity;
(5) If the operator is not the sole owner of the real property on which
the proposed adult-oriented use(s) or establishment are proposed
to be located or operated, the name, street address and telephone
number of each such owner;
(6) If the operator is not the sole and record owner of the real property
on which the proposed adult-oriented use(s) or establishment are
proposed to be located or operated, attach proof of the operator's
right to conduct the proposed adult-oriented use(s) or
establishment on such real property (e.g., copy of deed or lease);
(7) If the operator or any person required to be listed in response to
Subsection B(4) above has been convicted during the five years
immediately preceding the date of the application of obscenity,
sexual assault, prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution,
pandering, soliciting prostitutes, lewd and lascivious behavior,
public sexual gratification or other similar crimes of a sexual
nature, or of the manufacture, distribution or delivery of a
controlled substance or of a controlled substance analog, or of
possession of a controlled substance or a controlled substance
analog with intent to manufacture, distribute or deliver, or of other
similar crimes relating to the distribution or delivery of controlled
substances or controlled substance analogs, identify the person so
convicted and state the crime, the date of conviction and identify
the court and jurisdiction in which the conviction occurred (e.g.,
Circuit Court, Kenosha County, Wisconsin);
(8) If the operator or any person required to be listed in response to
Subsection B(4) above has been adjudicated guilty during the five
years immediately preceding the date of application of any
§ 108-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-6
108:84
ordinance violations occurring in or relating to the operation of
an adult-oriented use or establishment, identify the person so
adjudicated, state the nature of the ordinance violation, the date of
the adjudication and identify the court and jurisdiction in which the
adjudication occurred;
(9) Name and street address of any other adult-oriented use(s) or
establishment(s) owned and/or operated by the operator or by any
person required to be listed in response to Subsection B(4) above
currently or within the five years immediately preceding the date of
application, and the name, street address and telephone number of
each local governmental entity which has issued or granted any
permit or license for or with respect to each such use or
establishment;
(10) If a permit or license for an adult-oriented use or establishment
owned or operated by the operator or by any person required to be
listed in response to Subsection B(4) above has been terminated or
suspended during the five years immediately preceding the date of
the application, state the name and address of the business, the
type of permit or license terminated or suspended, the date and
reason(s) for the termination or suspension and the name, street
address and telephone number of the governmental entity that
terminated or suspended the permit or license;
(11) Location of the proposed adult-oriented use(s) or establishment
(legal description of the real property, street address of the
building, and the floor and/or building unit designation, if
applicable);
(12) Zoning district in which the proposed adult use(s) or establishment
is proposed to be located (and if in any zoning district other than
the B-2 District, whether any such use or establishment is a
nonconforming use pursuant to the Chapter 420, Zoning
Ordinance; if nonconforming use status is claimed, attach proof of
each element of such status (see definition of "nonconforming use"
in § 108-24 below);
(13) List and describe all proposed adult-oriented use(s) [e.g., adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video-rental store, adult video store and/or adult
viewing facility] to be located and conducted together in the same
physically separate defined area of a building;
(14) List and describe all proposed indoor accessory uses related to and
to be located and conducted together with the listed adult-oriented
use(s) in the same physically separate defined area of a building;
(15) List and describe all other proposed principal uses and related
accessory uses to be located and conducted together with the listed
adult-oriented use(s) in the same physically separate defined area
of a building;
§ 108-6 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-6
108:85
(16)Name of the business or establishment which the proposed adultoriented
use(s) will constitute or be a part of;
(17) Whether the entire building where the proposed adult-oriented
use(s) will be located will be the physically separate defined area
occupied by the proposed adult-oriented use(s) and any related
indoor accessory use(s), and if not, attach a scale drawing showing
the boundaries of the physically separate defined area to be
occupied by such use(s) [see Subsection B(28) below], and describe
in detail the means by which such area will be physically separated
from the remainder of the building or, if applicable, from the
remainder of the building unit;
(18) Whether site and operational plan approval has been issued or
applied for with respect to the proposed adult-oriented use(s) and
any other use(s) to be located and conducted together in the same
physically separate defined area of a building, and if so, the date of
issuance of such approval or, if not issued, the date of the
application for such approval;
(19) Whether a conditional use permit has been issued or applied for
with respect to any of the use(s) proposed to be located and
conducted together with the proposed adult-oriented use(s), and if
so, the date of issuance of such permit or, if not issued, the date of
the application for such permit, and the type of conditional use
involved;
(20) Whether any existing conditional use permit will be automatically
terminated upon issuance of the requested adult-oriented use
license pursuant to § 420-119E(1)(e) of Chapter 420, Zoning
Ordinance;
(21) Whether a zoning ordinance amendment is necessary to
accommodate the proposed adult-oriented use(s) or establishment,
and if so, whether the required zoning ordinance has been adopted
or denied, or if pending, the date of the rezoning application;
(22) If the building in which the proposed adult-oriented use(s) is
proposed to be located is not existing, or if such building is
proposed to be modified, attach a copy of detailed building plans
that satisfy the plan requirements for a building permit;
(23) A detailed description of how the operator will ensure that
individuals who are less than 18 years of age will be excluded from
the physically separate defined area to be occupied by any
proposed adult-oriented use(s);
(24) A detailed description of how the operator will ensure that any
seminude individual appearing live and publicly in an adultoriented
use or establishment will only so appear on a stage or
raised platform which is raised not less than 23 inches above the
surrounding floor areas;
§ 108-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-6
108:86
(25) A detailed description of how the operator will ensure that no
seminude individual appearing live in an adult-oriented use or
establishment will be visible to anyone outside the physically
separate defined area of the building occupied by such use;
(26) A detailed description of how the operator will ensure that no
adult-oriented printed or graphic materials displayed in an adultoriented
use or establishment will be visible to anyone outside the
physically separate defined area of the building occupied by such
use or establishment;
(27) A detailed description of how the operator will ensure that no
adult-oriented movie or other adult-oriented motion-picture
materials shown in an adult-oriented use or establishment will be
visible to anyone outside the physically separate defined area of the
building occupied by such use or establishment;
(28) Attach a scale drawing of the layout of the interior of the building in
which the proposed adult-oriented use(s) and any proposed related
indoor accessory use(s) will be conducted (or of the floor or
building unit thereof to which the proposed adult-oriented use(s)
will be limited, if applicable, but in any event showing enough of
the building interior to include the boundaries of the physically
separate defined area of the building to be occupied by such use(s),
showing:
(a) The boundary of the physically separate defined area within
which the proposed adult-oriented use(s) and any related
indoor accessory uses will be conducted, with dimensions, and
showing any physical means by which the required physical
separation of such area will be achieved, and if the adultoriented
use(s) will involve the retail sale or rental of
merchandise, the location where the checkout counter and
cash register will be located within such area;
(b) The location, dimensions and function of each room, cubicle or
other enclosed space to which customers or members of the
public will have access;
(c) The location, dimensions and function of each room or other
enclosed space from which customers or members or the
public will be excluded, and the means of accomplishing such
exclusion;
(d) The location, height and other dimensions, type and purpose of
any interior movable or non-floor-to-ceiling walls, partitions,
screens or other barriers; and the function of any spaces
created by such barriers, and whether customers or members
of the public, customers, club members or guests will be
admitted to or excluded from such spaces;
§ 108-6 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-6
108:87
(e) The location and dimensions of each doorway, entryway or
passageway through which customers or members of the
public will be permitted to pass and whether the doorway,
entryway or passageway will be open and unobstructed or
closed (only exterior entrances/exits and rest rooms can be
closed or obstructed);
(f) The location and dimensions of each doorway, entryway or
passageway through which members of the public, customers,
club members or guests will not be permitted to pass and the
means of accomplishing such exclusion;
(g) The location and dimensions of any raised platform or stage on
which any seminude employees or entertainers will appear live
and publicly and the height thereof above the surrounding
floor areas;
(h) The location and dimensions of the required minimum six-foot
separation zone between any raised platform or stage where
seminude employees or entertainers will appear live and
publicly and any area where customers or members of the
public will be permitted to sit, stand, move about or dance, and
the location, type, materials and dimensions of the required
physical separation barrier at the outer periphery of such
separation zone;
(i) The location and dimensions of any bar and of any related
service area;
(j) The location and dimensions of any dance floor;
(k) The location and dimensions of any customer seating areas;
(l) The location and dimensions of any merchandise racks;
(m) The location and dimensions of any cubicles, booths, small
rooms or other small partially enclosed spaces to be used by
customers or members of the public for private viewing of
videos or any other similar purpose;
(n) The location and dimensions of any movie screen, projection
equipment, or viewing equipment;
(o) A certification that the operator has reviewed this chapter;
(p) A certification that the operator has reviewed the information
contained in or submitted with the application and that such
information is up to date, accurate and complete as of the date
of the application.
C. Incomplete applications. The Community Development Department
may decline to accept an adult-oriented use application for filing if it is
obviously incomplete. With respect to any filed application that is
§ 108-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-6
108:88
§ 108-7. Application fees.
§ 108-8. Decision.
determined upon review to be incomplete, the Department shall issue
a written notice to the operator, within five business days after the
date of filing, stating that the application is incomplete and listing the
specific items required to complete the application. If no such notice
is issued within such five-day period, the application shall be deemed
to be complete for purposes of processing. Upon completion of the
application, the Department shall notify the operator in writing within
three business days that the application was completed as of a specified
date. In the event the application is not completed within 60 days
after the initial filing of the application, the Department shall deny the
application as incomplete and shall notify the operator in writing of the
reason for the denial within three business days.
D. Waiver of application requirements. The Community Development
Director or the Director's staff designee may waive in writing any
application requirement that the Director or the Director's staff
designee determines is not necessary for the effective review and
determination of the application. Such waivers may be issued at a preapplication
staff conference or at any time during the application
review process.
E. Background check. Upon the filing of an application for an adultoriented
use license, the Community Development Department shall
immediately request the Police Department to conduct a background
check on the operator and on each person identified in response to
Subsection B(4) of this section. The Police Department shall promptly
forward the results of such background check(s) to the Community
Development Department, which shall present the results of such
background check(s) for the five years immediately preceding the date
of the application to the Village Board as part of its staff report.
F. Staff report. The Community Development Department shall prepare a
staff report on the application, which shall include the relevant results
of any background checks conducted pursuant to Subsection D above
and present such report to the Village Board. A copy of such staff report
shall be made available to the operator prior to the meeting at which
the Village Board will consider the application.
A. License. The application fee for an initial adult-oriented use license
shall be $500. The application fee for an amendment of such a license
or for a renewal and amendment of such license shall be $300. The
application fee for a renewal of such a license without change shall be
$200. The application fee for an informal minor modification of such a
license shall be $100.
B. Work permit. The application fee for an adult-oriented use work permit
shall be $25.
§ 108-6 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-8
108:89
A. Time limit.
(1) The Village Board shall decide each application for an initial adultoriented
use license, or for an amendment or renewal of such a
license, within 45 days after a complete application and the
applicable fee for such application are filed with the Community
Development Department, unless the operator or an authorized
representative of the operator agrees to an extension of time at a
Village Board meeting, which extension is contained in the minutes
of such meeting, or is memorialized in a writing signed by the
operator or an authorized representative of the operator; provided,
however, that notwithstanding the foregoing time limit, the Village
Board may toll the remaining time for decision until the next
regularly scheduled meeting that is conducted by the Village Board
if:
(a) A required site and operational plan approval under Article IX
of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance (including the
determination of the applicable physically separate defined
area), has not yet been issued with respect to the proposed
adult-oriented use(s) and any other use(s) to be located and
conducted together with such adult-oriented use(s) in the same
physically defined separate area of a building; or if
(b) A required amendment of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, has
not yet been enacted and the application for such amendment
is not ripe for decision by the Village Board; or if
(c) The operator or a knowledgeable representative of the
operator authorized to speak for and bind the operator fails to
appear at a meeting of the Village Board at which
consideration of the application is duly scheduled, and if the
Village Board has any questions about the application or the
proposed use(s) to which it reasonably requires answers before
deciding the application, or if the operator or the operator's
authorized representative are unable to answer such questions
without an adjournment.
(2) If the Village Board fails to decide an application for an adultoriented
use license within the time limits established by this
chapter, the license shall be deemed to be issued on the basis of the
information provided in the application.
B. Notice and opportunity to be heard. The Village Board shall cause a
written notice to be issued to the operator, not less than 10 days prior to
the date of the Village Board meeting at which the operator's
application is proposed to be considered, stating the date, time and
place of the meeting, the operator's obligation to be present in person
or by knowledgeable representative authorized to speak for and bind
the operator, and optionally, any additional information that the Village
Board or staff believes is necessary or desirable to decide the
§ 108-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-8
108:90
application. The operator shall be given an opportunity to present its
application and to respond to any concerns that members of the Village
Board have which might be the basis for denial or the imposition of any
special limiting condition.
C. Approval. The Village Board shall approve an application for an adultoriented
use license if the application and the proposed adult-oriented
use(s) and establishment satisfy all of the requirements of this chapter
and if the Village Board does not find that there is a reasonable
probability that the operator will fail to comply with the requirements of
this chapter or of a license issued pursuant to this chapter, based on a
substantial pattern of noncompliant behavior during the five years
immediately preceding the date of the application or other clear and
convincing information.
D. Conditions. The Village Board may impose reasonable requirements
and conditions to ensure compliance by the operator with the
requirements of this chapter or of a license issued pursuant to this
chapter, and for such purposes may incorporate by reference in its
decision all or portions of the operator's application or other
documents. The Village Board shall specify whether any condition
imposed on its approval is a condition precedent (must be satisfied
before the license takes effect) or a condition subsequent (must be
satisfied after the license takes effect to avoid a subsequent suspension
and possible termination) and may specify a reasonable period of time
within which to satisfy any such condition. For existing adult-oriented
uses or establishments that are allowed uses pursuant to Chapter 420,
Zoning Ordinance, conditions precedent shall be avoided unless they
are required to remedy serious health or safety problems or serious
adverse secondary effects in the surrounding area.
E. Physically separate defined area. In the event that the physically
separate defined area to be occupied by an existing allowed adultoriented
use and any related interior accessory use(s) involved in the
adult-oriented use license application has not been determined and will
not be determined pursuant to Article IX of Chapter 420, Zoning
Ordinance, in connection with a then-currently-required site and
operational plan approval, the Village Board shall determine the
physically separate defined area of such use(s) as part of the license
decision.
F. Denial. The Village Board shall deny the license application if it finds
that the proposed adult-oriented use(s) or establishment fail to satisfy
the requirements of this chapter, or if it finds that there is a reasonable
probability that the operator will fail to comply with the requirements of
this chapter or of a license issued pursuant to this chapter, based on a
substantial pattern of noncompliant behavior during the five years
immediately preceding the date of the application or other clear and
convincing information. The Village Board may deny a license
application for lack of specific information, which it reasonably needs to
decide the application, if the operator has been given a reasonable
§ 108-8 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-8
108:91
§ 108-9. License.
The Community Development Department shall issue an adult-oriented use
license within five business days after Village Board approval of the
application, if there are no conditions precedent, or Community
Development Department certification that all conditions precedent to the
Village Board approval have been satisfied pursuant to § 108-10A of this
chapter. If the Department fails to act timely pursuant to this § 108-9, the
license shall be deemed to be issued for purposes of the operator's right
to operate, but a subsequently issued license shall be valid and binding.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no violation of this
chapter shall result from an operator of an existing adult-oriented use
or establishment that is an allowed use pursuant to Chapter 420, Zoning
Ordinance, continuing to operate such use or establishment during the
period between Village Board's approval of an adult-oriented use license for
such use or establishment, which is not subject to any conditions precedent,
and the issuance of such license to the operator. An adult-oriented use
license shall be personal to the operator and site-specific to the approved
location, shall not run with the land, shall not be transferable or assignable
and shall not be applicable to an adult-oriented use or establishment at
a location different than the approved location. A transfer or assignment
of an adult-oriented use license shall automatically terminate such license.
(A simple name change by an operator shall not be deemed to involve an
assignment and require a new license, but the merger or acquisition of an
operator shall be deemed to involve an assignment and shall require a new
license.) Except as provided in § 108-11 or 12 below, any initial, renewed
or amended adult-oriented use license shall automatically expire one year
after the date of issuance unless it is sooner invalidated or terminated.
§ 108-10. Satisfaction of license conditions.
opportunity to supply such information. The Village Board shall
specifically state its reasons for denying any adult-oriented use license
application.
G. Minor modifications. Applications for minor modifications of adultoriented
use licenses may be informally granted in writing by the
Community Development Director or the Director's staff designee
pursuant to § 108-13 below.
A. Conditions precedent. The operator of a proposed adult-oriented use or
establishment shall satisfy all conditions precedent imposed by the
Village Board on its approval of an application for an adult-oriented use
license within the time specified by the Village Board in its decision, or
if the time was not specified by the Village Board, within 270 days after
the date of approval. The operator shall notify the Community
Development Department, in writing, within the time prescribed, of the
satisfaction of any conditions precedent and shall either provide proof
of satisfaction with such notice or request in such notice an inspection
of the premises. The Community Development Department shall make
§ 108-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-10
108:92
any requested inspection within three business days after receipt of
such notice and shall certify to the Village Board satisfactory
compliance with any condition precedent and issue the license (or
notify the operator in writing why a condition has not been satisfied)
within three business days after receiving such proof or after making
an inspection. In the event that the operator fails to satisfy a condition
precedent within the time prescribed, the Village Board's approval shall
be automatically suspended. If the operator thereafter satisfies the
condition precedent within one year after the Village Board's approval,
and files with the Community Development Department an updated
application in which the operator certifies that the updated information
is accurate and complete, together with the fee required for a renewal
application, the Community Development Department shall certify to
the Village Board satisfactory compliance with the condition(s)
precedent and issue the license within three business days, unless
facts have changed materially or the requirements of this chapter have
changed materially in the interim, in which event the Department shall
issue a notice to the operator within three business days that the
updated application is being treated as an application for renewal. If
the Department fails to act timely pursuant to this Subsection A, the
action in favor of the operator shall be deemed to have been taken
timely.
B. Conditions subsequent. The operator shall satisfy any conditions
subsequent to the license and obtain the Department of Community
Development's certification of such satisfaction within the time
specified in the license or, if such time is not specified, within 60 days
after the date of issuance. The operator shall notify the Community
Development Department in writing, within the time prescribed, of
satisfaction of any conditions subsequent and provide proof of
satisfaction with such notice or request in such notice an inspection of
the premises. The Community Development Department shall inspect
the premises within three business days after receiving notice and a
request for inspection. The Community Development Department shall
certify the satisfaction to the Village Board (or notify the operator in
writing why the condition has not been satisfied) within three business
days after receiving such proof or conducting such an inspection. In the
event that an operator fails to satisfy a condition subsequent and obtain
the Department's certification of such satisfaction within the time
prescribed, the license shall be automatically suspended. During any
such suspension, operations shall be prohibited. Any such suspension
shall be automatically lifted upon the Community Development
Department's certification to the Village Board of satisfactory
compliance with the condition(s) subsequent. If the Department fails to
act timely pursuant to this Subsection B, the action in favor of the
operator shall be deemed to have been taken on the last day of the time
prescribed for such action.
§ 108-10 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-11
108:93
§ 108-11. License renewal.
An operator wishing to renew a valid adult-oriented use license shall file
a complete renewal application with the Community Development
Department, together with the renewal license application fee specified in
§ 108-7 of this chapter, not later than 60 days prior to the expiration of the
existing license. The timely filing of a complete renewal application and the
required application fee shall entitle an operator to continue operating an
adult-oriented use or establishment during the pendency of the application,
even if the application is not decided until after the expiration of the existing
license, and until the license is issued if the Village Board approves the
application without conditions precedent. Any amendments to this chapter
that are enacted before the Village Board's decision shall be applicable
to a renewal application. The application for renewal of an adult-oriented
use license shall contain all of the information and documents required for
an initial adult-oriented use license. Such an application may incorporate
by reference specific information filed by the operator in or attached to
the most recent application on the basis of which an adult-oriented use
license was approved by the Village Board, provided that such previous
application and any applicable attachments thereto are attached to the
renewal application or are on file with the Village and readily available to
the Community Development Director, if the operator specifies the date of
such prior application and certifies that such information has not changed
and is up to date, accurate and complete as of the date of the application.
Any information that has changed since the previous application or which
was incorrectly stated in the previous application shall be updated and
corrected by the operator so that all of the information filed with the Village
is accurate and complete as of the date of the application. Sections 108-8
through 108-10 of this chapter shall apply to license renewal.
§ 108-12. License amendment.
An operator desiring to amend a valid adult-oriented use license shall file an
application for amendment of the license with the Community Development
Department, together with the amended license application fee specified
in § 108-7 of this chapter, after requesting and participating in any
preapplication staff conference required by § 108-5 of this chapter. Any
amendments to this chapter that are enacted before the Village Board's
decision shall be applicable to an amendment application. The application
for amendment of an adult-oriented use license shall contain all of the
information and documents required for an application for an initial adultoriented
use license and shall contain a complete and detailed description
of any proposed changes in use, operation, physical layout or license
provisions and a scale drawing showing any physical changes in layout.
Such an application may incorporate by reference specific information filed
by the operator in the most recent application on the basis of which an
adult-oriented use license was approved by the Village Board, provided
that such previous application and any applicable attachments thereto are
attached to the application, or that such documents are on file with the
Village and is readily available to the Community Development Director, if
§ 108-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-12
108:94
the operator specifies the date of such application and certifies that such
information has not changed and is up to date, accurate and complete as of
the date of the application. Any information that has changed since the date
of the previous application or which was incorrectly stated in the previous
application shall be updated and corrected by the operator so that all of the
information filed with the Village is accurate and complete as of the date of
the application. Sections 108-8 through 108-10 of this chapter shall apply to
license amendment.
§ 108-13. Minor modification of license.
An operator desiring a minor modification of a valid adult-oriented use
license shall file an application for minor modification with the Community
Development Department, together with the minor modification application
fee specified in § 108-7 of this chapter, after requesting and participating
in any preapplication staff conference required by § 108-5 of this chapter.
The Director of the Community Development Department or the Director's
staff designee shall be authorized but not obligated to grant a minor
modification, and if practicable, the Director or the Director's staff designee
shall give guidance to the operator during the preapplication staff
conference whether an application for a minor modification is advisable.
The application for minor modification shall contain a complete, detailed
and accurate description of the proposed minor modification(s) of the
operation, physical layout or license provisions and a scale drawing showing
any proposed physical modification(s) in layout, any information required to
update or correct any changes or inaccuracies or incomplete statements in
the information filed with the most recent application on the basis of which
the Village Board approved an adult-oriented use license so that all of the
information filed with the Village is accurate and complete as of the date of
the application, together with the certification by the operator that all such
information is accurate and complete as of the date of the application, and
any other information reasonably required by the Director or the Director's
staff designee to determine whether any proposed modification is a minor
modification. Any application for a minor modification of an adult-oriented
use license which the Director of the Community Development Department
or the Director's staff designee declines or fails to issue in writing within
10 business days after the filing of the application shall be deemed to be
denied. If the operator still desires to effect the proposed modification(s) in
the license, the operator shall file an application for an amended license.
§ 108-14. Suspension, adjustment or termination of license.
A. Upon receipt of information providing a reasonable basis to believe that
a serious violation of this chapter or of a license issued pursuant to this
chapter has occurred (for purposes of this section, "serious violation"
shall include any violation which involves criminal activity, involves the
presence of an individual of less than 18 years of age inside the
physically separate defined area of a building within which an adultoriented
use is located, or is of a type reasonably likely to result in
harmful secondary effects in the surrounding area) or that a pattern of
§ 108-12 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-14
108:95
violations of this chapter or of a license issued pursuant to this chapter
has occurred which reasonably suggests intentional violation by the
operator or a lack of concern about compliance on the part of the
operator or that materially false, misleading or incomplete information
was provided by the operator in or with an adult-oriented use
application; the Village Board may schedule a hearing to determine
whether such violations occurred (unless a court has already made such
determination), whether the operator committed or was responsible
for such violation(s), and whether adjustments in the operation,
supervision, layout or other aspects of the licensed adult-oriented
use(s) or establishment are required, or whether adjustments in the
adult-oriented use license provisions are required, to prevent similar
violations in the future, and with respect to materially false, misleading
or incomplete information provided in or with a license application,
what the accurate and complete information is and whether, how and
to what extent any such false, misleading or incomplete information
affected the Village Board's decision to approve the license application
and whether the license should be adjusted or terminated in light of
such information.
B. The Village Board shall cause a written notice of any such hearing to be
served upon the operator or upon the individual apparently in charge of
the adult-oriented use or establishment in the manner of serving a
summons under §§ 801.10 and 801.11(1), Wis. Stats., not less than 10
days before the date of the hearing. The notice shall specify the alleged
violation(s), state the reason for the hearing, and state the date, time
and place of the hearing.
C. If the Village Board finds that adjustments in the adult-oriented use
license provisions are required to ensure that further similar violations
are prevented, or in light of complete and accurate information, it may
impose such additional or further requirements or conditions on the
license as are reasonably designed to prevent further similar violations
or to deal with the situation presented by complete and accurate
information, and may suspend such license for a reasonable period of
time while such adjustments are being made and while related
requirements or conditions are being implemented or satisfied. If the
Village Board finds that the operator has intentionally committed,
authorized, approved or knowingly acquiesced in a serious violation of
the provisions of this chapter or of a license issued pursuant to this
chapter, or if a felony has been committed at the adult-oriented use or
establishment for which the operator is responsible pursuant to
§ 108-17AA of this chapter, or if the Village Board finds, based on a
substantial pattern of violations of this chapter or of a license issued
pursuant to this chapter committed by the operator or for which the
operator is responsible pursuant to § 108-17AA of this chapter, that a
reasonable probability exists that violations will continue, it may
terminate the license. If the Village Board finds, in a situation where the
operator provided materially inaccurate, misleading or incomplete
information in or with a license application, that it would not grant an
§ 108-14 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-14
108:96
§ 108-15. Appeal.
At the option of the operator, any denial by the Village Board of an initial
adult-oriented use license application or of an application to renew or
amend such a license, or any adjustment, suspension or termination of such
a license by the Village Board, or the imposition of any requirement or
condition by the Village Board, or any determination by the Community
Development Department that a condition of approval has not been
satisfied, may be appealed by the operator to the Village Zoning Board of
Appeals in accordance with the procedure and with the effect set out in
Chapter 18, Article V, Zoning Board of Appeals, but if the operator wishes
to challenge any such denial, condition or determination directly in court,
the Village Board shall waive any defense based on the operator's failure
to exhaust administrative remedies. Any denial by the Village Clerk of an
adult-oriented use work permit may similarly be appealed by the applicant
to the Village Zoning Board of Appeals, but if the applicant wishes to
challenge such denial directly in court, the Village shall waive any defense
based on the applicant's failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
§ 108-16. Inspection.
The portions of any adult-oriented use or establishment open or proposed
to be open to any customers or members of the public shall be subject
to inspection by Village inspectors or police officers at any time such use
or establishment is open to the public to determine compliance with the
requirements of this chapter or of any license issued pursuant to this
chapter. The filing of an application for an adult-oriented use license (or
adult-oriented use license based on the current information (or lack
thereof) that it has, or if the license it would grant would have different
provisions in light of such information or the lack thereof, it may
terminate or adjust the license, and may suspend the license until
satisfactory information is provided and/or for a reasonable period
of time while such adjustments are being made and while related
requirements or conditions are being implemented or satisfied.
D. The operator may be represented by legal counsel at such a hearing
and may make legal arguments, present evidence and call, examine and
cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be recorded by a
recording device or stenographer. Exhibits shall be marked and
preserved. The Village Board shall make findings of fact and
conclusions of law to support any decision to suspend, adjust or
terminate a license. If a license is terminated pursuant to this § 108-14,
the operator shall not file an application for a new license within one
year after the date of termination.
E. The procedures of this § 108-14 shall be in addition to any other
remedies that the Village may have in the event of violations of this
chapter or of a license issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 108-14 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-16
108:97
for the renewal, amendment or minor modification of such license) shall
constitute consent to any such inspection.
§ 108-17. Requirements and prohibitions.
The following requirements or prohibitions shall apply to licensed adultoriented
uses and establishments:
A. The operator (if the operator is an individual), all individuals identified
in response to § 108-6B(4) of this chapter, and all employees and
entertainers working, providing services or entertaining in an adultoriented
use or establishment shall be at least 18 years of age.
B. Any adult-oriented use shall be conducted entirely within a principal
building.
C. All adult-oriented uses located and conducted together in the same
principal building, and all related indoor accessory uses, shall be
located within the same physically separate defined area of a principal
building, and no other uses shall be permitted in such defined area
except as expressly approved in an adult-oriented use license.
D. Any adult-oriented use license shall either designate an entire principal
building as the physically separate defined area or shall precisely
designate the location of the boundary of such defined area and specify
the approved means of physically separating such defined area from
other portions of the building or, if applicable, from other portions of
the applicable unit of a building. In the event that an adult-oriented use
license fails to designate the applicable physically separate defined
area, however, any designation of such defined area made pursuant to
Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, shall be deemed to be controlling, and
in the absence of such a designation, the entire building shall be
deemed to be included in such area.
E. An adult-oriented use license shall not be issued for any adult-oriented
use or establishment if the operator, use(s) or related operation or
layout in question fail to satisfy any applicable requirements of this
chapter, Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, or any other Village
ordinance.
F. An individual shall not appear live and publicly in an adult-oriented use
or establishment while completely nude. A female individual shall not
appear live and publicly in an adult-oriented use or establishment
without wearing at least opaque pasties and an opaque G-string. A male
individual shall not appear live and publicly in an adult-oriented use or
establishment without wearing at least an opaque G-string. An
individual appearing live and publicly in an adult-oriented use or
establishment shall not uncover or expose to view his or her genitals or
anus, and a female individual appearing live and publicly in an adultoriented
use or establishment shall not uncover or expose to view the
areola or nipple of her breast. The operator shall not permit an
§ 108-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-17
108:98
individual appearing live and publicly in an adult-oriented use or
establishment to violate this Subsection F.
G. A seminude individual shall not appear live and publicly in any adultoriented
use or establishment other than on a raised platform or stage
that is at least 23 inches above the surrounding floor areas. A seminude
individual shall not appear live and publicly in an adult-oriented use or
establishment in an area that is not open to and viewable by customers
and members of the public generally who are within the physically
separate defined area occupied by the adult-oriented use in which such
individual is appearing. The operator shall not permit a seminude
individual appearing live and publicly in an adult-oriented use or
establishment to violate this Subsection G.
H. The raised platform or stage on which any seminude individual appears
live and publicly in an adult-oriented use or establishment shall be
separated from any area of such use or establishment where any
members of the public or customers are permitted to sit, stand, move
about or dance by a separation zone consisting of not less than six feet
of space (measured horizontally from the closest edge of the raised
platform or stage), and a rigid physical barrier not less than 30 inches
high at the outer periphery of such separation zone. A customer or
member of the public shall not sit, stand, move about or dance within
such six-foot separation zone while a seminude individual is appearing
live and publicly in such adult-oriented use or establishment. The
operator shall not permit a customer or member of the public in an
adult-oriented use or establishment to so occupy such six-foot
separation zone while a seminude individual is appearing live and
publicly in such use or establishment.
I. Without respect to Subsections G and H above, a seminude individual
shall not appear live and publicly in any adult-oriented use or
establishment within six feet of any customers or members of the
public.
J. An individual less than 18 years of age shall not enter or remain in the
physically separate defined area of a building in which an adultoriented
use is located. The operator of an adult-oriented use or
establishment shall not permit any individual less than 18 years of age
to enter or remain in the physically separate defined area of a building
in which an adult-oriented use is located. The age limit shall be
prominently and clearly posted at all entrances to the physically
separate defined area of a building in which an adult-oriented use is
located.
K. A seminude individual appearing live in an adult-oriented use or
establishment shall not be visible to anyone outside the physically
separate defined area of a building occupied by such use.
L. Adult-oriented printed or graphic materials (including, without
limitation, any advertising or packaging materials that are themselves
§ 108-17 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-17
108:99
adult-oriented printed or graphic materials) that are displayed within
an adult-oriented use or establishment shall not be visible to anyone
outside the physically separate defined area of a building occupied by
such use.
M. An adult-oriented movie or other adult-oriented motion-picture
materials being shown in an adult-oriented use or establishment shall
not be visible to anyone outside the physically separate defined area of
a building occupied by such use.
N. An adult-oriented use or establishment shall comply with all applicable
requirements of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, and of all other Village
ordinances.
O. An adult-oriented use license shall not be granted for the operation of
an adult-oriented use or establishment in the same building as a
residential use or a motel or hotel use, unless both the adult-oriented
use or motel or hotel use and the residential use are existing allowed
uses pursuant to Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, and the only way to
access the residential use or motel or hotel use is by an exterior
entrance that is completely separate from the adult-oriented use(s) or
establishment.
P. An individual who appears live and publicly in a seminude condition in
an adult-oriented use or establishment shall not socialize or mingle with
customers or members of the public or customers in such use or
establishment, and shall not work as a bartender, waitress, waiter,
hostess or host, or in any other capacity in such use or establishment
that involves direct contact with customers or members of the public in
such use or establishment, during the eight hours immediately before
or after so appearing.
Q. An operator shall not permit any criminal activity in an adult-oriented
use or establishment.
R. A seminude individual appearing live and publicly in an adult-oriented
use or establishment shall not touch any customer or member of the
public in such use or establishment, or voluntarily allow himself or
herself to be touched by a customer or member of the public in such use
or establishment. A customer or member of the public in an adultoriented
use or establishment shall not touch a seminude individual
appearing live and publicly in such a use or establishment and shall not
voluntarily allow himself or herself to be touched by a seminude
individual appearing live and publicly in such a use or establishment.
These restrictions on touching shall be applicable, without limitation, to
any touching in connection with the acceptance or giving a tip or other
gratuity. The operator shall not permit a customer, member of the
public or seminude individual appearing live and publicly in an adultoriented
use or establishment to violate this Subsection R.
S. A customer or member of the public in an adult-oriented use or
establishment shall not be directly and physically involved in any
§ 108-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-17
108:100
entertainment involving the live public appearance of a seminude
individual. The operator shall not permit a customer or member of the
public to violate this Subsection S.
T. A seminude individual appearing live and publicly in an adult-oriented
use or establishment shall not fondle or otherwise touch in an erotic or
indecent manner any other entertainer or employee in an adultoriented
use or establishment or voluntarily permit herself or himself to
be fondled or otherwise touched in an erotic or indecent manner by any
other entertainer or employee in such a use or establishment.
U. Any cubicle, booth or small room or other small enclosed space having a
floor area less than 100 square feet in an adult use or establishment,
which is used by customers or members of the public for private
viewing of adult-oriented materials or other similar purposes (but not
including a rest room), shall be completely open at one end to the main
room or to an interior aisle, shall be situated and arranged so as to be
easily inspected, shall contain seating for not more than one individual,
shall have walls not less than six feet high without any openings
separating it from any adjoining cubicles, booths or small rooms or
enclosed spaces. No more than one customer, member of the public,
employee or entertainer shall occupy any such cubicle, booth, small
room or other small enclosed space at any one time. The operator shall
not permit more than one individual to occupy any such cubicle, booth,
small room or other small enclosed space at any one time.
V. The hours that an adult-oriented use or establishment may be open to
the public shall only be those periods of time that are permitted for such
a use in the B-2 Zoning District by § 420-119K(1) of Chapter 420,
Zoning Ordinance.
W. An individual shall not perform or engage in any actual specified sexual
activities in an adult-oriented use or establishment. The operator shall
not permit any individual to perform or engage in any such activities in
an adult-oriented use or establishment.
X. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter:
(1) Each employee or entertainer working, performing any services or
entertaining in an adult-oriented use or establishment shall possess
a valid adult-oriented use work permit issued by the Village Clerk
pursuant to § 108-18 of this chapter;
(2) The operator shall not permit any employee or entertainer to work,
perform any services or entertain in an adult-oriented use or
establishment without possessing a valid adult-oriented use work
permit; and
(3) Each employee or entertainer shall have a valid adult-oriented use
work permit on his or her person or readily accessible at all times
when working, performing any services or entertaining in an adult-
§ 108-17 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-17
108:101
oriented use or establishment and shall display such permit upon
reasonable request by a Village inspector or police officer.
Y. Any cubicle, booth or small room or other small enclosed space having a
floor area of less than 100 square feet, which is used by customers or
members of the public for private viewing of adult-oriented materials or
other similar purposes (but not including a rest room) shall have
interior surfaces that are light-colored, nonabsorbent and easily
cleaned. Such surfaces shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times.
Z. All doorways, entryways or passageways within the physically separate
defined area of a building occupied by an adult-oriented use through
which any customers or members of the public are permitted to pass,
except exterior entrances/exits and rest rooms, shall not be closed, or
obstructed, or off limits to other customers or members of the public
unless specifically provided for in an adult-oriented use license.
AA. Every act or omission of an employee or entertainer working, providing
any services or entertaining in an adult-oriented use or establishment,
and every act or omission of a customer or member of the public
present in an adult-oriented use or establishment, which violates this
chapter or a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to
be the act or omission and violation of the operator if such act or
omission occurred with the authorization, approval or knowing
acquiescence of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent
failure to supervise the conduct of the employee, entertainer, customer
or member of the public and diligent supervision by the operator would
reasonably have prevented the violation, and the operator shall be
punishable for such act or omission to the same extent as if the operator
committed or caused the act or omission.
BB. The operator shall be responsible for advising employees, entertainers,
customers and members of the public in an adult-oriented use or
establishment of applicable requirements of this chapter and of any
license issued pursuant to this chapter. The operator shall be
responsible for closely supervising the activities and conduct of all
employees, entertainers, customers and members of the public in an
adult-oriented use or establishment in order to prevent violations of this
chapter and of any license issued pursuant to this chapter, and to
terminate any violations that do occur as rapidly as possible, and to
take such actions as may reasonably be required to prevent any
recurrence of any such violations.
CC. Any adult-oriented use or establishment shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, and all other
applicable Village ordinances.
§ 108-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-18
108:102
§ 108-18. Employee and entertainer permits.
After the effective date of this chapter any employee or entertainer desiring
to work, provide services or entertain within the physically separate defined
area of a building in which an adult-oriented use or establishment licensed
pursuant to this chapter is located, while such use or establishment is open
to customers or the general public, shall obtain and possess a valid adultuse
work permit before commencing or continuing such work, services
or entertaining. The Village Clerk is authorized to issue such permits for
periods of 30 days or one year, depending on the work plans of the
applicant.
A. An application for an adult-oriented use work permit shall be filed with
the Village Clerk, on a form provided by the Village and dated and
signed by the applicant. The application shall include the following
information:
(1) Name of the applicant and any aliases used within the five years
immediately preceding the date of the application;
(2) Name and address of the adult-oriented use or establishment
where the applicant proposes to work, perform services or
entertain, the nature of the work, services or entertainment to be
provided, and the anticipated duration of the work, services or
entertainment;
(3) The street address and telephone number at which the applicant
can be contacted regarding the application and permit;
(4) Applicant's date of birth;
(5) Applicant's sex;
(6) Applicant's race;
(7) Applicant's state of residence currently and at any time during the
five years immediately preceding the date of the application;
(8) Whether the applicant has been convicted during the five years
immediately preceding the date of the application of any of the
crimes specified in § 108-6B(7) of this chapter, and if so, the
information about such conviction(s) required by that subsection;
and
(9) Whether the applicant has been adjudicated guilty during the five
years immediately preceding the date of application of any
ordinance violation occurring in or relating to the operation of an
adult-oriented use or establishment, and if so, the nature of the
ordinance violation, the date of the adjudication, and the court and
jurisdiction in which the adjudication occurred.
B. Upon the filing of an application, the Village Clerk shall request that the
Village Police Department conduct a background check on the
§ 108-18 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-18
108:103
§ 108-19. Violations.
After the effective date of this chapter, except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to, and no person shall:
§ 108-20. Enforcement.
applicant. Any information obtained by the Village Police Department
regarding the applicant shall be promptly provided to the Village Clerk.
If the application as filed is incomplete, the Village Clerk shall notify the
applicant, in writing, within three business days after the date of filing,
what additional information is required.
C. The Village Clerk shall deny the license if the applicant is not at least 18
years of age or if the Clerk finds that a reasonable probability exists
that the applicant will violate the provisions of this chapter or of a
license issued pursuant to this chapter, based on a substantial pattern
of noncompliant behavior during the five years immediately preceding
the date of the application or other clear and convincing information.
The Village Clerk shall state the reason(s) for denial and notify the
applicant of such reasons in writing within five business days after the
filing of a complete application and the application fee.
D. If the applicant is at least 18 years of age, and the Village Clerk does not
find that a reasonable probability of future violations exists, the Clerk
shall issue the license, within five business days after a complete
application and the application fee required by this chapter is filed. If
the Village Clerk fails to act within the time provided in this § 108-18, a
thirty-day license shall be deemed to be issued.
A. Operate an adult-oriented use or establishment without possessing a
valid adult-oriented use license;
B. Operate an adult-oriented use or establishment other than in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and of a valid adultoriented
use license;
C. Violate any provision of this chapter or of any license issued pursuant to
this chapter; or
D. Provide materially false, misleading or incomplete information in or
with an application for an initial license pursuant to this chapter, or for
a renewal, amendment or minor modification of such a license.
E. Work, provide services or entertain in an adult-oriented use or
establishment without a valid work permit required by § 108-18 of this
chapter.
A. Legal actions. The Village may institute any appropriate legal actions or
proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter or of any license
issued pursuant to this chapter by means of forfeitures or penalties,
§ 108-18 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-20
108:104
§ 108-21. Authorized representatives.
Any individual representing and appearing or speaking for an operator in
any dealings with the Village Board or with the Community Development
Department shall be deemed to be an authorized representative of the
operator unless the operator has specifically advised the Village in writing
that such individual is not to be regarded as an authorized representative
or is only to be regarded as an authorized representative with respect to
certain specified matters.
§ 108-22. Discrepancies.
In the event of any discrepancy between a requirement imposed by the
Village Board pursuant to this chapter and a requirement imposed pursuant
to any other Village ordinance, the more stringent requirement shall
control.
§ 108-23. Other licenses, permits and approvals.
Possession by an operator of a valid adult-oriented use license shall not
eliminate the need to obtain any other license, permit or approval required
by any Village ordinance. Notwithstanding any other provision of a Village
ordinance to the contrary, any complete application for a Village license,
permit or approval needed by an adult-oriented use or establishment shall
be deemed to be automatically granted if the application is not decided
within 45 days after the date of filing (or the date of completion, if later
than the date of filing) and the payment of any applicable application fee,
and the Village shall issue a written notice to the operator of any required
additional information needed to complete any such application within 10
business days after the date of filing.
injunction of violations, abatement or nuisances, or otherwise as
provided by law.
B. Forfeitures; penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $250 nor more than
$1,000 for each violation, plus the costs of prosecution. Each day that a
violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate violation. The
penalty for default of payment of any such forfeiture and costs shall be
imprisonment in the Kenosha County Jail until payment thereof, but not
exceeding six months.
C. Adjustment, suspension, termination of license. The Village Board may
adjust, suspend or terminate a license issued pursuant to this chapter in
accordance with § 108-14 of this chapter for violations of this chapter or
of any license issued pursuant to this chapter that are committed by the
operator or for which the operator is responsible pursuant to
§ 108-17AA of this chapter.
§ 108-20 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-24
108:105
§ 108-24. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, certain words, terms and phrases are defined as
follows:
ACCESSORY USE — A use of real property that is related, subordinate
and customarily incidental to a particular principal use, or a use that is
specifically recognized by Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, as an accessory
use in relation to a particular principal use, and which is located on the
same lot or on the same approved site as such principal use. (Note: An
indoor accessory use related to an adult-oriented use must be located within
the same physically separate defined area of the principal building occupied
by such adult-oriented use, pursuant to § 108-18B of this chapter.)
ADJUDICATED GUILTY — See definition for "convicted" below.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — A use or establishment that sells at retail adultoriented
printed or graphic materials, provided that 40% or more of the
store's inventory of printed or graphic materials that are displayed and
offered for sale in the store (either in terms of the number of items or
in terms of the aggregate retail value of such items) consists of adultoriented
printed or graphic materials, or that 40% or more of the display
space or floor area devoted to printed or graphic materials for sale in the
store is devoted to adult-oriented printed or graphic materials, or that 40%
or more of the store's gross receipts from the sale of printed or graphic
materials during any calendar month within the past 12 calendar months
are attributable to the sale of adult-oriented printed or graphic materials,
or that the store holds itself out or identifies itself to the public by its name,
its signs and/or its advertising as an adult bookstore or as a substantial
source of adult-oriented materials including, without limitation, by verbal
or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references
to "adult books," "adult entertainment," "exotic entertainment" or similar
terms.
ADULT CABARET — A use or establishment, open to members of the
public, that serves or sells alcoholic beverages by the drink, and which
typically or on a frequently recurring basis provides or allows the provision
of adult live entertainment to its customers, or which holds itself out or
identifies itself to the public by its name, its signs and/or its advertising
as an establishment where adult live entertainment is typically available
or available on a frequently recurring basis including, without limitation,
by verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or
by references to "adult entertainment," "exotic entertainment," "strippers,"
"showgirls," "exotic dancers," "gentlemen's club" or similar terms relating
to either or both sexes.
ADULT CLUB — A use or establishment that would be classified as an adult
cabaret, adult dry cabaret or adult viewing facility except that it is operated
as a private club that is open only to members and their guests.
ADULT DRY CABARET — A use or establishment, open to members of the
public, that does not serve or sell alcoholic beverages, and which typically
or on a frequently recurring basis provides or allows the provision of adult
§ 108-24 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-24
108:106
live entertainment to its customers, or which holds itself out or identifies
itself to the public by its name, its signs and/or its advertising as an
adult dry cabaret or an establishment where adult live entertainment is
typically available or available on a frequently recurring basis including,
without limitation, by verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation
or gratification or by references to "adult entertainment," "exotic
entertainment," "strippers," "showgirls," "exotic dancers," "gentlemen's
club" or similar terms relating to either or both sexes.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT — Seminude dancing or any other form of
live entertainment performed by seminude entertainers.
ADULT MOVIE THEATER — A use or establishment, open to the public,
that typically or on a frequently recurring basis shows movies which have
as their dominant subject or theme, or which are distinguished or
characterized by their primary emphasis on, the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or that holds
itself out or identifies itself to the public by its name, its signs and/or
its advertising as an adult movie theater or a movie theater where adultoriented
motion-picture materials are typically shown or shown on a
frequently recurring basis including, without limitation, by verbal or
pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to
"adult entertainment," "exotic entertainment" or similar terms.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — A business, private club or other
use conducted at a particular location, which constitutes or includes one or
more adult-oriented uses, and the building or portion of a building where it
is operated.
ADULT-ORIENTED MATERIALS — Adult-oriented printed or graphic
materials and/or adult-oriented motion-picture materials.
ADULT-ORIENTED MOTION-PICTURE MATERIALS — Motion-picture
materials which have as their dominant subject or theme, or which are
distinguished or characterized by their primary emphasis on, the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT-ORIENTED PRINTED OR GRAPHIC MATERIALS — Printed or
graphic materials that have as their dominant subject or theme, or that are
distinguished or characterized by their primary emphasis on, the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT-ORIENTED USE — An adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club,
adult movie theater, adult dry cabaret, adult video store, adult video rental
store or adult viewing facility.
ADULT VIDEO STORE — A use or establishment that sells at retail adultoriented
motion-picture materials, provided that 40% or more of the store's
inventory of motion-picture materials that are displayed and offered for
sale in the store (either in terms of the number of items or in terms of
the aggregate retail value of such items) consists of adult-oriented motionpicture
materials, or that 40% or more of the display space or floor area
devoted to motion-picture materials for sale in the store is devoted to
adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more of the store's
§ 108-24 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-24
108:107
gross receipts from the sale of motion-picture materials during any calendar
month within the past 12 calendar months are attributable to the sale of
adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that the store holds itself out or
identifies itself to the public by its name, its signs and/or its advertising as
an adult video store or as a substantial source of adult-oriented materials
including, without limitation, by verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual
stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult videos," "adult
entertainment," "exotic entertainment" or similar terms.
ADULT VIDEO-RENTAL STORE — A use or establishment that rents at
retail motion-picture materials, provided that 40% or more of the store's
inventory of motion-picture materials that are displayed and offered for
rent in the store (either in terms of the number of items or in terms
of the aggregate rental value of such items) consists of adult-oriented
motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more of the display space or floor
area devoted to motion-picture materials for rent in the store is devoted
to adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more of the
store's gross receipts from the rental of motion-picture materials during
any calendar month are attributable to the rental of adult-oriented motionpicture
materials, or that the establishment holds itself out to the public
by its name, its signs and/or its advertising as an adult video rental store
or as a substantial source of adult-oriented materials including, without
limitation, by verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or
gratification or by references to "adult videos," "adult entertainment,"
"exotic entertainment" or similar terms.
ADULT VIEWING FACILITY — A use or establishment, open to members
of the public, that allows individuals to view adult-oriented motion-picture
materials on site, provided that 40% or more of the motion-picture materials
available for such on-site viewing consist of adult-oriented motion-picture
materials, or that 40% or more of the display space or floor area devoted
to motion-picture materials that can be viewed in the establishment is
devoted to adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more
of the motion-picture materials actually viewed in the establishment in
any calendar month within the past 12 calendar months are adult-oriented
motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more of the establishment's gross
receipts from on-site viewing of motion-picture materials during any
calendar month within the past 12 months are attributable to the viewing
of adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that the establishment holds
itself out or identifies itself to the public by its name, its signs and/or
its advertising as an adult viewing facility or as a substantial source of
adult-oriented materials including, without limitation, by verbal or pictorial
allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult
videos," "adult entertainment," "exotic entertainment" or similar terms.
ALLOWED USE — Any type of use of real property that is allowed by
Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, in a particular zoning district or any
existing use of real property in a particular location and in a particular set
of circumstances that satisfies the requirements of Chapter 420, Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 108-24 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-24
108:108
APPEAR PUBLICLY IN AN ADULT-ORIENTED USE OR ESTABLISHMENT
— Appear in areas of an adult-oriented use or establishment to which
customers or members of the public are admitted (other than a rest room)
so as to be visible to any customer or member of the public in such use or
establishment.
BUILDING — Any roofed structure that provides or is designed to provide
housing, shelter, enclosure, protection or support for persons, animals or
property. Whenever any portion of a building is completely separated from
every other portion of the building by a fire division wall without pedestrian
openings, it shall be deemed to be a separate attached building.
CABARET — A use or establishment, open to members of the public, in
which alcoholic beverages are served or sold by the drink, and which
provides or allows the provision of live entertainment to its customers.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that has been legislatively approved in
Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, for a particular zoning district, subject
to required administrative approval by the Village Plan Commission of a
particular proposed use of that type at a particular proposed location (in
the form of a conditional use permit), in light of potential problems or
potential adverse impacts associated with that type of use. A conditional use
may require other Village permits, licenses or approvals in addition to the
conditional use permit.
CONVICTED — An unvacated adjudication of guilt or other determination
in a court of original jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal
that a person has violated or failed to comply with the law, including without
limitation, a plea of guilty or no contest accepted by a court, payment of a
fine or court cost, an unvacated forfeiture of property deposited to secure
the person's appearance in court, or an adjudication of having violated a
local ordinance.
CRIME — Conduct which is prohibited by state law and punishable by fine
or imprisonment or both. Conduct punishable only by forfeiture is not a
crime.
CUSTOMER — An individual who:
DRY CABARET — A use or establishment, open to members of the public,
that provides or allows the provision of live entertainment to its customers,
Is allowed to enter an adult-oriented use or establishment in return for
the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or
gratuity,
A.
Enters an adult-oriented use or establishment and purchases, rents or
otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other
services offered therein, or
B.
Is a member of (or the guest of such a member) and on the premises
of an adult-oriented use or establishment that is operated as a private
club.
C.
§ 108-24 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-24
108:109
and that does not serve or sell alcoholic beverages, exclusive of theaters,
dinner theaters, concert facilities and organized sporting events.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who works in or provides any services in an
adult-oriented use or establishment, while open to customers, members of
the public or members, without regard to the nature of such individual's
relationship with the operator.
ENTERTAINER — Any individual who provides live entertainment in an
adult-oriented use or establishment, whether or not compensation is
received for such entertainment, and without regard to the nature of such
individual's relationship with the operator.
ESTABLISHMENT — A business, private club or other use conducted at
a particular location and the building or portion of a building where it is
operated.
FREQUENTLY RECURRING — Occurring on six or more occasions within a
period of six consecutive calendar months, provided that such six or more
occasions occur within at least three separate calendar weeks (i.e., the
period of seven consecutive days beginning with Monday and ending with
Sunday).
INDOOR ACCESSORY USE — An accessory use conducted inside a building,
e.g., not including outdoor parking, fencing, landscaping, etc.
ISSUE WRITTEN NOTICE — To personally deliver a written notice, to mail
such a notice by prepaid first class United States mail or certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by transmitting such notice by facsimile or email
if the operator has provided a fax number or e-mail address in the
license application.
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC — Individuals who are neither employees nor
entertainers in an adult-oriented use or establishment.
MINOR MODIFICATION — A modification of the physical layout of the
physically separate defined area of a building occupied by an adult-oriented
use or of the operation of an adult-oriented use, as approved by the Village
Board in approving an application for an adult-oriented use license (or in
approving an application for renewal or amendment of such a license),
or as approved by the Community Development Director or the Director's
designee in approving the issuance of a minor modification to such a
license, or a modification of the terms of an adult-oriented use license,
which:
A. Is minor in scope;
Has no potential to create or increase the risk of harmful secondary
effects of the adult-oriented use(s) in question;
B.
Is not contrary to any requirement of this chapter, Chapter 420, Zoning
Ordinance, or any other Village ordinance;
C.
Does not involve the addition of any new use within the applicable
physically separate defined area; and
D.
§ 108-24 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-24
108:110
MOTION-PICTURE MATERIALS — Videotapes, films, disks, slide shows, or
other recordings of visual images from which motion pictures or a series of
still pictures can be projected or reproduced and viewed, with or without
audio accompaniment.
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing use that was lawful in its inception,
but that has subsequently become either a prohibited use under Chapter
420, Zoning Ordinance, or a use requiring a conditional use permit which
has not been granted, and that was active and actual at the time the
use became nonconforming (as distinguished from being merely casual,
occasional, incidental or accessory), and that has been continuous with no
gap of 12 or more consecutive months since it became a nonconforming
use, and that has not been physically expanded or extended to occupy a
greater area since the use became nonconforming, and that does not occupy
a building or other structure that has been structurally altered or repaired
to the extent of 50% or more of its assessed value since the use became
nonconforming.
OPEN TO THE PUBLIC — The hours during which members of the public
or customers are invited onto or permitted to remain on the premises of an
adult-oriented use or establishment.
OPERATOR — Any person that owns, operates or conducts an adult-oriented
use or establishment; also, the person that is required to apply for an adultoriented
use license and the person to whom or to which an adult-oriented
use license is issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, joint venture, trust, association or any other type of legally
recognized entity.
PHYSICALLY SEPARATE DEFINED AREA — The area of a principal building
or of a unit of a principal building occupied by one or more specified uses
(such as an adult-oriented use), which area is defined in an approved site
and operational plan, conditional use permit or special Village license (such
as an adult-oriented use license) and is physically separated from other
portions of the building or other portions of a particular unit of the building
by walls, doorways, floor stripes, signs and/or other approved means which
individually or collectively make it readily apparent that one is entering or
leaving the defined area.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building occupied by or used for one or more
principal uses [and, if applicable, occupied by or used for one or more
accessory uses related to such principal use(s)].
PRINCIPAL USE — A primary use of real property, including any use that is
not an accessory use to a principal use conducted on the same lot or site.
PRINTED OR GRAPHIC MATERIALS — Books, magazines, newspapers,
periodicals, calendars, posters, cards, photographs, pictures, drawings,
Does not involve an expansion of any adult-oriented use or any related
indoor accessory use or of the approved physically separate defined
area occupied by such use(s).
E.
§ 108-24 ADULT-ORIENTED USES AND § 108-24
108:111
covers or other packaging for merchandise or any other similar printed or
graphic materials.
PROPOSED (USE, DEVELOPMENT, STRUCTURE, ALTERATION,
MODIFICATION, ETC.) — Any use, development, structure, alteration,
modification, etc., for which a license, permit or approval is required by
this chapter or Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, which has not yet been
issued or granted, regardless of whether or not the permit or approval has
been requested, and regardless of whether or not the use, development,
structure, alteration, modification, etc., is existing or has been commenced,
constructed, installed or completed.
SEMINUDE — When any portion of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or anus, or any portion of the human female breast below the top of the
areola, is not completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIAL LICENSED USE — Any use requiring a special Village license,
e.g., an adult-oriented use license, a cabaret license, or a liquor license. A
special licensed use can only be conducted pursuant to and in accordance
with a required Village license, and the granting of such a license is not
assured either by permitted use zoning status or by the granting of a
conditional use zoning permit or of any other Village permit or approval. A
special licensed use may require other Village permits or approvals.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely covered human
genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks and female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Simulated or actual acts of human
sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, sodomy, masturbation,
sadomasochistic abuse, beastiality or necrophilia; or simulated or actual
physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification,
with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, anus or buttocks
or with a female person's breast; or a person's simulated or actual use of an
inanimate object in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
STORE — A use devoted exclusively or primarily to the retail sale or rental
of goods or products.
UNIT OF A BUILDING — The specified area of a building in which a
tenant or other person has a right of use and occupancy for nonresidential
purposes, e.g., a store space in a shopping center building or a suite of
offices in an office building.
USE — The employment and/or occupancy of particular real property for a
particular purpose or purposes; or a particular use of real property that is
specifically recognized by Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance. (Note: "use" is
intended to be sufficiently elastic to refer simultaneously to the most limited
possible hypothetical use, e.g., the retail sale of books, and to an actual use
of which such hypothetical use is a component, e.g., a combined bookstore/
coffeehouse.)
§ 108-24 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 108-24
108:112
USES CONDUCTED TOGETHER IN THE SAME BUILDING — Uses
conducted in the same building by the same owner or operator as part of
the same business, company, firm or organization.
USES LOCATED TOGETHER IN THE SAME BUILDING — Two or more
principal uses located in the same principal building, if there are no units
of such building, or two or more principal uses located in the same unit
of a building; provided, however, that uses located in different physically
separate defined areas of a building, approved pursuant to Chapter 420,
Zoning Ordinance, or this chapter, will be deemed not to be located
together.
VALID ADULT-ORIENTED USE LICENSE — An adult-oriented use license
that has been approved by the Village Board and issued to an operator
pursuant to this chapter, and which has not expired, or been terminated, or
been adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, and which
is not currently suspended.
VILLAGE — The Village of Pleasant Prairie, Wisconsin.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Pleasant Prairie,
Wisconsin.
Chapter 114
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire and rescue protection — See Ch. 180. Peace and good order — See Ch. 250.
§ 114-1. Intent, findings and purpose.
It is the intent of this chapter that the safety and welfare of the public be
promoted by efficient use of alarm systems requiring the response of law
enforcement or fire personnel. It is hereby recognized that well-maintained
alarm systems aid in the detection of crime and other emergency situations.
It is also recognized that negligently maintained alarm systems cause an
undue burden on law enforcement and fire protection and create dangers
to members of the responding agency and the public. It is the purpose
of this chapter to establish regulations relating to the installation, use
and termination of such alarms and to establish a Safety Building Central
Alarm System, located in the Pleasant Prairie Safety Building, under the
jurisdiction of the Village of Pleasant Prairie, to monitor alarms.
§ 114-2. Interpretation.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to give effect to its purpose. It is
intended that this chapter be interpreted to be consistent with applicable
state and federal law.
§ 108-24 ALARM SYSTEMS § 114-3
114:113
§ 114-3. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
ALARM — Any mechanical or electrical device which, upon being activated
by a criminal act, fire, emergency, or any other reason, transmits a signal
to the Safety Building Central Alarm System or to a central alarm system
to elicit a response from law enforcement personnel or Fire Department
personnel or which produces an audible or visual signal to notify members
of the public within range of such signal of a need for help.
AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING DEVICE — Any electric or mechanical
unit which has the capability of automatically dialing any telephone number
programmed into it to deliver either a prerecorded voice message or other
signal.
FALSE ALARM —
FIRE DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL — Members of Village of Pleasant Prairie
Fire & Rescue Department.
LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Members of the Village of Pleasant
Prairie Police Department.
OWNER — Any person, association, corporation, institution or organization
who or which has a hookup to the Safety Building Central Alarm System or
any other alarm system.
PERSON — Any individual, association, corporation, institution or
organization.
RESPONDING AGENCY — The Pleasant Prairie Police Department and
Pleasant Prairie Fire & Rescue Department.
§ 114-4. Safety Building Central Alarm System.
A signal from an alarm resulting in response by Fire Department
personnel when an emergency or a crime did not exist at the location of
the alarm.
A.
A signal from an alarm resulting in response by law enforcement
personnel when an emergency or a crime did not exist at the location of
the alarm.
B.
"False alarm" does not include such a signal caused solely by a
malfunction of equipment, unless said malfunction is due, in whole or
in part, to failure of the owner or operator to maintain or arrange
maintenance of said equipment according to the requirements of this
chapter.
C.
A. A central alarm system shall be maintained in the Pleasant Prairie
Safety Building at such location as the Police Chief shall designate.
B. The Village Board and responding agencies shall determine who shall
be allowed an alarm connection or connections to the Safety Building
§ 114-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 114-4
114:114
Central Alarm System, and the total number of connections to be
made, according to written policies developed by the Village Board
and the responding agencies. Said policies may be changed from time
to time as deemed advisable by the Village Board. The Village Board
and responding agencies may consider, along with other factors, state
or federal laws or local regulations which require certain persons to
connect.
C. Persons desiring to have an alarm system connection to the Safety
Building Central Alarm System shall file an application with the Village
Board. The Village Board shall forward copies of the application to the
responding agency for approval of the application. Written notice of the
decision of the responding agency shall be returned to the Village
Board within 10 working days. Written notice of the decision of the
responding agency and Village Board on an application shall be mailed
to the applicant at the address given on the application within 30 days
of the date of such application. No person shall cause to be connected
to the Safety Building Central Alarm System without receiving prior
written approval from the Village Board and responding agencies.
D. All approvals by the Village Board and responding agencies for
connection of alarm systems shall be subject to the following
conditions:
(1) The applicant shall use only alarm equipment that meets minimum
alarm device standards of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and which shall be
compatible with the Safety Building Central Alarm System
equipment.
(2) All installation costs associated with connection to the Safety
Building Central Alarm System shall be borne by the applicant.
(3) All costs associated with disconnection or termination of service
shall be borne by the applicant, whether such disconnection or
termination is required by the Village Board or the responding
agency or by choice of the owner. Such costs include the costs of
termination and reconnection in the event the Safety Building
Central Alarm System is relocated.
(4) The applicant shall cause the alarm system to be periodically
inspected and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations and the requirements of the Village Board. The
Village Board reserves the right to inspect the applicant's
equipment at any time for any reason related to the efficient
operation of the alarm system. Failure to allow inspection shall be
cause for immediate removal.
(5) The applicant shall sign an agreement holding the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, its agents and employees, the Village Board and
responding agencies harmless for any and all damages or losses
§ 114-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 114-4
114:115
§ 114-5. Audible or visual alarm system.
§ 114-6. Private alarm companies.
Private alarm companies, including persons engaged in the business of
monitoring burglary alarm systems, shall be responsible for the monitoring,
maintenance and use of private central alarm stations. Any such company
shall staff its central office during all hours said company operates and
shall dispatch a company representative to the location of any alarm in
its system immediately upon oral request of Pleasant Prairie police or
the responding agency's dispatch. Private alarm companies shall provide
the Pleasant Prairie Police Department or Pleasant Prairie Fire & Rescue
Department or the responding agency's dispatch with a telephone number
at which a company representative can be contacted at any time. When
reporting an alarm to the Safety Building, a caller from such company shall
first identify the private alarm company and the name of the caller.
§ 114-7. Intentional false alarms.
No person shall intentionally cause the activation of an alarm device if
such person knows that no crime or emergency exists which requires law
enforcement personnel or Fire Department personnel to respond to such
alarm.
§ 114-8. Penalties for repeated false alarms.
resulting directly or indirectly from an alarm connection with the
Safety Building Central Alarm System.
(6) The applicant shall pay a reasonable monitoring fee as set by the
Village Board.
A. Any person who maintains an audible or visual alarm shall use and
install only alarm equipment which meets minimum alarm device
standards of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) and shall regularly test, inspect, and
maintain such equipment in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations in ensuring that such equipment is in proper
operating condition.
B. No person shall sell, install or use an alarm which upon activation emits
a sound the same or similar to civil defense sirens or emergency vehicle
sirens.
C. No audible residential alarms shall be permitted.
A. Persons with alarm systems intended to elicit a response from law
enforcement personnel or Fire Department personnel shall pay to the
Village Board a charge for false alarms responded to by such personnel
according to the following schedule for each calendar year, for each
connection to the Safety Building Central Alarm System:
§ 114-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 114-8
114:116
§ 114-9. Disconnections.
The Village Board and responding agencies may, on 30 days' notice to the
owner, require the disconnection, at the owner's expense, of any alarm
system for any reason reasonably related to the intent and purpose of this
chapter, including but not limited to failure to pay monitoring fees, repeated
false alarms, repeated malfunctions of equipment, or failure to pay false
alarm fees.
§ 114-10. Taped recorded dialers.
Taped recorded dialers to the Pleasant Prairie Safety Building are not
permitted.
§ 114-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall forfeit not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each such offence and
in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the Kenosha County Jail
for a period of not more than 30 days.
§ 114-12. Appeals.
Any person, association or corporation aggrieved by any decision of the
Village Board or the responding agency under the terms of this chapter may
appeal in writing to the Village Board, in care of the Village Clerk, within 10
days of receipt of notice of the reason such party believes it is aggrieved.
All written notices provided by the Village Board and responding agencies
pursuant to this chapter will be presumed to be received within four days
of the date of mailing. The appropriate committee shall hear such grievance
within 30 days of the date such grievance is filed with the Village Clerk. The
procedures found in Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., shall govern such appeal.
Chapter 119
(1) First two false alarms: no charge.
(2) Third false alarm: $75.
(3) Fourth false alarm: $125.
(4) Fifth and subsequent false alarms: $175.
B. Where persons employ the services of a private alarm company, said
company shall be responsible for payment to the responding agencies
of the above-listed charges for false alarms responded to by law
enforcement personnel or Fire Department personnel.
C. Each business, residence or other premises to which law enforcement
personnel or Fire Department personnel are dispatched or arrive shall
be considered a separate occurrence for purposes of determining the
number of false alarms.
§ 114-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 114-12
114:117
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 214.
Nuisances — See Ch. 234.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 242.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 250.
§ 114-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 114-12
114:118
ARTICLE I
Dog Licensing and Regulation
§ 119-1. License procedure; rabies control.
A. License required. Every person residing in the Village who owns a dog
which is more than five months of age on January 1 of any year shall
annually, at the time and in the manner prescribed by law for the
payment of personal property taxes, obtain a license therefor.
B. Fees. Such owner shall pay to the Clerk such fees as are stated in
Chapter 214 of this Code.
C. Issuance of license. Upon receipt of the required fee and the exhibition
of the certificate of inoculation required by Subsection E, the Clerk
shall issue to such person a license to keep such dog for one year. Such
person shall, upon procuring the license, place upon the dog a collar
with a tag furnished to him by the Village Clerk.
D. State regulations. Chapter 174, Wis. Stats., shall apply so far as
applicable.
E. Certificate of inoculation required.
(1) Vaccination required.
(a) Except as provided in § 174.054, Wis. Stats, no person residing
in the Village shall own, harbor or keep any dog more than five
months of age unless the dog or animal has been inoculated
with an anti-rabies vaccine by a veterinarian:
[1] During the last 12 months, if the vaccine administered was
a "killed one year" rabies vaccine.
[2] During the last 36 months, if the vaccine administered was
a "multiyear" rabies vaccine.
(b) If the owner obtains a dog or brings the dog into the Village
after the dog has reached five months of age, the owner shall
have the dog vaccinated against rabies within 30 days after the
dog is obtained or brought into the Village unless the dog has
been vaccinated as evidenced by a current certificate of rabies
vaccination.
(2) Rabies certificate. A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog against
rabies shall complete and issue to the owner a certificate of rabies
vaccination bearing a serial number and in the form approved by
the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer
Protection stating the owner's name and address, the name, sex,
whether spayed or unspayed, neutered or unneutered, breed and
color of the dog, the date of the vaccination, the type of rabies
vaccine administered and the manufacturer's serial number, the
date the immunization expires as specified for that type of vaccine
§ 119-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 119-1
114:119
§ 119-2. Regulation of dogs.
by the Centers for Disease Control of the United States Department
of Health and Human Services, and the city, village or town where
the dog is required to be licensed.
(3) Vaccination records. Each veterinarian shall retain a copy of the
rabies vaccination certificate in a file maintained for this purpose
until the date that the immunization expires or until the animal is
revaccinated, whichever occurs first.
(4) Rabies tags. After issuing the certificate of rabies vaccination, the
veterinarian shall deliver to the owner a rabies vaccination tag of
durable material bearing the same serial number as the certificate,
the year the vaccination was given and the name, address and
telephone number of the veterinarian. The owner shall immediately
attach the rabies vaccination tag or a substitute tag to a collar. The
collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog at all times.
This requirement does not apply to a show dog during competition
or training, to a dog while hunting, to a dog securely confined
indoors or to a dog securely confined in a fenced area.
(5) Cost. The owner shall pay the cost of the rabies vaccination and the
cost associated with the issuance of a certificate of rabies
vaccination and the delivery of a rabies vaccination tag.
(6) Impoundment and notice thereof. The Police Department may
impound any dog that does not carry the rabies tag required by
Subsection E(4). If the owner or keeper of the dog can be
ascertained with reasonable effort, he/she shall be notified of the
animal's impoundment. The owner or keeper of any dog so
impounded may reclaim it by the payment of the fees hereinafter
set forth in § 119-3D.
(7) State regulations. Section 95.21, Wis. Stats., shall apply so far as
applicable.
F. Prohibition. Wolf-hybrid dogs are not permitted in the Village and as
such do not qualify for a dog license.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AT LARGE — A dog is off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of the owner or a member of his or her immediate family, either
by leash, cord, chain, rope or other physical restraint mechanism.
DANGEROUS — A dangerous dog as used in this section means:
Any dog which, without provocation, has attacked, bitten or injured
any human being or domestic animal on public or private property;
or
(1)
§ 119-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 119-2
114:120
DOG — Any canine animal, male or female, sexed or neutered.
HARBORED — A dog has been fed or sheltered for three or more
consecutive twenty-four-hour periods. The definition shall not apply to
any veterinary clinic or boarding kennel in the Village.
OWNER or KEEPER — Any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation owning, keeping, harboring or possessing a dog.
VILLAGE — The Village of Pleasant Prairie, or the official, agent or
employee of the Village designated by the Village Administrator.
Any dog which, without provocation, behaves in a manner that
a reasonable person would believe poses an unjustified imminent
threat of serious injury or death to one or more persons or domestic
animals; or
(2)
Any dog which is owned, harbored or trained primarily or in part
for the purpose of dog fighting.
(3)
B. Running at large.
(1) No dog may run at large, as defined above, within the Village of
Pleasant Prairie. Any owner or keeper of any dog found to be
running at large shall be strictly responsible for said dog running at
large and shall be subject to the penalty hereinafter provided
without regard to whether the owner or keeper intended that the
dog run at large.
(2) Any owner or keeper of a dog found to be running at large within
the Village of Pleasant Prairie shall be subject to a forfeiture of
between $1 and $500.
C. Limitation on number of dogs. No person shall keep, house or maintain
more than four adult dogs one year or older on any separate parcel of
real estate located within the Village of Pleasant Prairie unless the
property has received a valid conditional use permit from the Village.
D. Harboring certain dogs prohibited. No person shall own, harbor or keep
a dog which:
(1) Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, highway, or
alley.
(2) Habitually barks or howls causing unreasonable annoyance to
persons of ordinary sensibilities.
(3) Is required to be licensed under this article but is not so licensed.
(4) Is dangerous as defined in § 119-2 above.
E. Dangerous dogs.
(1) Determination. A determination by the Police Chief that a dog has
bitten, attacked or injured any person shall constitute a prima facie
§ 119-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 119-2
114:121
showing that such dog is dangerous. Any dog cited by the Police
Chief as being dangerous shall be immediately impounded at the
expense of the owner or keeper.
(2) Notice. Within three days of the Police Chief's citation that the
animal is dangerous, the Police Chief shall send to the owner or
keeper of the alleged dangerous dog a notice by certified mail to
said owner's or keeper's last known address, or by personal
service, advising the owner or keeper that the dog will be humanely
destroyed and setting forth the following options for the owner with
respect to said alleged dangerous animal and advising the owner
that the animal may only be removed from the Village in
accordance with § 119-2E(7) of this chapter.
(3) Request for hearing. The owner or keeper may request a special
hearing before the Village Board for a determination as to whether
or not the dog is dangerous as defined in this Code. The owner or
keeper shall be advised that he has 10 days from the date of the
mailing of the notice to request such a hearing by filing a written
request with the Village Clerk. If such hearing is requested, the
hearing will be scheduled within not less than 10 or more than 30
days of the date the written request for hearing is received by the
Village Clerk. In such event, upon request, the Police Chief shall,
within 10 days, provide the owner or keeper of said dog with a
written list of facts upon which the Chief relied in citing the dog as
dangerous.
(4) Hearing. The issue to be determined by the Village Board in such a
hearing is whether the animal is in fact dangerous as determined
by the Police Chief. If the Board upholds the Police Chief's
determination, within 10 days, the owner must authorize the dog to
be forthwith humanely destroyed at the expense of the owner, or
the dog must be removed from the Village in accordance with
§ 119-2E(7). If the Board disagrees with the Police Chief's
determination and renders the dog not dangerous, the dog may be
released to the owner and the impoundment fees therewith are to
be paid by the Village.
(5) Nonresponse. If the owner or keeper of the dog does not request a
hearing before the Village Board or does not request permission to
remove the dog in accordance with § 119-2E(7) of this chapter, the
owner's or keeper's nonresponse shall be deemed conclusive
evidence of the fact that the dog is in fact dangerous, and the dog
will be forthwith humanely destroyed at the expense of the owner.
(6) Impoundment. Any animal charged by the Police Chief with being
dangerous shall be impounded at the owner's cost until a
determination is made by the Village Board that the dog is in fact
not dangerous or the owner makes arrangements to remove the
dog from the Village in accordance with § 119-2E(7) of this chapter.
§ 119-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 119-2
114:122
§ 119-3. Confinement and disposition of dogs.
All such impoundment charges shall be paid by the owner or
keeper of the dog.
(7) Sale or transfer of animal determined to be dangerous.
(a) No person may sell or transfer possession of a dangerous
animal to another person or entity without first notifying the
person to whom the dangerous animal is being sold or
transferred, in writing, of the fact that such animal has been
found to be a dangerous animal as a result of a determination
by the Police Chief or by the Village Board.
(b) No person may sell or transfer possession of a dog found to be
a dangerous animal as a result of a determination by the Police
Chief or presumptively found to be dangerous by the owner's
or keeper's failure to request a hearing by the Village Board, to
another person or entity without first notifying the Village
Clerk thereof in writing at least five days in advance of the sale
or transfer of possession, which notice shall include the
transferee's name, address and municipality and where said
transferee intends to keep the dangerous animal. Within five
days of the receipt of the transfer notice, the Village Clerk shall
mail a notice to the clerk of the municipality wherein said
dangerous dog is to be transferred advising said clerk of the
fact that the dog has been found to be a dangerous animal by
the Police Chief or by the Village Board of Pleasant Prairie and
that the dog is being moved to that particular municipality.
A. Confinement. The Police Department or any officer appointed by the
Village Board shall apprehend any dog running at large within the
Village or which does any of the things prohibited under this article and
confine the same in a suitable place.
B. Disposition of unclaimed dogs. The Police Department or keeper of a
pound shall keep all dogs apprehended for seven days (unless sooner
claimed by the owner or keeper). If any dog is not reclaimed by the
rightful owner or keeper within such time, the dog may be sold for the
amount incurred in apprehending, keeping and caring for the dog, or it
may be destroyed in a proper and humane manner.
C. Owner or keeper to pay costs. The owner or keeper of any dog so
confined may reclaim such dog at any time before the same is disposed
of upon payment of all costs and charges incurred in apprehending,
keeping and caring for the dog. Such costs and charges may include
expenses for inoculations or other medical treatment of the dog. The
owner's or keeper's payment of costs and charges incurred in
apprehending, keeping and caring for the dog shall be made directly to
the Village Treasurer.
§ 119-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 119-3
114:123
§ 119-4. Disposition of vicious dogs.
Any owner or keeper who defaults in abiding by any of the requirements
set for a dog previously determined to be vicious by the Police Chief and/
or Village Board and licensed as a vicious dog by the Village prior to the
adoption of this chapter shall immediately be impounded by the Police
Department. The owner or keeper of the vicious animal shall have 10 days
from the date of impoundment to either consent that the dog be humanely
destroyed at the owner's expense or make arrangements to remove the dog
from the Village in accordance with § 119-2E(7) of this chapter. After 10
days, if the owner or keeper does not consent to the dog being humanely
destroyed or does not make arrangements for the dog to be removed from
the Village, the dog will be forthwith humanely destroyed at the expense of
the owner.
§ 119-5. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the suspension or revocation of a license issued under this
article, any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any
regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as
provided by Chapter 1, § 1-4, of this Code.
D. Owner or keeper to post bail. The owner or keeper of any dog so
confined shall, in addition to any costs required to be paid under
Subsection C, post bail in the following amounts prior to reclaiming the
dog:
(1) For the first offense involving such dog within one calendar year:
$25.
(2) For the second offense involving such dog within one calendar
year: $50.
(3) For the third offense involving such dog within one calendar year:
$75.
(4) For the fourth or more offenses involving such dog within one
calendar year: $100.
§ 119-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 119-5
114:124
ARTICLE II
Animal Control
§ 119-6. Running at large.
§ 119-7. Removal of animal waste.
§ 119-8. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of
this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided by Chapter 1, § 1-4, of
this Code.
A. No person having in his possession or under his control any animal or
fowl shall allow the same to run at large in or upon any street, bike
path, trail, walkway, beach, public ground, or park or within any platted
subdivision or within any residential, institutional, commercial or
manufacturing zoning districts within the Village, except on any parcel
owned or occupied by such person in the Village.
B. No livestock shall be kept closer than 200 feet to any dwelling located
on an adjacent property.
C. Any animal beyond the boundaries of its owner's property or the
property of the person in custody or control of said animal must be
under positive control by leash.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in custody or control of any
animal to allow such animal to defecate or urinate upon the public
property of the Village, the rights-of-way of the Village and the private
property of another other than the owner or keeper of said animal.
B. If such animal shall defecate upon property other than that of the owner
or keeper of the animal, the owner or keeper must immediately clean up
the feces and make proper disposition of it so as not to endanger the
health and safety of the public.
C. If an animal shall defecate upon the property of the owner or keeper of
such animal, the owner or keeper must clean up the feces and make
proper disposition of it within a reasonable period of time so as not to
endanger the health and safety of the public.
§ 119-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 119-8
114:125
Chapter 125
ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 250.
Theaters, circuses and carnivals — See Ch.
326.
Zoning Ordinance — See Ch. 420.
§ 125-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the assemblage of large numbers
of people in excess of those normally needing the health, sanitary, fire,
police, transportation and utility services regularly provided in the Village
and to preserve and promote the peace, health, safety and welfare of all
persons in the Village, residents and visitors alike.
§ 125-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSEMBLY — A company of persons gathered together at any location at
any single time for any purpose.
§ 125-3. License required; exceptions.
A. License required. No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct,
advertise, act as entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage, sell or
give tickets to an actual or reasonably anticipated assembly of 1,000 or
more people which continues or can reasonably be expected to continue
for 12 or more consecutive hours, whether on public or private
property, unless a license therefor has first been obtained from the
Village Clerk. A license shall permit any person to engage in any lawful
activity in connection with the holding of the licensed assembly.
B. Separate licenses. A separate license shall be required for each twelvehour
period and each location in which 1,000 or more people assemble
or can reasonably be anticipated to assemble.
C. Fee. The fee for each license shall be $100.
D. License restrictions.
(1) A license shall permit the assembly of only the maximum number of
people stated in the license. The licensee shall not sell tickets to,
nor permit to assemble at the licensed location, more than the
maximum permissible number of people.
§ 119-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 125-3
125:126
§ 125-4. Application for license.
(2) The licensee shall not permit the sound of the assembly to carry
unreasonably beyond the enclosed boundaries of the location of the
assembly.
E. Exceptions.
(1) This chapter shall not apply to any regularly established permanent
place of worship, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium,
coliseum or other similar permanently established place of
assembly for assemblies which do not exceed by more than 250
people the maximum seating capacity of the structure where the
assembly is held.
(2) This chapter shall not apply to government-sponsored fairs held on
regularly established fairgrounds nor to assemblies required to be
licensed by other Village ordinances or regulations.
A. Application for a license to hold an actual or anticipated assembly of
1,000 or more persons shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk at
least 30 days in advance of such assembly.
B. Such application shall contain a statement made upon oath or
affirmation that the statements contained therein are true and correct
to the best knowledge of the applicant and shall be signed and sworn to
or affirmed by the individual making application, in the case of an
individual, by all officers in the case of a corporation, by all partners in
the case of a partnership, or by all officers if an unincorporated
association, society or group or, if there are no officers, by all members
of such association, society or group.
C. The application shall contain:
(1) The name, age, residence and mailing address of all persons
required to sign the application by Subsection B and, in the case of
a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation,
together with the name, age, residence and mailing address of each
person holding 10% or more of the stock of such corporation.
(2) The address and legal description of all property upon which the
assembly is to be held, together with the name, residence and
mailing address of the record owner of all such property.
(3) Proof of ownership of all property upon which the assembly is to be
held, or a statement made upon oath or affirmation by the record
owner of all such property that the applicant has permission to use
such property for an assembly of 1,000 or more persons.
(4) A statement as to the nature or purpose of the assembly.
(5) The total number of days or hours during which the assembly is to
last.
§ 125-3 ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC § 125-4
125:127
(6) A statement as to the maximum number of persons which the
applicant shall permit to assemble at any time, not to exceed the
maximum number which can reasonably assemble at the location of
the assembly, or the maximum number of persons allowed to sleep
within the boundaries of the location of the assembly by the zoning
ordinances of the Village, if the assembly is to continue overnight.
(7) A statement of the maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any.
(8) A statement of the applicant's plans to limit the maximum number
of people permitted to assemble.
(9) A statement of the plans for fencing the location of the assembly
and the gates contained in such fence.
(10) A statement of the plans for supplying potable water, including the
source, amount available and location of outlets.
(11) A statement of the plans for providing toilet and lavatory facilities,
including the source, number, location and type and the means of
disposing of waste deposited.
(12) A statement of plans for holding, collecting and disposing of solid
waste material.
(13) A statement of plans to provide for medical facilities, including the
location and construction of a medical structure, the names,
addresses and hours of availability of physicians and nurses and
provision for emergency ambulance service.
(14) The plans, if any, to illuminate the location of the assembly,
including the source and amount of power and the location of
lamps.
(15) The plans for parking of vehicles, including the size and location of
lots, the points of highway access and the interior roads and routes
between highway access and parking lots.
(16) The plans for telephone service, including the source, number and
location of telephones.
(17) A statement specifying whether any camping or housing facilities
are to be available and, if so, a plan showing the intended number
and location of the same.
(18) A statement of plans for security, including the number of guards,
their deployment and their names, addresses, credentials and
hours of availability.
(19) A statement of plans for fire protection, including the number, type
and location of all protective devices, including alarms and
extinguishers, and the number of emergency fire personnel
available to operate any such equipment.
§ 125-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 125-4
125:128
§ 125-5. License conditions.
(20) The plans for food concessions and concessionaires who will be
allowed to operate on the grounds, including the names and
addresses of all concessionaires and their license or permit
numbers.
A. Plans. Before an applicant may be issued a license hereunder, he shall
first:
(1) Determine the maximum number of people which will be assembled
or admitted to the location of the assembly, provided that:
(a) The maximum number shall not exceed the maximum number
which can reasonably assemble at the location of the assembly
in consideration of the nature of the assembly.
(b) Where the assembly is to continue overnight, the maximum
number shall not be more than is allowed to sleep within the
boundaries of the location of the assembly by the zoning or
health ordinances of the Village.
(2) Provide proof that he will furnish at his own expense before the
assembly commences:
(a) A fence completely enclosing the proposed location and of
sufficient height and strength to prevent people in excess of
the maximum permissible number from gaining access to the
assembly grounds and having at least four gates, at least one at
or near four opposite points of the compass.
(b) Potable water meeting all federal and state requirements for
purity and sufficient to provide drinking water for the
maximum number of people to be assembled at a rate of at
least one gallon per person per day and water for bathing at
the rate of at least 10 gallons per person per day.
(c) Separate, enclosed toilets for males and females meeting all
state and local specifications, conveniently located throughout
the grounds, and sufficient to provide facilities for the
maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at
least one toilet for every 200 females and at least one toilet for
every 300 males, together with an efficient, sanitary means of
disposing of waste matter deposited which is in compliance
with all state and local laws and regulations. A lavatory with
running water under pressure and a continuous supply of soap
and paper towels shall be provided with each toilet.
(d) A sanitary method of disposing of solid waste in compliance
with state and local laws and regulations, sufficient to dispose
of the solid waste production of the maximum number of
people to be assembled at the rate of at least 2.5 pounds of
§ 125-4 ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC § 125-5
125:129
solid waste per person per day, together with a plan for holding
and collecting all such waste at least once each day of the
assembly and sufficient trash cans with tightfitting lids and
personnel to perform the task.
(e) Physicians and nurses licensed to practice in the state
sufficient to provide the average medical care enjoyed by state
residents for the maximum number of people to be assembled
at the rate of at least one physician for every 1,000 people and
at least one nurse for every 1,500 people, together with an
enclosed, covered structure where treatment may be rendered,
containing separately enclosed treatment rooms for each
physician, and at least one emergency ambulance available for
use at all times.
(f) If the assembly is to continue during hours of darkness,
illumination sufficient to light the entire area of the assembly
at the rate of at least five footcandles, but not to shine
unreasonably beyond the boundaries of the enclosed location
of the assembly.
(g) A free parking area inside the assembly grounds sufficient to
provide parking spaces for the maximum number of people to
be assembled at the rate of at least one parking space for every
four persons.
(h) Telephones connected to outside lines sufficient to provide
service for the maximum number of people to be assembled at
the rate of at least one separate line and receiver for each
1,000 persons.
(i) If the assembly is to continue overnight, camping facilities in
compliance with all state and local requirements as prescribed
by the Wisconsin Administrative Code and Village ordinances,
sufficient to provide camping accommodations for the
maximum number of people to be assembled.
(j) Security guards, either regularly employed, duly sworn, offduty
state peace officers or private guards, licensed in the
state, sufficient to provide adequate security for the maximum
number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one
security guard for every 750 persons.
(k) Fire protection, including alarms, extinguishing devices and
fire lanes and escapes, sufficient to meet all state and local
standards for the location of the assembly as prescribed in the
Wisconsin Administrative Code and Village ordinances, and
sufficient emergency personnel to efficiently operate the
required equipment.
§ 125-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 125-5
125:130
§ 125-6. Issuance of license.
The application for a license shall be processed within 20 days of receipt,
and a license shall be issued if all conditions are complied with.
§ 125-7. Revocation of license.
The license may be revoked by the Village Board whenever any condition of
the issuance of the license or any condition contained in the license is not
complied with or whenever any condition previously met is no longer being
met.
§ 125-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 132
BLASTING REGULATIONS AND LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Quarries and nonmetallic mining
operations— See Ch. 270.
Zoning — Ch. 420.
(l) All necessary precautions to ensure that the sound of the
assembly will not carry unreasonably beyond the enclosed
boundaries of the location of the assembly.
B. Bond. No license shall be issued unless the applicant deposits with the
Village Clerk a bond, either in cash or underwritten by a surety
company licensed to do business in the state, at the rate of $1 per
person for the maximum number of people permitted to assemble,
which shall indemnify and hold harmless the Village or any of its agents,
officers, servants or employees from any liability or causes of action
which might arise by reason of the granting of such license and from
any cost incurred in cleaning up any waste material produced or left by
the assembly.
C. License fees. The application shall be accompanied by the license fee as
required hereunder.
A. By injunction. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by
injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction.
B. As a public nuisance. The holding of an assembly in violation of any
provision or condition contained in this chapter shall be deemed a
public nuisance and may be abated as such.
C. Forfeiture action. Any person who fails to obtain a license as required
hereunder or who violates any condition upon which he is granted a
license shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000.
§ 125-5 BLASTING REGULATIONS AND LICENSING § 125-8
132:131

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 132-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority of §§ 66.0415 and 61.34(1),
Wis. Stats.
§ 132-2. Findings.
The Village Board finds that while rock quarries and other operations
utilizing blasting produce socially beneficial products and results, such
operations, when conducted in a rapidly developing and urbanizing
community such as the Village and its environs, can constitute offensive
industry, produce nuisance conditions, adversely affect the public health,
safety, prosperity and general welfare, and otherwise result in a
deterioration of the quality of life and aesthetically pleasing surroundings
that are important to the continued growth, development and prosperity of
the Village, unless such operations are rigorously regulated and controlled.
In addition to the obvious safety hazards associated with blasting and the
potential physical injury and damage that can result from flyrock, ground
vibration, airblast, noise and dust produced by blasting operations, such
operations can also result in unreasonable annoyance and serious indirect
impacts on neighboring properties and the community as a whole, such as
diminution of property values, resultant property tax loss and the shifting of
development patterns so as to be at odds with long-range land use planning.
If not prevented or controlled, such adverse effects of blasting operations
can far outweigh the beneficial aspects of such operations.
§ 132-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control all blasting operations
and related activities within the Village and within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction area identified in § 132-6, except as is specifically provided in
§ 132-7.
§ 132-4. Greater restrictions to control.
It is not intended that this chapter will repeal any preexisting ordinance
provisions affecting blasting operations, but whenever this chapter imposes
greater or more stringent requirements or restrictions on blasting
operations than do preexisting ordinances' provisions, the provisions of
this chapter shall control. Whenever this chapter imposes greater or more
stringent requirements or restrictions on blasting operations than does Ch.
COMM 7 ("Explosive Materials"), Wis. Adm. Code, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
§ 132-5. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village.
§ 132-1 BLASTING REGULATIONS AND LICENSING § 132-5
132:133
Headings in this chapter are provided only for convenience and ease of
reference. They are not intended to be referred to for the purpose of
interpreting the provisions of this chapter. Words or phrases that are
defined in § 132-7 shall have the meaning stated in the definitions.
Undefined words or phrases shall have their common, ordinary meaning
unless a particular meaning is clearly suggested by the context in which
a particular word or phrase is used. As used in this chapter, "shall" is
mandatory.
§ 132-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all blasting operations located within the
corporate limits of the Village or within the four-mile extraterritorial
jurisdiction area established by § 66.0415, Wis. Stats., except as is
specifically provided in § 132-7.
§ 132-7. Exempt activities.
This chapter does not apply to the following activities:
§ 132-8. Definitions.
The following words or phrases shall have the meaning specified below
when used in this chapter:
AIRBLAST — An airborne shock wave resulting from the detonation of
explosives.
BLAST — An explosion resulting from an act of blasting.
A. Explosive materials while in the course of transportation via railroad,
water, highway or air when the explosive materials are moving under
the jurisdiction of and in conformity with regulations adopted by any
federal department or agency.
B. The laboratories of schools, colleges or similar institutions when
confined to the purposes of instruction or research or to explosive
materials in the forms prescribed by the official United States
Pharmacopeia or the National Formulary and used in medicines and
medicinal agents.
C. The emergency operations of any government, including all
departments, agencies and divisions thereof, if they are acting in their
official capacity and in the proper performance of their duties or
functions.
D. Pyrotechnics commonly known as "fireworks" or signaling devices such
as flares or torpedoes.
E. Small arms ammunition.
F. Gasoline, fertilizers and propellant-actuated power devices or tools.
§ 132-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 132-8
132:134
BLASTER — Any individual holding a valid blaster's license issued by the
Wisconsin Department of Commerce.
BLASTING — Any method of loosening, moving or shattering masses of
solid matter by use of an explosive, or the act of using an explosive for such
purposes.
BLASTING AGENT — Any explosive material or mixture, consisting of a fuel
and oxidizer, intended for blasting, not otherwise classified as an explosive,
if the material or mixture cannot be detonated by a No.8 test detonator
when unconfined.
BLASTING CAP — A metallic capsule containing an initiating explosive and
a base charge, open at the upper end to accept a section of safety fuse and
used for initiating the primer or main charge.
BLASTING OPERATION — Any operation, enterprise or activity involving
the use of blasting.
BLASTING RESULTANTS — The physical manifestations of forces released
by blasting, including but not limited to projectile matter, vibration and
concussion, which might cause injury, damage or unreasonable annoyance
to persons or property located outside the controlled blasting site area.
BLASTING SITE — The area within which blasting will be conducted.
BURDEN — The horizontal distance from the face to the vertical holes in
which an explosive charge is to be detonated.
CONTROLLED BLASTING SITE AREA — The area that fully includes and
surrounds a blasting site and:
DELAY — A timing element interposed between the ignition head and the
detonating compound.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Commerce.
DETONATOR — Any device containing a detonating charge that is used for
initiating detonation in an explosive. The term includes, but is not limited
to, electric blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, blasting caps
for use with safety fuses, detonating cord delay connectors, and nonelectric
instantaneous and delay blasting caps.
EXPLOSIVE — Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion unless the compound,
mixture or device is otherwise classified by the Department by rule.
EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS — Explosives, blasting agents and detonators. The
term includes, but is not limited to, dynamite and other high explosives,
slurries, emulsions, water gels, blasting agents, black powder, pellet
A. Is owned by the operator; or
With respect to which, because of property ownership, an employment
relationship or an agreement with the property owner, the operator can
take reasonably adequate measures to exclude or to assure the safety
of persons and property.
B.
§ 132-8 BLASTING REGULATIONS AND LICENSING § 132-8
132:135
powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating
cord, igniter cord and igniters.
FACE — The exposed vertical surface of rock resulting from blasting.
FLYROCK — Rock or other solid materials that are propelled through the
air and along the surface of the ground as a result of a blast.
GROUND VIBRATION — A shaking of the ground caused by the elastic wave
emanating from the blast.
INHABITED BUILDING — A building regularly occupied in whole or in
part as a habitation for human beings, or any church, schoolhouse, railroad
station, store or other structure where people are accustomed to assemble.
MAGAZINE — Any building, container or structure other than an explosives
manufacturing building, of approved construction, used for the storage of
explosive materials.
OPERATOR — The person who is responsible for a blasting operation at a
blasting site.
PARTICLE VELOCITY — Any measure of ground vibration describing the
velocity at which a particle of ground vibrates when excited by a seismic
wave.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, firm,
partnership, society or joint stock company.
PRIMER — A capped fuse, electric detonator or any other detonating device
inserted in or attached to a cartridge of explosive.
STEMMING — The inert material, such as drill cuttings, used in the collar
portion or elsewhere of a blast hole to confine the gaseous products of
detonation:
TEMPORARY LICENSE — A blasting operation license for a blasting
operation that will not exceed 15 days in duration and will not be recurring
in essentially the same location.
UNREASONABLE ANNOYANCE — An excessive, repeated noise, vibration
or other disturbance that is not justified, taking into account all of the facts
of the particular situation.
§ 132-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 132-8
132:136
ARTICLE II
Licenses
§ 132-9. License required.
Except as is expressly provided in this chapter to the contrary, no person
shall commence, conduct or engage in any blasting operation, or conduct
or engage in any related activities, without a valid and effective blasting
operation license issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 132-10. Existing operations.
With respect to ongoing blasting operations that were commenced prior
to the effective date of this chapter and which were active and actual
on such date, the operator shall have 60 days from the effective date of
this chapter to submit an application for a license. The Village Board may
extend such time upon good cause shown. During such period, and during
any extension thereof, the operator of any such blasting operation shall be
deemed to have an interim license, subject to all of the minimum standards
and requirements of this chapter. A timely application submitted by the
operator of such a blasting operation shall be treated as an interim license,
subject to all of the minimum standards and requirements of this chapter,
until such time as the Village Board acts upon the application.
§ 132-11. License application.
The application for a blasting operation license shall be submitted to the
Village Clerk on forms provided by the Village, together with the
appropriate application fee. The application for a blasting operation license
shall be signed by the applicant and shall be accompanied by the following
information and materials (which may be combined, so long as the required
information is presented in a clear and understandable manner):
A. Name, address, telephone number. The name, address and telephone
number of the operator, and the name, address and telephone number
of the owner(s) of the proposed controlled blasting site area, or any part
thereof, if the operator is not the owner.
B. Standing. A copy of the operator's deed, contract to purchase, lease or
other agreement or document authorizing the operator to conduct a
blasting operation on the blasting site and to exercise the requisite
degree of control over the proposed controlled blasting site area. The
expiration date, if any, of such authorization shall be clearly stated on
the face of any such document.
C. Description; acreage. A legal description, or other description or
depiction satisfactory to the Village Board, of the proposed blasting site
and of the proposed controlled blasting site area, and the total number
of acres included in the blasting site and the controlled blasting site
area.
§ 132-9 BLASTING REGULATIONS AND LICENSING § 132-11
132:137
D. Other permits or licenses. A list of all other current blasting operations
of the operator, including those that have been terminated within the
past three years, and with respect to each, the name, address and
telephone number of each permitting or licensing entity.
E. General location map. A map of the community showing the general
location of the controlled blasting site area.
F. Survey scaled drawing or aerial photograph. Five copies of a survey,
scaled drawing or scaled aerial photograph, at a scale of not less than
one inch equals 200 feet, showing the following:
(1) The boundaries of the blasting site.
(2) The boundaries of the controlled blasting site area.
(3) Location (and names, if applicable) of all streams, lakes, ponds or
other bodies of navigable water, floodplains, wetlands, primary
environmental corridors, streets or highways, railroads, utility lines
and pipelines within the boundaries of the controlled blasting site
area or within 300 feet thereof.
(4) Location of all inhabited structures within the boundaries of the
controlled blasting site area or within 300 feet thereof.
G. Zoning. Zoning of the controlled blasting site area and of all properties
within 300 feet of such boundaries.
H. Photographs. Photographs (eight inches by 10 inches) of the blasting
site and of those aspects of the controlled blasting site area and its
surroundings which will assist the Village Board in understanding the
potential adverse impacts of the blasting operation and the proposed
methods of eliminating or controlling such adverse impacts and, if
available, an aerial photograph of such area and its surroundings
(usually available from the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission).
I. Operations plan. An operations plan, consisting of maps, diagrams,
narrative documents and/or other materials, describing and explaining
in detail the nature and purpose of the proposed blasting operation, the
methods and procedures to be used in blasting, the methods and
procedures to be used in eliminating or minimizing any potential
adverse effects of the proposed blasting operation, and a proposed
timetable for completion of the proposed blasting operation, which plan
shall contain, without limitation, the following:
(1) Type and approximate volume of material to be blasted.
(2) Type of explosive materials and initiation system to be used.
(3) Timetable for the commencement and, to the extent practical,
duration and cessation of the blasting operation and, if seasonal
§ 132-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 132-11
132:138
operations are intended, the months during which the operation
will be conducted.
(4) Anticipated hours and days during which the blasting operation
will be conducted.
(5) A detailed description and explanation of all methods that will be
used to control and monitor flyrock.
(6) A detailed description and explanation of all methods that will be
used to control and monitor ground vibrations.
(7) A detailed description and explanation of all methods that will be
used to control and monitor airblast.
(8) A detailed description and explanation of all methods that will be
used to control and monitor other noise associated with the
blasting operation.
(9) A detailed description and explanation of all methods that will be
used to control and monitor dust associated with the blasting
operation.
(10) A detailed description and explanation of the methods that will be
used to control access to and otherwise assure the safety of
persons and property within the controlled blasting site area.
(11) If the blasting is proposed to be conducted below the surface of the
ground, the observed or estimated depth of groundwater, together
with a description of the location(s) and date(s) of any observations
and the basis for any estimates.
(12) If the blasting or the shattering effects thereof on the rock or other
material being blasted will be below the level of the groundwater, a
detailed description and explanation of how the operator will avoid
any drawdown or pollution of groundwater that may adversely
affect nearby wells, and a detailed description and explanation of
all methods used to monitor the effects of the operation on the
groundwater table.
(13) A detailed statement of the following:
(a) The beneficial aspects of the proposed blasting operation.
(b) The potential adverse impacts of the proposed blasting
operation on humans residing, working or otherwise present in
the vicinity of the proposed blasting operation which cannot be
totally eliminated by proposed control measures.
(c) The potential adverse environmental impacts of the proposed
blasting operation which cannot be totally avoided by proposed
control measures.
§ 132-11 BLASTING REGULATIONS AND LICENSING § 132-11
132:139
(d) The potential adverse economic impacts of the proposed
blasting operation on neighboring property owners or the
Village which cannot be totally avoided by the proposed control
measures.
(14) A detailed, step-by-step description and explanation of all aspects
of the proposed blasting operation and methodology, including,
without limitation and as applicable, drilling procedure (and how
the burden and depth of holes will be measured), benching, the
initiation system, type and sequencing of delays, the explosives
used and a full description of a typical proposed production shot, if
applicable, including the height of the face, number of holes, size of
holes, burden, spacing and maximum pounds of explosives per
delay.
(15) A detailed plan for the storage, handling and use of explosives. Any
such proposed procedures shall comply with all federal, state and
local regulations.
(16) Map, diagram and/or narrative describing in detail the sequential
stages of the blasting operation, if any, or, if no stages are planned,
a detailed description of how the operator plans to proceed with
the blasting operation.
(17) A plan describing and explaining in detail the handling of all water
in the blasting site.
(18) A detailed map or diagram and description of the location, type,
height and installation of proposed fencing.
(19) A detailed description and explanation of the methods by which the
operator proposes to determine whether the proposed blasting
operation has damaged or diminished the value of nearby
properties, including, for example, periodic evaluation of
structures, wells and market value, and whether the operator is
willing to reimburse nearby property owners for any such losses.
(20) A detailed description of all structures or areas of archeological or
historic interest within the boundaries of the controlled blasting
site area, and a detailed explanation of whether and to what extent
the operation will affect such structures or areas.
(21) Any other information or materials required to demonstrate that
the proposed blasting operation will result in no significant loss,
harm or damage to neighboring property owners, to the Village or
to the public health, safety and welfare, nor any serious risk of any
such loss, harm or damage.
(22) In the event that the proposed blasting operation is a quarry
operation for which a permit is required under Chapter 270,
Quarries and Nonmetallic Mining Operations, of the Village Code
and/or under Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, documents
§ 132-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 132-11
132:140
§ 132-12. Fees.
The fee for an initial blasting operation license or a renewed license
involving substantial changes in the operation shall be $3,000. The fee for a
renewed blasting operation license not involving substantial changes in the
blasting operation shall be $500. The fee for a temporary blasting operation
license shall be $1,000. The fee for an amendment of a blasting operation
license shall be $1,000.
§ 132-13. Public hearing.
Upon receipt of a complete license application, the Village Clerk shall refer
the application to the Village Plan Commission for its recommendations
and schedule a public hearing on the application before the Village Board.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published as Class 1 notice in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Village and posted. In addition,
notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the operator, the owner(s) of
submitted in connection with such permit application(s) can be
referred to and incorporated by reference to the extent such
documents are accurate and responsive.
J. Additional information. The Village Board and its designees may
require the submittal of such additional information or documents as
may be necessary or desirable to determine the nature and extent of the
proposed blasting operation, the potential adverse impacts of such
operation on neighboring property owners or their property, persons
residing, working or otherwise present in the vicinity of the proposed
operation, or the Village in general, and the appropriate methods to
eliminate or mitigate potential adverse impacts of the operation.
K. Waiver of application requirements. The Village Board may waive any
specified information or documents required to be submitted with the
application for a permit, if it is satisfied that such information or
documents are not relevant or are unnecessary to a full and effective
evaluation of the proposed blasting operation, or if the cost of
producing certain information or documents is unreasonable in
comparison to the usefulness of the information or documents in the
evaluation process. The Village Board's designees may preliminarily
waive any such information requirements on the same grounds, but
such a preliminary waiver may be reversed by the Village Board. In
determining whether to waive application information requirements,
the Village Board and its designees shall take into account, without
limitation, the nature, extent and duration of the proposed blasting
operation, the surrounding existing and anticipated land uses, and
whether and to what extent the potential adverse impacts of the
operation are known because the operation preexisted the effective
date of this chapter. It shall be the obligation of the applicant to request
in writing any such waiver. Such request shall set forth the justification
for such waiver.
§ 132-11 BLASTING REGULATIONS AND LICENSING § 132-13
132:141
the proposed controlled blasting site area, and to the last known address of
all owners of real property located within 300 feet of the boundaries of the
blasting site. This requirement of actual notice to persons other than the
operator and the owner(s) of the proposed controlled blasting site area is
precatory, and the failure to mail or receive such notice shall not invalidate
any action taken by the Village Board. At the hearing, the Village Board
shall hear and receive information or recommendations presented by the
Village Plan Commission, staff, and consultants, information presented by
the applicant or the applicant's authorized agents and consultants, and
information presented by members of the public. If the Village Board
determines that additional time or information is required, the public
hearing may be adjourned or continued from time to time at the direction
of the Board. The applicant shall be given an opportunity to respond to any
adverse information or recommendations.
§ 132-14. Action on application.
After the hearing, the Village Board shall either grant or deny the license
application on the basis of express findings and conclusions. The Village
Board may condition any permit granted upon compliance with specified
operational requirements, including without limitation the minimum
requirements of this chapter, except as such requirements may be
appropriately varied by the Board under § 132-21, and the requirements
of all other applicable federal, state, and local statutes, rules, regulations,
ordinances and permits relating to blasting. The Board may impose
requirements which are in addition to or more stringent than the minimum
requirements of this chapter and shall consider the imposition of such
requirements if the controlled blasting site area or any part thereof is
within, adjacent to or less than 300 feet from a residential zoning district.
In granting a permit, the Board shall specify all aspects of the proposed
blasting plan which are not approved. No application shall be granted
unless the Board first finds that the approved operation, as conditioned,
will result in no significant loss, harm or damage to neighboring property
owners, to the Village, or to the public health, safety or welfare, nor serious
risk of any such loss, harm or damage. In deciding upon an application
regarding a blasting operation that preexisted the effective date of this
chapter and was active and actual on the effective date of this chapter, the
Village Board shall take into account the nature, extent, circumstances and
past performance of the operation and shall modify the requirements of this
chapter to the extent necessary to ensure that the license requirements are
reasonable under the particular circumstances.
§ 132-15. Term.
Licenses shall be granted by the Village Board for a maximum term of two
years for ongoing blasting operations or operations that will be conducted
for a period of more than 15 days or will be recurring from time to time in
essentially the same location. Licenses may thereafter be renewed by the
Board for successive terms of not more than two years each. Temporary
licenses may be granted by the Village Board for a maximum term of 15
§ 132-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 132-15
132:142
days, which may be extended in writing, upon good cause shown, by the
Village Administrator for a period not to exceed seven days. Any license
issued pursuant to this chapter shall automatically terminate upon the
abandonment of the blasting operation.
§ 132-16. Renewal.
Applications for the renewal of a license shall be filed with the Village
Clerk not later than 45 days prior to the expiration date. Applications
for the extension of a temporary license shall be filed with the Village
Clerk prior to the expiration of the temporary license. Any information
or materials required for an initial license application shall be supplied
with the application for the renewal to the extent that such information or
materials were not supplied with the previous application or to the extent
that the previously supplied information or materials are out of date or no
longer accurate and complete. The applicant for a renewal license shall
certify that any previously submitted information or materials that is not
updated or resubmitted continues to be accurate and complete. Such an
application shall be processed in the same manner as an initial permit
application. In the event that a timely renewal application is not decided
by the expiration date of the license, the license shall be deemed to be
extended to the date of the Board's decision.
§ 132-17. Amendment.
In the event that the operator desires to make any substantial modification
in the licensed blasting operation, the operator shall file with the Village
Clerk an application for an amendment of the license, together with the
appropriate fee. Such application shall describe in detail the proposed
modification; explain the effects of the proposed modification; supplement
and update the information and materials submitted with the prior
application; and make the certification required for renewal applications.
Such an application shall be processed in the same manner as an initial
license application.
§ 132-18. Security.
As a condition of any blasting operation license issued pursuant to this
chapter, the Village Board shall require, and the operator shall deposit with
the Village prior to the issuance of the license, an irrevocable letter of
credit, cash, a bond or other security in an amount adequate to secure
the obligation of the operator to perform conditions imposed by the Village
Board, when compliance cannot reasonably be assured by the usual
enforcement procedures or when the Village may reasonably be exposed
to substantial cost or liability in the event of noncompliance. Any security
instrument shall be in a form satisfactory to the Board or its designees and
shall be issued by a person satisfactory to the Board or its designees, but the
Board's approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any cash deposited
with the Village shall be deposited in a segregated interest-bearing account
and shall be used only for the purposes specified in this section. Any
§ 132-15 BLASTING REGULATIONS AND LICENSING § 132-18
132:143
security shall be promptly released or returned to the operator, with any
accrued interest, upon the termination of the blasting operation, less any
costs incurred by the Village. The termination, expiration, or release of
a security instrument or security deposit, in the absence of a renewal or
replacement thereof or the making of other arrangements satisfactory to
the Village Board, shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the
operator's license.
§ 132-19. Transfer.
Licenses issued under this chapter may be transferred only with the prior
written approval of the Village Board. Such approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld, but the Board shall not approve any transfer in the
absence of satisfactory arrangements regarding security and the prompt
correction of any prior failure to comply with license requirements, and
satisfactory assurances of future compliance.
§ 132-20. Suspension, denial of renewal or revocation of license.
The Village Board, after notice to the operator and a hearing, may suspend
a license if it finds that the operator is guilty of a pattern of repeated
violations after similar violations have been brought to the attention of
the operator, or of violations involving a serious risk of personal injury,
substantial property damage or substantial harm to the public health, safety
or welfare, or for the reasons set out in § 132-18 of this chapter, and may
deny renewal of a license or revoke a license if it finds that the operator is
guilty of a pattern of repeated violations involving a serious risk of personal
injury, substantial property damage or substantial harm to the public health,
safety or welfare.
§ 132-21. Variances.
A. The Village Board may grant variances from the literal requirements of
this chapter, when it is not otherwise expressly authorized to modify
requirements, after publication of a Class 1 notice and a public hearing,
if it finds that:
(1) Because of special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
requirements of this chapter will result in practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardship;
(2) Granting a variance will not result in any significant loss, harm or
damage to neighboring property owners or to the Village; and
(3) The spirit of this chapter will be observed by the variance, the
public health, safety and welfare will be secured and substantial
justice will be done.
B. Specific conditions may be imposed by the Board upon the grant of any
variance.
§ 132-18 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 132-21
132:144
ARTICLE III
Standards and Requirements
§ 132-22. Minimum standards and requirements.
The following are intended to be minimum standards and requirements for
all blasting operations.
§ 132-23. General conduct of blasting operations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or of any license issued
under this chapter, no blasting operation shall be conducted in such a
manner as to cause any substantial loss, harm or damage to the owner of
any property located outside of the controlled blasting site area, or to the
Village, or to the public health, safety or welfare, or to create a serious risk
of such loss, harm or damage.
§ 132-24. Licensed blaster required.
No person shall prepare explosive materials for use in any blasting
operation or conduct or engage in any blasting operation, and no operator
shall employ any person for such purposes, unless the person so preparing
explosive materials or conducting or engaging in a blasting operation holds
a valid blaster's license of the proper classification issued by the
Department pursuant to Ch. COMM 7, Wis. Adm. Code, or unless such
person is working under the direct supervisor of a blaster holding a valid
blaster's license of the proper classification.
§ 132-25. Compliance required.
No person shall conduct or engage in any blasting operation, or any related
activities, without complying fully with the requirements of this chapter and
the requirements of Ch. COMM 7 ("Explosive Materials"), Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 132-26. Time.
Blasting operations shall only be conducted between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. on Mondays through Fridays and between 9:00 a.m. and noon on
Saturdays other than on legal holidays, or during more restrictive periods
specified in a particular blasting license; provided, however, that in the
event an emergency has delayed a blast, a loaded charge may be exploded
within a reasonable time thereafter. The Village Administrator may
authorize in writing individual instances of blasting outside of the normally
permissible time periods upon a showing of extreme nonrecurring need by
an operator.
§ 132-27. Blasting log.
A blasting log shall be prepared and maintained by the operator for each
blast, and a complete copy of such log shall be delivered to the Village Clerk
§ 132-22 BLASTING REGULATIONS AND LICENSING § 132-27
132:145
within three working days after such blast. Each blasting log shall contain
the following information, if applicable and without limitation:
§ 132-28. Required monitoring instruments.
All blast monitoring instruments utilized to monitor blasts pursuant to this
chapter shall comply with the following minimum specifications:
A. Name and license number of blaster in charge of the blast;
B. Blast location with grid coordinates referenced to a scaled aerial
photograph or scaled diagram of the blasting site;
C. Date and time of blast;
D. Weather conditions at time of blast;
E. Diagram and cross section of blast layout;
F. Number of blast holes, if applicable;
G. Blast hole depth and diameter;
H. Spacing and burden of blast holes;
I. Number of holes per delay or number of delays per hole;
J. Maximum pounds of explosives per delay;
K. Total pounds of explosives used;
L. Depth and type of stemming used;
M. Distance to nearest inhabited building outside of the controlled blasting
site area;
N. Type of initiation system used;
O. Exact location of the monitoring instrument, including the distance
from the blast and the grid coordinates of the instrument referenced to
a scaled aerial photograph or scaled diagram of the blasting site and
surroundings supplied to the Village;
P. Name and affiliation of the individual reading the monitoring
instrument;
Q. Type, manufacturer and model of the monitoring instrument used and
the last calibration date;
R. Peak particle velocity and airblast levels recorded; and
S. Name of individual and firm analyzing the peak particle velocity and
airblast data, when required.
A. Seismic frequency range: 2 to 200 Hz (±3 dB).
§ 132-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 132-28
132:146
§ 132-29. Monitoring required.
The operator shall monitor every blast with a blast monitoring instrument
satisfying the requirements of this chapter located in the immediate vicinity
of the closest inhabited building outside of the controlled blasting area
or, if the operator cannot obtain permission to monitor at such location,
at the location best approximating the location of such building for the
purposes of accurately monitoring the level of the blasting resultants at
such building. Village officials may direct the operator to monitor blasts
at other locations from time to time, and the operator shall comply with
such directions. If it appears that the blasting resultants are higher at an
inhabited building outside of the controlled blasting site area other than
the closest such inhabited building, the monitoring instrument shall be
located in the immediate vicinity of such other building. The peak particle
velocity and peak airblast decibel readings with respect to each blast shall
be delivered to the Village Clerk within three business days after the blast.
§ 132-30. Flyrock limitation.
Flyrock traveling through the air or along the ground shall remain within
the controlled blasting site area and shall not be cast from the location
of the blast more than one-half of the distance to the nearest inhabited
building within or outside of the controlled blasting site area. Any violation
of this requirement shall be reported immediately by the operator to the
Village Clerk with a full explanation of the probable cause of such violation
and the steps being taken to preclude any possibility of a repetition.
§ 132-31. Ground vibration limitation.
Ground vibration resulting from a blast shall not exceed the peak particle
velocity limit set out in the following Figure 1 at the inhabited building
located outside of the controlled blasting site area which is closest to the
location of the blast or at any inhabited building located outside of the
controlled blasting site area.
B. Acoustic frequency range; 2 to 200 Hz (+3 dB).
C. Velocity range 0.02 to 4.0 inches/second.
D. Sound range: 110 to 140 dB linear.
E. Transducers: three mutually perpendicular axes.
F. Recording: provide time-history of waveform.
G. Calibration: be laboratory calibrated as often as necessary, but at least
once every 12 months and according to manufacturer's
recommendations.
§ 132-28 BLASTING REGULATIONS AND LICENSING § 132-31
132:147
§ 132-32. Airblast limitation.
Airblast resulting from a blast shall not exceed 118 dB at the inhabited
building located outside the controlled blasting site area which is closest to
the location of the blast or at any other inhabited building located outside
of the controlled blasting site area.
§ 132-31 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 132-32
132:148
ARTICLE IV
Administration and Enforcement
§ 132-33. Records.
All records of the operator regarding the conduct of the blasting operation
shall be subject to inspection by Village officials at all reasonable times at
the controlled blasting site area.
§ 132-34. Access.
Upon notification to the blasting operator or the operator's representative
at the blasting site, Village officials shall have a right of access to the
blasting site and the controlled blasting site area for the purpose of
inspecting the site, the operation and the operator's records at all
reasonable times.
§ 132-35. Department regulations.
Chapter COMM 7 ("Explosive Materials"), Wis. Adm. Code, as amended
from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference, except that where this
chapter imposes additional or greater or more stringent requirements, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 132-36. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful to commence, continue, conduct or engage in any
blasting operation without a valid and effective license issued pursuant
to this chapter, or to fail to obtain a required renewal or amendment of
such a license, or otherwise to violate or fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter, or any of the requirements of any license,
decision or order issued pursuant to this chapter.
A. Enforcement. The Village Board and its designees may enforce the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of all licenses, decisions
and orders issued pursuant to this chapter by means of compliance,
suspension and termination orders; the denial, suspension or
revocation of licenses; proceedings or actions to impose forfeitures;
actions seeking injunctive relief; draws upon cash deposits, bonds,
letters of credit or other security instruments; or any other lawful
means, either individually or in combination.
B. Forfeitures. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any
requirement of this chapter or any requirement of any license, decision
or order issued pursuant to this chapter shall, upon entry of judgment
of any court of competent jurisdiction, forfeit with respect to each such
violation or failure to comply not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
or the maximum permissible amount of such a forfeiture, whichever is
greater, plus the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such
amounts, such person shall be imprisoned in the county jail until
§ 132-33 BLASTING REGULATIONS AND LICENSING § 132-36
132:149
payment thereof, but not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation or
failure to comply exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 132-36 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 132-36
132:150
Chapter 133
BLOCK PARTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mass public assemblies — See Ch. 125. Peace and good order — See Ch. 250.
§ 133-1. Purpose.
The streets in the possession of the Village are primarily for the use of
the public in the ordinary way. However, under proper circumstances, the
Village Clerk may grant a permit for street use, subject to reasonable
municipal regulation and control. Therefore, this chapter is enacted to
regulate and control the use of streets pursuant to a block party permit, to
the end that the health, safety and general welfare of the public and the
good order of the Village can be protected and maintained.
§ 133-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLOCK PARTY — A gathering in a residential district only of abutting
neighbors and their relatives and friends within the Village street right-ofway
or other public thoroughfare which has been temporarily closed for the
occasion. Block party permits will only be issued during the period of May
1 through September 30.
§ 133-3. Prohibition.
No person shall encroach upon, occupy, obstruct or encumber any public
street or highway, or part thereof, for the purpose of participating in a block
party unless authorized to do so in accordance with this chapter.
§ 133-4. Application for permit.
A. A written application for a block party permit by persons or groups
desiring the same shall be made on a form provided by the Village Clerk
and shall be filed with the Village Clerk at least 15 days before an event.
B. The application shall set forth the following information regarding the
proposed street use:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant or
applicants. Applicant must be a Village resident.
(2) If the proposed street use is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
§ 132-36 BLOCK PARTIES § 133-4
133:151
§ 133-5. Review by Chief of Police and Superintendent of Streets
and Parks.
Before any application for a block party permit is considered by the Village
Clerk, the application shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police and the
Superintendent of Streets and Parks for their recommendation as to the
effect that the temporary closing of the street will have on the public safety
and traffic movement in the area during the time the street may be closed.
§ 133-6. Mandatory denial of street use permit.
headquarters of the organization and of the authorizing responsible
heads of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons
who will be responsible for conducting the proposed use of the
street.
(4) The date and duration of time for which the requested use of the
street is proposed to occur. A block party permit will only be issued
for one day and shall not start earlier than 10:00 a.m. and end no
later than 9:00 p.m.
(5) An accurate description of that portion of the street proposed to be
used.
(6) The approximate number of persons for whom use of the proposed
street area is requested and a list of block party participants on the
form provided. The list of participants must be signed by not less
than 75% of the residents over 18 years of age residing along that
portion of the street designed for the proposed use.
(7) The proposed use, described in detail, for which the block party
permit is requested.
A. An application for a block party permit shall be denied if:
(1) The proposed street use is primarily for private or commercial gain.
(2) The proposed street use would violate any federal or state law or
any ordinance of the Village.
(3) The proposed street use will substantially hinder the movement of
police, fire or emergency vehicles, constituting a risk to persons or
property. Permits will only be granted to close non-through streets
such as cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets. A permit will not be
granted to close a main thoroughfare in the Village.
(4) The application for a block party permit does not contain the
information required above.
(5) The application requests a period for the use of the street that
would last later than 9:00 p.m.
§ 133-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 133-6
133:152
§ 133-7. Permit fee.
Each application for a block party permit shall be accompanied by a fee of
$45.
§ 133-8. Responsibilities of applicant.
§ 133-9. Prohibiting drinking on public streets.
Alcohol cannot be served, consumed or transported in open containers on
any public property, i.e., streets, sidewalks and alleys.
(6) The proposed use could equally be held in a public park or other
location.
B. In addition to the requirement that the application for a block party
permit shall be denied, as hereinabove set forth, the Village Clerk, in
consultation with the Chief of Police and Superintendent of Streets and
Parks, may deny a permit for any other reason or reasons it is
determined that the health, safety and general welfare of the public
cannot adequately be protected and maintained if the permit is granted.
A. Acceptance of a permit shall make the applicant primarily liable for
damages to persons or property caused by reason of the closing. The
applicant further agrees to pay an amount sufficient to reimburse the
Village for any damages done to the street surface, right-of-way or any
other cleanup required after the event. The street surface shall not be
altered in any manner (i.e., tent stakes, line markings, etc.). The Village
shall not be liable for any damage caused by a street closing.
B. The applicant shall be responsible for procurement, placement and
maintenance of barricades used to barricade streets under this division.
No block party shall commence or continue unless barricades are
properly placed and maintained. The applicant acknowledges that
under no circumstances will the street or right-of-way be blocked that
would prohibit access for emergency vehicles. If a permit is granted,
the Department of Public Works will deliver a sufficient number of
marked barricades to the address of the applicant. The barricades shall
be returned to the point of delivery for pickup by the Village on the next
working day.
C. Music or noise must be kept at a reasonable level so as not to disturb
others. Amplified noise or music is prohibited at such block parties.
D. The applicant shall be responsible for clearing litter and debris from the
street after the conclusion of the event.
E. any damages associated with a block party permit will be invoiced to
the applicant and, if not paid, will be assessed against the applicant's
property.
§ 133-6 BLOCK PARTIES § 133-10
133:153
§ 133-10. Termination of block party permit.
A block party permit for an event in progress may be terminated by the
Police Department if the health, safety and welfare of the public appears to
be endangered by activities generated as a result of the event or the event
is in violation of any of the conditions of the permits or ordinances of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie. If police officers are dispatched or needed at
the location of this event because of problems being created, the officers
have the authority to order the street opened and, if appropriate, shall
enforce the Noise Ordinance if the noise being produced is determined to
be unreasonable.
§ 133-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, of this Code.
Chapter 139
(RESERVED)
Chapter 143
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 143-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK (BTN) — Any network
of cables, optical, electrical or electronic equipment, including cable
television systems, used for the purpose of transmission of electrical
impulses of television, radio and other intelligences, either analog or digital,
for sale or use by the inhabitants of the Village.
CHANNEL, CABLE TELEVISION — A frequency bank 6 MHz in width within
which a standard television broadcast signal is delivered by cable to a
subscriber terminal.
CHANNEL, DISCRETE CABLE TELEVISION — A signaling path provided
by a cable television system to transmit signals of any type to specified
subscriber terminals within the cable television system.
COMMENCE OPERATION — The operation will be considered to have
commenced when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as
to permit the offering of cable service to at least 25% of the dwelling units
located within the designated service areas.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed
or elected successor.
§ 133-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 143-1
143:154
FRANCHISE AREA — The Village or the areas within the limits of the
Village as they now exist or as they may change in the future as the result
of annexation.
GRANTEE — Any nonexclusive person, firm, company, corporation or
association to whom a franchise is granted by the Village Board of the
Village hereunder, and the lawful successor or assigns of such persons, firm,
company, corporation or association.
HEADEND — The land, electronic processing equipment, antennas, tower,
building and other appurtenances normally associated with and located at
the starting point of a broadband telecommunications network, excluding
the studio.
REASONABLE NOTICE — The provision of notice of contemplated action
delivered at least 72 hours prior to such action.
SERVICE, ADDITIONAL — Service other than service provided by the
grantee to the subscriber on a monthly basis and for which the subscriber
pays a set fee.
SERVICE, AUXILIARY — See "service, additional."
SERVICE, BASIC — Subscriber services provided by the grantee, including
the delivery of broadcast signals and programming originated over the
cable system, covered by the regular monthly charge paid by all
subscribers.
STREET — Includes all streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys,
courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way or other
public ways in the Village which have been or may hereafter be dedicated
and open to the public use, or such other public property as designated by
law.
SUBSCRIBER — A purchaser of any service delivered by grantee pursuant
to this franchise, and "subscriber" shall also include all persons who are
not required to pay any fee but receive any service delivered by grantee
pursuant to this franchise.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Operation will be considered
substantially completed when sufficient distribution facilities have been
installed so as to permit the offering of full network service to at least 95%
of the dwelling units in the area proposed to be serviced.
SYSTEM — See "broadband telecommunications network (BTN)."
VILLAGE — The Village of Pleasant Prairie.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Village Board of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
§ 143-2. Grant of authority.
A. The franchise granted hereunder shall give to the grantee the right and
privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain, in, upon,
along, across, over and under streets (as defined in § 143-1 herein),
which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use
§ 143-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 143-2
143:155
§ 143-3. Conditions of franchise.
The grantee shall be subject to the following restrictions and conditions
with regard to the operation of the system, which conditions and
restrictions shall be in addition to any other subsections of this section or
other sections of this Code.
in the Village, towers, antennas, poles, cables, underground conduits,
manholes, electronic equipment and other network appurtenances
necessary for the operation in the Village of a broadband
telecommunications network, utilizing wherever possible existing
facilities, with the right upon application to the designated Village
official to set poles or other equipment on facilities constructed by the
applicant. Any such designated Village official will not unreasonably
refuse permission for such construction. However, a nonproliferation of
poles policy for aesthetic purposes shall be considered. Where existing
utility service for telephone and electrical service is underground, cable
lines shall also be underground in that area.
B. The Village shall require all developers of future subdivisions, when
making provisions for or restrictions of utilities in the subdivision plat,
to include cable television services. It is intended by this subsection to
include cable television services in the same class as public utilities.
The fact that cable television services are classed as public utilities
under this chapter shall not prevent any owner of any residential,
commercial, industrial or other structure from refusing to approve or
permit the grantee from installing any wires, antennas or equipment of
any type or from physically occupying such owner's property in any
fashion, even if cable service is requested by such owner's tenant or
tenants.
C. The right to use and occupy such streets, as set forth above, shall not be
exclusive and the Village reserves the right to grant a similar use of
such streets to any person at any time during the period of this
franchise.
A. Conditions on street occupancy.
(1) Interference. All transmissions and distribution structures, lines
and equipment erected by the grantee within the Village shall be so
located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of
streets, alleys and other public ways and places and to cause
minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience
of property owners who join any of the streets, alleys or other
public ways and places. Cables, wires and other equipment in
connection with the system shall only be installed and operated on
or under the public right-of-way, upon poles or in underground
conduit and equipment of the existing utilities within the Village,
and their successors or assigns, where conduits exist and space in
installed conduits is available. Installation of any additional poles,
conduit or other equipment for the installation of cables, wires or
§ 143-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 143-3
143:156
other overhead equipment and underground equipment in the
public rights-of-way in connection with the system shall be subject
to authorization of the Village Board or its designated
representative. In reaching a decision as to such additional poles
or equipment, the suggestions, if any, of the utility companies
servicing or planning to service such area may be considered by
the Village Board or its designated representative. Underground
installation shall always be preferred.
(2) Restoration. In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley,
public way or paved area, the grantee shall, at its own cost and
expense and in a manner approved by the Village Superintendent
of Streets or other appropriate office, replace and restore such
street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved area in as good a
condition as before the work involved in such disturbance was
done. The grantee will also pay all cost incurred by the Village in
regards to the regulation of the cable television system, if any.
(3) Removal. The grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support,
temporarily or permanently disconnect, relocate in the same public
right-of-way, or remove from a public right-of-way, any property
owned or used by the grantee, if required by the Village for reasons
of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and
street construction, change or establishment of street grade,
installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines and tracts,
or any other type of structure or improvements by governmental
agencies when acting in a governmental capacity. The Village shall
provide the grantee notice of its intention to make changes which
might otherwise cause grantee expense, pursuant to this section,
and the grantee shall have an opportunity to comment.
(4) Poles or other fixtures. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any
public way by the licensee shall be placed in such manner as not to
interfere with the usual travel on such public way.
(5) Moving buildings. The grantee shall, on the request of any person
holding a building moving permit issued by the Village, temporarily
raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The
expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires
shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee
shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The
grantee shall be given not less than three working days' advance
notice to arrange for such temporary changes.
(6) Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees
overhanging upon any streets, alleys, sidewalks and public ways
and places of the Village so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee,
except that, at the option of the Village, such trimming may be done
by it or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the
grantee.
§ 143-3 CABLE TELEVISION § 143-3
143:157
(7) Cable, wires or other like facilities to be underground. In all
sections of the Village where the cables, wires or other like
facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee
shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground to
the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits
the grantee to do so.
(8) Erection, removal and common user of poles.
(a) No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by
the grantee without prior approval of the Village Board with
regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent aspect.
However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of
the grantee shall be a vested interest, and such poles or
structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its
own expense wherever the Village Board determines that the
public convenience would be enhanced thereby.
(b) Where poles or other wire-holding structures already existing
for use in serving the Village are available for use by the
grantee, but it does not make arrangements for such use, the
Village Board may require the grantee to use such poles and
structures if it determines that public convenience would be
enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the
grantee are just and reasonable.
(c) Where the Village or a public utility service desires to make
use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the
grantee, but agreement with the grantee cannot be reached,
the Village Board may require the grantee to permit such use
for such consideration and upon such terms as the Board shall
determine to be just and reasonable, if the Board determines
that the use would enhance the public convenience and would
not unduly interfere with the grantee's operations.
B. Compliance. All installations by the grantee of cables and incidental
equipment shall comply in all respects with all laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, the state
or any agency or department thereof, and of the Village or any agency
or department thereof, now or hereafter in effect.
C. Condition of equipment. The grantee shall provide and maintain its
equipment in such condition and of such quality so that none of its
service will adversely affect radio and television reception.
D. Color signals. Installation and maintenance of equipment shall be such
that standard color signals shall be transmitted with reasonable and
acceptable fidelity to all subscribers. When the signals the grantee
distributes are received in color, they shall be distributed in color where
technically feasible.
§ 143-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 143-3
143:158
§ 143-4. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
The grantee shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to
all lawful exercise of the police power by the Village and to such reasonable
regulation as the Village shall hereafter provide.
§ 143-5. Transfer or sale of franchise.
§ 143-6. Franchise term, review and renewal.
E. Television receivers. The grantee shall not directly or indirectly require
or solicit of any subscriber the patronage of any designated person or
company engaged in the servicing, sale or repair of television receivers.
The foregoing shall not apply to the repair or adjustment of equipment
which is part of the system of the grantee. Nothing in this subsection
shall preclude grantee from advertising or selling any merchandise or
services.
F. Inspections. The grantee shall submit to inspections by duly authorized
personnel of the Village and shall make available to such inspectors or
duly authorized personnel its facilities and equipment wherever
situated. The Village reserves the right to enact reasonable regulations
regarding the installation and maintenance of the facilities of the
grantee.
G. Public works. The grantee shall abide by the provisions of Chapter 305,
Streets and Sidewalks, of this Code, specifically Articles II and III and
§§ 305-2, 305-3 and 305-7.
A. This franchise may be transferred, assigned or sold only with the
written consent of the Village Board and approved only if the
transferee, assignee or purchaser agrees in writing to be subject to all
the terms and conditions of this chapter. The franchise shall notify the
Village Board at least 30 days before a proposed transfer, assignment or
sale is to take effect.
B. Such a notice shall be in the form of a written request to the Village
Clerk, stating the reasons why such an assignment is necessary and/or
advisable, and detailing the expected changes in the operation of the
system. Information as to the legal, character, financial capability,
technical and other qualifications of the party or parties to whom the
franchise is to be transferred, assigned or sold, or by whom the same is
to be operated, shall also be provided. This section shall apply to any
transfer, assignment or sale of greater than 25% of the ownership,
operation or management of the franchise. The Village Board shall not
withhold approval or consent regarding the transfer, assignment or
sale, without cause and unless it is shown that the operation or
management of the system will be affected to the detriment of the
public by approving such transfer, assignment or sale. The provisions
shall not apply to either the mortgage or hypothecation of the system in
respect to any mortgages or the remedies therein.
§ 143-3 CABLE TELEVISION § 143-6
143:159
§ 143-7. Responsibilities upon termination or expiration.
Should a grantee's franchise be terminated or expire and there is no judicial
or administrative review of the termination or expiration taking place, the
grantee shall begin removal within 90 days of termination or expiration all
property owned by him and placed on a public right-of-way unless permitted
by the Village to abandon such property in place or transfer such property
to a purchaser.
§ 143-8. Completion of construction and extension of system.
A. The term of a franchise shall be for a period of 15 years and shall be in
full force and effect for such term, subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Every two years during the term of a franchise, during the month of
January, at a regular or special Village Board meeting, the Village and
the grantee, at either party's option, may meet to discuss application of
new technologies, system performances, services provided,
programming offered, customer complaints and judicial and FCC
rulings affecting the operation of the system. The parties shall compare
the services offered by a grantee to those of other stand-alone systems
in similar market situations and, if then appropriate, the parties may
renegotiate any of the above provisions, provided that such changes do
not adversely affect economic viability of the franchise or adversely
affect programming and maintenance services to the subscribers.
C. At the 12th year of the franchise, or if mutually agreed by the Village
and a grantee during one of the review and renegotiations described in
Subsection B above, the Village and the grantee shall consider
extension of a franchise for 15 additional years. The purpose of this
provision is to allow for maximum flexibility in the financial planning on
the part of a grantee and for the Village in anticipating future services.
It is further the purpose of this provision to encourage the Village to
examine a grantee's performance and to plan for the future in providing
cable television service as well as-to reward the satisfactory
performance of a grantee. The Village may, at any time, reward a
grantee for satisfactory performance by the extension of the franchise
for five-year increments. This authority is granted so as to provide
incentive to a grantee for satisfactory performance and maximum
service.
A. Grantee shall initiate construction and installation of the broadband
telecommunications network within six months of receiving necessary
authority from the Federal Communications Commission, including
microwave licenses and a certificate of compliance, and within 12
months the grantee shall commence operations. The grantee shall have
substantially completed construction within the time periods set forth
in any franchise hereunder.
§ 143-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 143-8
143:160
§ 143-9. Rates.
The maximum initial rates which may be charged by a grantee to
subscribers shall be those rates as set forth in the grantee's application.
In the event of a rate increase of the basic service, the grantee shall
provide the subscribers a thirty-day notice of such increase. Such notice
shall be forwarded to the Village Administrator with supporting data for
such increase. In no event shall the rates exceed those charged to residents
of the City of Kenosha.
B. The Village may, in its discretion, extend the time for grantee, acting in
good faith, to perform any act required hereunder. The time for
performance shall be extended or excused, as the case may be, for any
period during which grantee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Village Board that grantee is being subjected to delay or interruption
due to any of the following circumstances, if reasonably beyond his
control:
(1) Necessary utilities rearrangements or pole change-outs.
(2) Governmental or regulatory restrictions or economic conditions.
(3) Labor strikes.
(4) Lock outs.
(5) War.
(6) National emergencies.
(7) Fire or extreme weather conditions.
(8) Other acts of God.
C. Line extensions or installations beyond 150 feet will be paid for by the
subscriber at the grantee's cost. It is the intent of this subsection to
protect a grantee and the subscribers from subsidizing unreasonable
extensions.
D. The grantee shall be allowed to furnish service from the headend to
other areas in the Village; provided, however, that the construction or
provision of services to areas other than the Village does not prohibit,
impede or delay the substantial completion date of the system in the
Village. If any such program service provided to such areas shall be in
any manner superior to the program service provided within the
Village, then such program service shall be provided to the Village.
A. The rates and charges for television and radio signals distributed
hereunder shall be fair and reasonable and no higher than necessary to
meet a fair return on the original cost, less depreciation, of the
properties devoted to such service.
§ 143-8 CABLE TELEVISION § 143-9
143:161
§ 143-10. Forfeiture of franchise.
§ 143-11. Broadband cable communications service.
B. By its acceptance of this franchise, the grantee specifically grants and
agrees that its rates and charges to its subscribers for television and
radio signals shall be fair and reasonable and no higher than necessary
to meet all its necessary costs of service (assuming efficient and
economical management), including a fair return on the original cost,
less depreciation, of its properties devoted to such service.
A. In addition to all rights and powers pertaining to the Village by virtue of
this franchise or otherwise, the Village reserves the right to terminate
and cancel this franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee
hereunder if the grantee:
(1) Violates any provision of this franchise or any rule, order or
determination of the Village or Village Board made pursuant to this
franchise, except where such violation, other than Subsection A(2)
below, is without fault or through excusable neglect.
(2) Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is
adjudged a bankrupt.
(3) Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this franchise or
practices any fraud or deceit upon the Village;
(4) Fails to begin or complete construction under this franchise by the
date negotiated between the Village and the grantee.
B. Such termination and cancellation shall be by ordinance duly adopted
after 90 days' notice to the grantee and shall, in no way, affect any of the
Village's rights under this franchise or any provision of law. In the event
that such termination and cancellation depends upon a finding of fact,
such finding of fact, as made by the Village Board or its representative,
shall be conclusive; provided, however, that before this franchise may
be terminated and cancelled under this section, the grantee shall be
provided with an opportunity to be heard before the Village Board. If,
during such ninety-day period, the cause shall be cured to the
satisfaction of the Village, the Village shall repeal such termination
ordinance.
A. The cable communications system permitted to be installed and
operated hereunder shall be operated in conformance with the FCC's
Technical Standards, 47 CFR § 76.601 et seq.
B. The grantee shall continue throughout the term of the franchise to
maintain the technical standards and quality of service set forth in this
section. Should the Village Board pass a resolution finding that the
grantee has failed to maintain those technical standards and quality of
service, it shall enumerate the improvements to be made, and the
grantee shall make such improvements.
§ 143-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 143-11
143:162
§ 143-12. Complaint procedure.
Grantee shall investigate all complaints within 24 hours of their receipt and
shall, in good faith, attempt to resolve them within 48 hours after notice.
Grantee shall maintain a record of each complaint and shall maintain such
record for a period of two years. After such two-year period, such records
shall be made available to the Village, which may thereafter retain such
records.
§ 143-13. Liability and indemnification.
C. The cable system shall carry and deliver to all subscribers all of the
signals as provided in the grantee's application.
A. The grantee shall, and by its acceptance of this franchise specifically
agrees that it will, pay all damages and penalties which the Village may
legally be required to pay as a result of granting this franchise. These
damages and penalties shall include, but shall not be limited to,
damages arising out of copyright infringements and all other damages
arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV
system authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission
complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this franchise.
B. The grantee shall, and by its acceptance of this franchise specifically
agrees that it will, pay all expenses incurred by the Village in defending
itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in Subsection
A above. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, such
as attorneys' fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any
services rendered by the Village Attorney or any employees of the
Village.
C. The grantee shall, and by its acceptance of any franchise granted
hereunder specifically agrees that it will, maintain through the term of
the franchise a general comprehensive liability insurance policy
insuring the Village and grantee with regard to all damages mentioned
in Subsection A above and liability for loss or damage for personal
injury, death or property damage occasioned by the operations of
grantee under any franchise granted hereunder, in the amounts of:
(1) For bodily injury or death to any one person, within the limit:
$1,000,000.
(2) For property damage resulting from any one accident: $1,000,000.
(3) For the infringement of copyrights: $1,000,000.
(4) For all other liability: $1,000,000.
D. The insurance policies mentioned in Subsection C above shall be
obtained from the same company and shall contain an endorsement
stating that the policies are extended to cover the liability assumed by
§ 143-11 CABLE TELEVISION § 143-13
143:163
§ 143-14. Construction and network technical standards and
measurements.
the grantee under the terms of this chapter and shall contain the
following endorsements:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
cancelled nor the amount of coverage thereof reduced until 30 days
after receipt by the Village Clerk by registered mail of a written notice
of such intent to cancel or reduce the coverage."
E. The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of any franchise
granted hereunder agrees that it will maintain, throughout the term of
this franchise a faithful performance bond running to the Village with at
least two good and sufficient sureties approved by the Village in the
penal sum of $25,000, conditioned that the grantee shall well and truly
observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of this chapter and
any franchise granted hereunder and that, in case of any breach of
condition of the bond, the amount thereof shall be recoverable from the
principal and sureties thereof by the Village for all damages resulting
from the failure of the grantee to sell and faithfully observe and perform
any provision of such franchise.
F. All of the foregoing contracts shall be in form satisfactory to companies
authorized to do business in the state, acceptable to the Village
Administrator and Village Attorney. Such insurance contracts shall
require 30 days' written notice of any cancellation to both the Village
and the grantee. Such insurance policy and bond, along with written
evidence of payment of required premium, shall be filed and maintained
with the Village Clerk during the term of any such franchise.
A. Technical standards. The technical standards, including measurements
of the construction and systems to be operated by the Village, shall
meet or exceed the minimum standards established by the Federal
Communications Commission.
B. Production, transmission and limiting failures. The grantee shall, in
addition:
(1) Produce a picture that is undistorted, free from ghost images and
accompanied with proper sound on typical standard production TV
sets in good repair and as good as the state of art allows.
(2) Transmit signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures
with good sound at all outlets without causing cross-modulation in
cable or interfering with other electrical or electronic systems.
(3) Limit failures to a minimum by locating and correcting
malfunctions promptly, but in no event longer than 48 hours after
notice.
C. Operation and maintenance of system.
§ 143-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 143-14
143:164
§ 143-15. Emergency use of facilities.
In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of
the Village Board, make available its facilities to the Village for emergency
use during the emergency or disaster period.
§ 143-16. Additional requirements.
The grantee shall comply with all conditions imposed by the Federal
Communications Commission and by the state. Failure to obtain any
required licenses or to comply with all such conditions shall be grounds
to revoke the franchise under the procedure of § 143-10 without liability
assigned to the Village.
§ 143-17. Subscriber privacy.
§ 143-18. Government and educational connections.
The grantee shall provide connections without charge, as many as needed,
to each municipally owned building; fire station; police station; library;
public, parochial or private school; and institution of higher learning that is
passed by its cable. In no event will there be a monthly service charge at
such locations for basic service. Premium pay channels will be charged for
at the current monthly rate.
§ 143-19. Unauthorized connections or modifications.
(1) The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly,
and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded
by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the
system.
(2) The grantee shall maintain an office in the City of Kenosha or the
Village, which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a
listed telephone and be so operated that complaints and requests
for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time.
A. Use of data from subscriber. The grantee, its successor or assignees,
the Village or any person shall not initiate or use any form, procedure or
device for procuring information or data from cable subscribers'
terminals by use of the cable system without prior authorization from
each subscriber so affected. Valid authorization shall mean approval
from the subscriber for a period of time not to exceed one year and shall
not have been obtained from the subscriber as a condition of service.
B. Subscriber data. The Village or a grantee, or any person, shall not,
without prior written valid authorization from the Village Board,
provide any data identifying designated subscribers.
§ 143-14 CABLE TELEVISION § 143-19
143:165
§ 143-20. Village's right of intervention.
The Village shall have the right to intervene and the grantee specifically
agrees by his acceptance of a franchise hereunder not to oppose such
intervention by the Village in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is
a party.
§ 143-21. Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited.
Grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service, service facilities, rules,
regulations, employment or in any other respect, make or grant any undue
preference or advantage to any party, nor subject any party to any
prohibited prejudice or disadvantage.
§ 143-22. Removal of facilities upon request.
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the grantee shall promptly
remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of such
subscriber upon his request.
§ 143-23. Village's right in franchise.
A. Unauthorized connections prohibited. No firm, person, group, company,
corporation or governmental body or agency shall, without the express
consent of the grantee, make any connections, extension or division,
whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise,
with or to any segment of the grantee's cable system. Further, no firm,
person, group, company, corporation or governmental body or agency,
shall, without the express consent of the grantee, possess or receive
any signals or transmissions, including specifically the transmission of
messages or programming over the cable system on a pay channel or
pay-per-program basis.
B. Unauthorized sale. No firm, person, group, company, corporation or
governmental body or agency, shall sell or solicit for sale any facilities,
devices or appurtenances used for the purpose of any or all lawful acts
as prohibited by Subsection A above.
C. Removal or destruction prohibited. No firm, person, group, company,
corporation or government body or agency, shall willfully interfere,
tamper, remove, obstruct or damage any part, segment or content of a
franchise broadband telecommunications network for any purpose
whatsoever.
D. Violations. Any firm, person, group, company, corporation or
governmental body or agency convicted of violation of this section shall,
for each offense, be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4,
of this Code.
A. The right is hereby reserved to the Village or the Village Board to adopt,
in addition to the provisions contained herein and in existing applicable
§ 143-19 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 143-23
143:166
§ 143-24. Maps, plats and reports.
§ 143-25. Further agreement and waiver by grantee.
The grantee agrees to abide by all provisions of this franchise and further
agrees that it will not at any future time set up as against the Village
or Village Board the claim that the provisions of this franchise are
unreasonable, arbitrary or void.
§ 143-26. Severability.
If any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is held
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such infirmity shall not affect the
validity of this chapter as a whole, and any portions in conflict are hereby
repealed; provided, however, that if the Federal Communications
Commission declares any subsection invalid, then such subsection shall be
renegotiated by the Village and the grantee.
§ 143-27. Franchise grant.
Any cable television franchise granted by the Village Board shall be
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 143-28. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the procedures specified in § 143-19, the following shall be in
effect:
ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in
the exercise of the police power;, provided that such regulations, by
ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the
rights herein granted.
B. The Village shall have the right during the life of this franchise to install
and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the grantee any wire and
pole fixtures necessary for a police alarm system, on the condition that
such wire and pole fixtures do not interfere with the CATV operations of
the grantee.
C. The Village shall have the right to supervise all construction or
installation work performed subject to the provisions of this franchise
and make such inspections as it shall find necessary to insure
compliance with the terms of this franchise and other pertinent
provisions of law.
A. The grantee shall file with the Village Clerk true and accurate maps or
plats of all existing and proposed installations.
B. The grantee shall keep on file with the Village Clerk a current list of its
shareholders and bondholders.
§ 143-23 CABLE TELEVISION § 143-28
143:167
Chapter 146
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 146, Christmas Trees, adopted 11-7-1994 (§§ 12.11 and
12.20 of the 1988 Code), as amended, was repealed 6-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-19.]
Chapter 148
CLEAN WATER UTILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater storage facilities — See Ch. 300. Water — See Ch. 355.
§ 148-1. Findings
A. After notice and hearing, the grantee may be subject to a forfeiture, as
provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4, of this Code, if such grantee fails to
provide the service specified in this chapter or any applicable
government regulation. The grantee is not responsible for failure to
provide adequate service which is caused by acts of God, strikes,
governmental or military action or other conditions beyond its control.
B. Upon interruption of service, except for acts of God, strikes,
governmental or military action, or with express prior permission of the
Village, any subscriber whose service is interrupted for more than 48
consecutive hours shall be entitled to a rebate of the subscriber's
monthly bill prorated on a daily basis for each twenty-four-hour period
of continuously interrupted service.
A. The management of stormwater and other surface water discharges
within and beyond Village borders is a matter that affects the public
health, safety and welfare of the Village, its citizens and businesses and
others in the surrounding area. The development of land increases
impervious surfaces and results in increased stormwater runoff. Failure
to effectively manage this increased stormwater runoff affects the
sanitary sewer utility operations of the Village by, among other things,
increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow in the sanitary sewer.
In addition, surface water runoff may create erosion of lands, threaten
businesses and residences with water damage and create
sedimentation and other environmental damage in the Village.
B. The federal Water Pollution Control Act also known as the "Clean Water
Act," requires communities to manage stormwater in accordance with
federal and state regulations.
C. The cost of operating and maintaining a utility to manage stormwater,
ensuring regulatory compliance, and financing necessary plans,
§ 143-28 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 148-1
143:168
§ 148-2. Establishment.
§ 148-3. Powers and duties.
§ 148-4. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following terms have the meanings set forth below:
studies, repairs, replacements, improvements and extension thereof
should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the
benefits enjoyed and services received therefrom.
A. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the
Village Board is exercising its authority to establish the Village of
Pleasant Prairie Clean Water Utility and set the rates for stormwater
utility services.
B. The operation of the Clean Water Utility shall be under the supervision
of the Village Administrator. The Superintendent of Streets will be in
charge of the Clean Water Utility.
C. The Village is acting under the authority of Chapters 61 and 66 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, and particularly without limitation the following
sections: 61.34, 61.35, 61.36, 66.0621, 60.0627, 66.0701, 66.0703,
66.0809, 66.0811, 66.0813 and 66.0821.
A. Facilities. The Village, through the Clean Water Utility, may acquire,
construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace,
clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage and finance such facilities as
are deemed by the Village to be proper and reasonably necessary for a
system of storm and surface water management. These facilities may
include, without limitation by enumeration, surface and underground
drainage facilities, sewers, watercourses, retaining walls and ponds
and such other facilities as will support a stormwater management
system.
B. Rates and charges. The Village, through the Clean Water Utility, may
establish such rates and charges as are necessary to finance planning,
design, construction, maintenance and operation of the facilities in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. The rates and
charges will be established by resolution.
C. Budgeting process. The Village, through the Clean Water Utility, shall
prepare an annual budget, which is to include all operation and
maintenance costs, debt service and other costs related to the
operation of the Clean Water Utility. The costs shall be spread over the
rate classifications as determined by the Board. The budget is subject to
the public hearing and approval process, set forth in § 65.90, Wis. Stats.
D. Excess revenues. The Village will retain any excess of revenues over
expenditures in a year in a segregated clean water fund which shall be
used exclusively for purposes consistent with this chapter.
§ 148-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 148-4
143:169
AGRICULTURAL — Lands related to or used for the production of food and
fiber, including, but not limited to, general farming, livestock and poultry
enterprises, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod production, cranberry productions and wild crop harvesting
and includes lands used for on-site buildings and other structures necessary
to carry out such activities.
CLEAN WATER UTILITY SYSTEM — Any natural or man-made stormwater
conveyance facility operated or maintained by the Village, including, but
not limited to, retention/detention ponds, ditches, storm sewers, roads and
navigable and non-navigable waterways.
CN VALUE — Runoff curve number calculated per USDA -- Natural
Resources Conservation Service and TR55 Methodology.
DUPLEX UNIT — A residential structure containing two dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof used exclusively for
residential purposes, including one-family, two-family and multiple-family
dwellings, but not including hotels and boarding and lodging houses. Each
dwelling unit shall have lockable entrances and exits that allow for
uninhibited movement throughout the entire dwelling unit, one complete
kitchen facility, and, at a minimum, a bathroom and a living/sleeping area.
EQUIVALENT RUNOFF UNIT or ERU — The unit by which a stormwater
charge is calculated in this chapter. It is based on the amount of runoff
produced by a two-inch rain event from an average residential parcel of
15,100 square feet with an average impervious area of 18.21%.
FARMSTEAD HOME SITE — That portion of any agricultural property
which contains one or more dwelling units, regardless of whether the
dwelling units are on a separate lot or parcel.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Used in the runoff calculation
methodology promulgated by the United States Natural Resources
Conservation Service Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices.
IMPERVIOUS AREA or IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been
compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant
to infiltration by rainwater or melting snow. It includes, but is not limited
to, principal and accessory structures, as well as streets, sidewalks, parking
lots, driveways and other similar surfaces. For purposes of this chapter,
all road, driveway or parking surfaces, including gravel surfaces, shall
be considered impervious, unless specifically designed to encourage
infiltration and approved by the Village Engineer.
LOT — Any legally created and described parcel of land.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — A residential structure consisting of three or more
dwelling units.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any lot except residential property as
defined herein, including, but not limited to, transient rentals (such as
hotels and motels), mobile home parks, commercial, industrial, institutional,
governmental property and parking lots.
§ 148-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 148-4
143:170
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any land cover that permits rain or melting snow
to soak into the ground.
POST-DEVELOPMENT — The extent and distribution of land cover types
anticipated to occur under conditions of full development of the submitted
plan. This term is used to match pre- and post-development stormwater
peak flows. A property is considered post-development after construction is
completed and final stabilization has occurred.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT — The extent and distribution of land cover types
present before the initiation of land development activity, assuming that
all land uses prior to land disturbing activity are in "good" condition as
described in the Natural Resources Conservation Service Technical Release
55, " Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds" (commonly known as
"TR-55").
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any lot or farmstead home site developed
exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family units, duplex
units, multifamily units, but not including transient rentals (such as hotels
and motels) and mobile home parks.
SINGLE-FAMILY UNIT — Any residential property consisting of a single
dwelling house.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — The municipal employee or contracted entity
designated by the Village Board as the local approval authority responsible
for administering this chapter.
§ 148-5. Rates and charges.
A. By this chapter, the Village Board is establishing the basis for the rates
that will be used to calculate and impose a charge upon each parcel
within the Village for services and facilities provided by the Clean Water
Utility consistent with this chapter, with the exception of exemptions
including agricultural land, public right-of-way, and as prescribed by
state law. Charges imposed under this chapter are in addition to
assessments imposed under Chapter 148 of the Village of Pleasant
Prairie Municipal Code.
B. The amount of each charge to be imposed shall be made by resolution.
All rates established pursuant to this chapter will be fair and
reasonable. The current rates will be on file with the Village Clerk.
C. Charges shall be imposed to recover all or a portion of the costs for the
Clean Water Utility. Such charges shall include the following
components:
(1) Base charge. The base charge shall be imposed on all property in
the Village with the exception of exemptions including agricultural
land, public right-of-way, and as prescribed by state law. The base
charge is designed to reflect the fact that all properties benefit
from Clean Water Utility activities of the Village and that all
properties contribute in some way to the clean water discharge
§ 148-4 CABLE TELEVISION § 148-5
143:171
§ 148-6. Credits.
that must be managed by the Village. The base charge will be
designed to collect the administrative costs of the Clean Water
Utility operations.
(2) Equivalent runoff unit (ERU) charge. The ERU charge shall be
assessed for each property or parcel in the Village based upon the
ratio of calculated runoff from the property as set forth in § 148-7 to
the standard ERU.
(3) Project evaluation fee. A charge shall be imposed on a property that
is converted from undeveloped to developed or when a property is
part of a lot split. The fee will be established by resolution.
D. The Village Board may make such other classifications in accordance
with § 148-6 as will be likely to provide reasonable and fair distribution
of the costs of the Clean Water Utility.
E. Exemptions. The following areas of property shall be exempt from
paying charges under this section:
(1) Agricultural land, but not farmstead home sites.
(2) Wetlands, ponds and lakes.
(3) Undeveloped parcels within the Floodplain Overlay District
(§ 420-131) and which are zoned C-1, as defined in § 420-128.
[Added 9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 13-42]
(4) Undeveloped parcels within the Floodplain Overlay District
(§ 420-131) and which are zoned PR-2, as defined in § 420-127.1.
[Added 9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 13-42]
A. The Village Administrator or Village Engineer may provide credits
against the ERU, but not the base charge. Such adjustments of
stormwater fees shall not be made retroactively.
B. To be entitled to consideration for a credit, the property owner shall file
an application, together with a review fee, with the Village Engineer
that is supported by documentation from a professional engineer
registered in the State of Wisconsin and demonstrates the conditions of
this section have been met. The application is subject to review and
approval of the Village Engineer. If the Village Engineer needs
additional engineering expertise to complete his review, the Village
Engineer can deny the application unless the property owner agrees to
pay for the necessary engineering services.
C. Credits may be provided under the following circumstances:
(1) A nonresidential property owner may seek a credit on the ERU
charge where he or she has installed and maintained facilities that
result in the retention and treatment of stormwater on site that
§ 148-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 148-6
143:172
§ 148-7. Calculation of ERU charges.
exceeds a suspended solids removal level established by the Village
Engineer. Credits to a maximum of 30% of the ERU charge will be
based on the percent of suspended solids removed over the limits
established by the Village Engineer.
D. The Administrator may revoke the credit if the basis for the credit has
materially changed. The Administrator shall provide at least 30 days'
advance written notice of any proposed revocation.
E. A denial or revocation of any credit may be reviewed pursuant to
§§ 148-10 and 148-11.
A. Basis for ERU charge. The Village shall calculate the actual runoff value
for each property within the Village except for those portions of
property which are exempt. The ERU charge shall be the multiple of the
actual runoff value for each property compared to the standard ERU
value.
B. Calculation of actual runoff value.
(1) For each property or parcel within the Village, the Village shall
calculate the ratio of impervious area to total property size based
upon data from the Village's Geographic Information System (GIS),
or where such data is not available or is out of date, the Village
Engineer may calculate the ratio from other reliable data. In the
case where a property or parcel does not have any impervious area,
the calculations shall be performed without an impervious area.
(a) For residential property, impervious area is calculated as the
actual area of principal structures and out buildings and an
average value of 750 square feet for driveways, sidewalks and
other impervious areas.
(b) For nonresidential property, impervious area is calculated as
the actual area of all impervious surfaces.
(2) The Village shall calculate a runoff curve (CN) value for each
property by applying the ratio of impervious area to total lot size to
the calculated runoff curve for the Village. For composite CN
values, the most recent aerial photo or as determined from other
reliable and confirmable information shall be used. Ponds, lakes,
agricultural and wetlands will not be included in the calculations of
a composite CN value. Woods, brush and meadows will use the
lowest CN value as published in the TR55 publication.
(3) The Village shall calculate the actual runoff value for each property
applying the CN value and a two-inch rain event to the TR-55 runoff
model.
C. Calculation of ERU value.
§ 148-6 CABLE TELEVISION § 148-7
143:173
§ 148-8. New construction.
§ 148-9. Billing and penalties.
§ 148-10. Reconsideration.
(1) The standard ERU value is based upon the runoff value from an
average residential parcel of 15,100 square feet with an average
impervious area of 18.21%.
(2) The charge is the ERU multiple of the calculated runoff value under
Subsection B above to the average runoff value under Subsection
C(1) above.
A. The property owner shall be responsible for submitting a clean water
utility service application at the time a building permit is issued or a
site plan review is conducted. The application shall be made on a form
prescribed by the Village and provided with each application for a
building permit or application for site plan review. Failure to submit
such clean water utility service application or providing false
information on such form shall be a violation of this chapter.
B. A person violating Subsection A above shall, upon conviction, pay a
forfeiture not to exceed $500 for each offense, in addition to the costs of
prosecution which are allowed by law. Each day during which a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Clean Water Utility charges will be billed monthly, with said charges to
appear on the bill issued for municipal water, sanitary sewer and solid
waste service. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to preclude
the Clean Water Utility from billing on a quarterly or annual basis for
properties with minimum charges.
B. The bills for Clean Water Utility charges shall be mailed to the
designated utility bill recipient, but this mailing shall not relieve the
owner of the property from liability for rental property in the event
payment is not made as required in this chapter. The owner of any
property served which is occupied by tenants shall have the right to
examine collection records of the Village for the purpose of determining
whether such charges have been paid for such tenants, provided that
such examination shall be made at the office at which the records are
kept and during the hours that such office is open for business.
C. If Clean Water Utility charges remain unpaid after a period of 30 days
from the date of the utility billing, such bill shall be determined
delinquent. The Village may collect delinquent charges under
§§ 66.0821(4) and 66.0809(3), Wis. Stats.
D. All delinquent charges shall be subject to a penalty of 1% per month in
addition to all other charges, including prior penalties or interest that
exist when the delinquent charge is extended upon the tax roll.
§ 148-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 148-10
143:174
§ 148-11. Appeals.
A. The Clean Water Utility charge, a determination of ERUs or ERU credits
may be reconsidered by filing a written request for reconsideration with
the Village Clerk prior to the utility charge due date if not paid, or
within 30 days of payment. The request shall specify all bases for the
challenge and the amount of the Clean Water Utility charge the
customer asserts is appropriate. Failure to file a timely request waives
all right to later challenge that charge or other decision. Unless greater
than 10%, no change will be made.
B. The Village Engineer will determine whether the charge is fair and
reasonable, or whether a refund or re-evaluation is due the customer.
The Village Engineer may act with or without a hearing, and will inform
the customer in writing of his or her decision.
C. If the Village Engineer determines that a refund is due the customer,
the refund will be applied as a credit on the customer's monthly utility
account, or will be refunded at the discretion of the Finance Director.
A. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Village Engineer under
§ 148-10 may appeal to the Board of Appeals within 30 days from the
date of a decision.
B. Appeal procedure.
(1) A notice of appeal setting forth the specific grounds for the appeal
shall be filed with the Village Engineer and the Village Clerk. The
Village Clerk shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(2) The secretary of the Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of the appeal and publish a Class 2 notice thereof under
Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., as well as give due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the
hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
(a) Issue notices of hearings requesting the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant
to any matter involved in the hearings; and
(b) Take evidence.
(3) Hearing process.
(a) In general. The Board of Appeals shall preside over a hearing
under this section and shall take evidence on the reasons why
the charge, ERU credit or other ERU determination should not
be upheld.
(b) Burden of proof. The customer shall have the burden to prove
why the order should not be upheld.
§ 148-10 CABLE TELEVISION § 148-11
143:175
§ 148-12. Special assessment and charges.
§ 148-13. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is found to be illegal, the remaining
provisions shall remain in effect.
Chapter 150
CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 305. Public improvement projects — See Ch. 405.
(c) Record. At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony
taken must be under oath and recorded. Records from the
proceeding will be made available to any member of the public
or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges
therefor. A stenographic record will not be taken unless
requested and paid for by the customer.
(4) The Board of Appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may
make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought
to be made, and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom
the appeal is taken.
(5) The vote of a majority of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to
reverse the decision of the Village Engineer.
(6) A fee as set forth by resolution will be charged for all appeals.
A. In addition to any other method for collection of the charges established
pursuant to this chapter for Clean Water Utility costs, the Village Board
finds that these charges may be levied on property as a special charge
pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats. The charges established hereunder
reasonably reflect the benefits conferred on property may be assessed
as special charges. The mailing of the bill for such charges to the owner
will serve as notice to the owner that failure to pay the charges when
due may result in a lien on the property enforced pursuant to
§ 66.0627(4), Wis. Stats.
B. In addition to any other method of charging for Clean Water Utility
costs, the Village Board may by resolution collect special assessments
on property in a limited and determinable area for special benefits
conferred upon property pursuant to § 66.0703, Wis. Stats. The failure
to pay such special assessments may result in a lien on the property
enforced pursuant to § 66.0703(3), Wis. Stats.
§ 148-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 148-13
143:176
§ 150-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by §§ 66.0901 and
61.34, Wis. Stats.
§ 150-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that contractors and subcontractors
who perform work on public improvement projects within the Village are
responsible, competent to perform such work skillfully, capable of
completing such work in a timely manner and sensitive to the necessity
of performing such work in a manner that protects the health, safety and
welfare of the public and minimizes any disturbance, inconvenience or
annoyance to the public.
§ 150-3. Title.
This chapter shall be known, referred to and cited as the "Contractor
Qualification Ordinance of the Village of Pleasant Prairie" or as "Chapter
150 of the Code of the Village of Pleasant Prairie."
§ 150-4. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village.
Headings are provided in this chapter for convenience and ease of
reference; they shall not be interpreted to limit the applicability, purpose,
effect or meaning of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any word or
phrase defined in § 150-5 of this chapter shall have the meaning stated
therein. Undefined words or phrases shall have their common, ordinary
meaning unless some other meaning is clearly suggested by the context in
which a particular word or phrase appears. As used in this chapter, "shall"
is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
§ 150-5. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings set out below:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Administrator and/or such other Village
staff members or officials as may be designated as the administrators of
this chapter by resolutions adopted from time to time by the Village Board;
the Village Board, in its discretion, may perform, in the first instance, any
function delegated to the Administrator by this chapter.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROTECT — Any project within the Village, or
undertaken by or on behalf of the Village, involving the construction,
reconstruction, improvement, installation, remodeling or repair of, or any
grading, excavation, drilling, filling, landscaping or other work in
connection with, any public improvement, including without limitation all
§ 148-13 CABLE TELEVISION § 150-5
143:177
public buildings, public street improvements (pavement, curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, culverts, street trees, streetlights and street signs), public
bridges, public sanitary sewerage system improvements and facilities,
public water supply and distribution system improvements and facilities,
public storm sewer and drainage system improvements and facilities, and
public parks and recreational facilities, or any improvements or facilities
that are intended to become public through dedication to the Village in
connection with an approved land division or otherwise.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, trust,
body politic or corporate, or any other legal entity.
SUBCONTRACTOR — Any person whose relationship to the principal
contractor is substantially the same, with respect to a part of the work on a
public improvement project, as the latter's relationship is to the proprietor;
a subcontractor takes a distinct part of the work on a project in such a way
that the subcontractor does not contemplate doing merely personal service.
VILLAGE — The Village of Pleasant Prairie.
§ 150-6. Qualification requirement. [Amended 2-6-2012 by Ord. No.
12-11]
No person shall be permitted to obtain bid proposal forms or related plans
or specifications from the Village for the purpose of submitting a bid for
work on any public improvement project, or to submit a bid for work on
any public improvement project, unless such person is properly qualified
pursuant to this chapter. Additionally, subject to § 150-7 below, it shall be
unlawful to, and no person shall, act as a contractor or subcontractor on any
public improvement project within the Village unless such person is duly
qualified pursuant to this chapter.
§ 150-7. Exemption.
Any contractor or subcontractor who has submitted a bid to the Village
for work on a public improvement project or who has entered into a
construction contract for work on a public improvement project prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall be exempt from this chapter only to the
extent of the work on such project. No lapse, suspension or cancellation of
the qualification of a contractor or subcontractor under this chapter shall
affect the ability of such contractor or subcontractor to carry out a contract
with respect to a public improvement project, without penalty, provided that
such contract was entered into in good faith at a time when such contractor
or subcontractor was duly qualified.
§ 150-8. Qualification application. [Amended 12-15-1997]
Any person who wises to obtain bid proposal forms or related plans or
specifications from the Village for the purpose of submitting a bid for
work on any public improvement project, or to submit a bid for work on
any public improvement project or to act as a contractor or subcontractor
on any pubic improvement project, may become qualified to do so by
§ 150-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 150-8
143:178
filing with the Administrator an application for qualification. Each such
application shall specify the categories of public improvement projects
for which qualification is sought and shall be accompanied by a sworn
statement of qualifications. The applicant shall pay to the Village Treasurer,
at the time of application, a fee of $30 to help defray the costs of reviewing
and evaluating the application. All applications for qualification and all
sworn statements of qualification shall be submitted on standard forms
approved by the Village Board and available from the Administrator.
§ 150-9. Statement of qualifications.
The statement of qualifications shall be signed and sworn to under oath,
in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized by law to
administer oaths, by the applicant or by a representative of the applicant
with personal knowledge on behalf of the applicant.
A. The statement of qualifications shall contain the following minimum
information:
(1) Applicant's name;
(2) Applicant's address;
(3) Applicant's telephone number;
(4) Number of years the applicant has been in business under the
present name (and the applicant's prior business name if the name
has been changed within five years);
(5) Type of entity the applicant is (if the applicant is a corporation,
state when and in what state incorporated);
(6) Categories of work for which qualification is sought and the
number of years of applicant's experience as a principal contractor
and as a subcontractor, in each such category;
(7) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of all officers, general
partners or other principals;
(8) List of all projects started during the past five years, including, with
respect to each project, the following year, category of work,
capacity in which the work was undertaken, contract amount,
location of work, and name, address and telephone number of the
person for whom the work was performed;
(9) Experience of all principal and supervisory individuals, including
the following: name, present position, years of experience by
categories of work, and capacity in which such work was
performed;
(10) Major pieces of equipment owned and available when needed,
including, with respect to each, the name, description, condition
and years of service;
§ 150-8 CABLE TELEVISION § 150-9
143:179
(11) Whether the applicant has failed, during the past five years, to
complete satisfactorily and on time any work awarded to it or
contracted for by it, and, if so, the full details of each such incident;
(12) Whether any officer, general partner or other principal or
supervisory individual associated with the applicant was an officer,
general partner, principal or supervisor of any other contractor or
subcontractor, during the past five years, when such contractor or
subcontractor failed to complete, satisfactorily and on time, a
construction contract, and, if so, details of each such incident;
(13) Whether the applicant or any of its officers, directors, general
partners or other principal or supervisory individuals have a
financial interest in any other contractor or subcontractor qualified
to work on public improvement projects in the Village, and, if so,
the full details of any such interest;
(14) Whether the applicant has asked to be relieved of a bid submitted
by it to a public awarding authority during the past five years, and,
if so, the full details of each such incident;
(15) Whether the applicant has been relieved of a bid submitted by it to
a public awarding authority during the past five years, and, if so,
the full details of each such incident;
(16) Whether the applicant has ever been charged with or convicted of a
violation of any wage schedule, and, if so, the full details of each
such incident;
(17) Whether the applicant or any of its officers, general partners or
principal or supervisory individuals has been charged with or
convicted of a felony during the past five years, and, if so, the full
details of each such incident;
(18) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of bonding companies
used by the applicant during the past five years and the amount and
issuer of the largest bond provided during such period;
(19) Whether any bonding company has, during the past five years,
taken over a contract or made any payments because applicant
failed to carry out a contract or performed it unsatisfactorily, and, if
so, full details of each incident;
(20) List borrowings during the past five years, including the name of
the bank or lending institution, the maximum amount borrowed at
any time during such period and the nature of the collateral
furnished;
(21) List lines of credit available to the applicant, including name of the
bank or financial institution, and the amount of credit;
§ 150-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 150-9
143:180
§ 150-10. Qualification categories.
The following are the categories of public improvement projects on which
contractors and subcontractors may be qualified to perform work pursuant
to this chapter:
(22) Whether the applicant contemplates any change in its capital
structure or any substantial increase or decrease in its equity
capital, and, if so, the full details;
(23) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of municipalities and
state agencies which have qualified the applicant during the past
five years;
(24) Provide a current balance sheet, together with the name of the
preparer, and whether the assets listed are pledged, mortgaged or
assigned;
(25) Average number of individuals employed by the applicant during
the past year, in each of the following categories: skilled
construction, unskilled construction, office; and
(26) Summary of any litigation in which the applicant has been involved
during the last five years, including, with respect to each case, the
caption, court, case number, name of opposing party or parties,
nature of claims by or against the applicant, the outcome or status
of the case and the identity of the attorneys representing the
applicant and the opposing party or parties.
B. The Administrator may require from time to time that additional or
supplementary information be submitted by any applicant or any
qualified contractor or subcontractor with respect to particular
categories of public improvement projects, or with respect to a
particular public improvement project, or as a follow-up to issues raised
by a failure to submit required information, or by the information
initially submitted, or by problems or complaints generated by work on
current or recent public improvement projects, or by adverse
information received from any source.
A. General street construction. The construction and performance of a
complete unit of street improvement work, including without limitation
grading, subbase work, base course, structures, asphaltic or concrete
pavement and related work, or any combination thereof.
B. Grading. The movement of earth, the construction of earthwork and
related work.
C. Concrete pavement. The construction of concrete pavement and related
work.
D. Asphaltic pavement. The construction of all types of asphaltic pavement
and related work.
§ 150-9 CABLE TELEVISION § 150-10
143:181
§ 150-11. Qualification determination.
The Administrator shall determine whether and with respect to which
categories of public improvement projects an applicant is qualified. Such
determination shall be made as soon as practical after an application and
all required information is filed. In the event that an applicant fails or
refuses to file required supporting or supplementary information within
a reasonable period of time, the Administrator may deny qualification,
entirely or with respect to certain categories of public improvement
projects, or subject any qualification granted to reasonable conditions. The
Administrator may attach to any determination to qualify a contractor or
subcontractor under this chapter such conditions precedent or subsequent
E. Gravel and crushed stone. The construction of crushed aggregate base
course and shoulder and related work.
F. Structures. The construction of masonry, steel or timber bridges,
viaducts, culverts, railroad bridges or other similar structures, and
related work.
G. Rail construction and rehabilitation. The construction or rehabilitation
of a section of track, including all or part of the grading, drainage
structures, ballasting, laying or replacement of rails, ties, turnouts and
crossings, and incidental related items or related work, or any
combination thereof; in granting any qualification relating to this
category, the Administrator may consider the recommendation of the
railroad involved.
H. Painting. Work involving the painting of structures.
I. Streetlighting. Work involving trenching and underground duct work,
placing of electrical cable on or under the ground, placing light bases
and fixtures, including generators, regulators, transformers and related
equipment, and related work.
J. General building construction. The construction of a complete unit of
work relating to construction of a public building.
K. General sewer construction. the construction of a complete unit of
sanitary sewerage system improvements work.
L. General water main construction. The construction of a complete unit of
water system improvements work.
M. Storm sewer construction. The construction of a complete unit of storm
sewer and drainage system improvements work.
N. Incidental construction. Work involving sidewalks, curbs and gutters,
small concrete structures, guardrails, fencing, furnishing and planting
of plant materials, cutting and spraying of weeds, signage, signals and
other work of a minor or incidental character.
§ 150-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 150-11
143:182
as may be reasonable in light of the purposes of this chapter and the
information available to the Administrator.
§ 150-12. Notice of determination.
The Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of any
determination made with respect to qualification. Any determination to
deny any qualification sought by an applicant because of the lack of
required information shall specify the missing information. Any
determination to deny any qualification sought by an applicant, for any
reason other than missing information, shall specify with particularity the
reasons for such determination. Any determination to qualify an applicant
shall specify for which categories of public improvement projects the
applicant is qualified and any conditions to which the qualification is
subject. In the absence of a subsequent determination to modify, suspend or
cancel the qualification of a contractor or subcontractor, all determinations
to qualify an applicant shall be effective until the following December 31.
§ 150-13. Continuous qualification. [Amended 12-15-1997]
Any qualified contractor or subcontractor can maintain continuous qualified
status by filing with the Administrator the application and statement of
qualifications required by § 150-8, above, and by paying to the Village
Treasurer the application fee of one-half the original fee required by § 150-8
on or before December 1. The Administrator shall process all applications
for qualification received by December 1 before processing any applications
received after December 1. Any application filed by a qualified contractor
or subcontractor in accordance with this section shall continue the qualified
status of such contractor or subcontractor until the Administrator makes
a new determination, whether or not such determination is made before
January 1, but any qualified contractor or subcontractor who fails to file by
the December 1 deadline risks being unqualified for a period of time after
December 31.
§ 150-14. Reconsideration.
An applicant may file an application to reconsider a prior qualification
determination at any time. The fee for filing an application to reconsider a
prior determination shall be 1/2 the fee for an initial application, and such
application shall be processed in the same manner as an initial or renewal
application. The applicant shall file with the application an updated sworn
statement of qualifications. Any such statement shall correct all outdated
or incorrect information on the prior statement and shall include any new
information upon which the application is based.
§ 150-15. Suspension, modification or cancellation of qualification.
If a qualified contractor or subcontractor fails or refuses promptly to supply
any information requested by the Administrator, or fails to satisfactorily
perform work on any public improvement project, or if the Administrator
§ 150-11 CABLE TELEVISION § 150-15
143:183
receives material new information regarding the responsibility, competence
or capability of the contractor or subcontractor, or its sensitivity to the
necessity of performing work on public improvement projects in such a
way as to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and to
minimize any disturbance, inconvenience or annoyance to the public, which
demonstrates that a prior qualification determination is no longer justified,
the Administrator may suspend, modify, cancel or subject to new conditions
the qualification of such contractor or subcontractor, as may be reasonable
in light of the purposes of this chapter and the information available to
the Administrator. If the Administrator determines that materially false
information was submitted on a statement of qualifications filed with the
Village, the Administrator shall cancel the qualification of such contractor
or subcontractor, and such contractor or subcontractor shall be ineligible
for qualification for one year.
§ 150-16. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any determination made by the Administrator
pursuant to this chapter may appeal such determination to the Village
Board by filing with the Village Administrator or the Village Administrator's
designee a notice of appeal specifying with particularity the grounds for
believing that the Administrator's determination is erroneous. Any such
notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the date of mailing to the
appellant of the Administrator's written determination on standard forms
approved by the Village Board and available from the Village Administrator.
The appellant shall pay to the Treasurer, at the time of filing the notice
of appeal, a fee of $25 to help defray the costs of appeal. The appellant
shall be given not less than 10 days' advance written notice of the date,
time and place of the hearing. The appellant may be represented by counsel
at the hearing, may present evidence and argument relevant to the issues
raised by the notice of appeal, and may question witnesses called to support
the Administrator's determination. The appellant shall have the burden
of proving that it is qualified and that any conditions imposed on its
qualification are not reasonable. The Village Board may reverse, affirm or
modify the determination of the Administrator, and the Board's decision
shall be final. The Village Board shall promptly notify the appellant of its
findings in writing.
§ 150-17. Confidentiality.
The contents of any statement of qualifications or any related information,
including any additional, updated or supplemental information, filed by
a person pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential and shall not be
disclosed except upon the written order of such person, or for necessary use
by the Administrator or the Village Board in qualifying such person, or in
cases of court or administrative action against or by such person, or against
or by the Administrator or the Village.
§ 150-15 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 150-18
143:184
§ 150-18. Violations and penalties.
The Village may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings to
enforce the provisions of this chapter by means of injunction, forfeitures or
otherwise, as provided by law. Any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $500
for each violation, plus the costs of prosecution. The penalty for default
of payment of any such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisonment in the
Kenosha County Jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding six months.
Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 155
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 250. Truancy — See Ch. 336.
§ 155-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CURFEW HOURS — The hours between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on
Saturday and Sunday and between 10:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the next day
beginning on Sunday through Thursday.
GUARDIAN — A person or a public or private agency who either pursuant
to court order or acceptance of testamentary appointment is the legal
guardian of the minor.
LOITER, IDLE OR REMAIN — To linger or stay, as well as to refuse to leave
when requested to do so by a police officer, or the owner or other person in
control of a public place. This term also encompasses activities which may
be mobile, such as walking, driving, and riding about in a public place.
MINOR — Any person who is 17 years of age or younger.
PARENT — A person who is the natural parent, adoptive parent, or
stepparent of the minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — A place located in the Village of Pleasant Prairie to
which the public, or a substantial group of the public, has access, including,
but not limited to, streets, highways, sidewalks, parking lots, vacant lots,
parks, and the common areas in and about apartment buildings, office
buildings, hospitals, schools, shops and places of entertainment such as
movie theaters.
§ 155-2. Curfew established; exceptions.
§ 150-18 CURFEW § 155-2
155:185
§ 155-3. Responsibility of parents.
No parent, legal guardian or other person having legal custody of a minor
shall permit such child to loiter, idle or remain upon any street, alley or
other public place in the Village during curfew hours, unless such child is
accompanied by his parent, legal guardian or other adult person having
legal custody of such child.
§ 155-4. Responsibility of operators of places of amusement.
No person operating a place of amusement or entertainment within the
Village or any agent, servant or employee of such person shall permit
a minor to enter or loiter in such place of amusement or entertainment
during curfew hours, unless such child is accompanied by his parent, legal
guardian or other adult person having legal custody of such child.
A. No minor shall loiter, idle or remain upon any street, alley or other
public place in the Village during curfew hours, unless such child is
accompanied by his parent, legal guardian or other adult person having
legal custody of such child.
B. Exceptions.
(1) This section shall not apply to a minor:
(a) Who is performing an errand as directed by his or her parent,
legal guardian or person having lawful custody.
(b) Who is on his or her own premises or in the area immediately
adjacent thereto.
(c) Who is engaged in a lawful employment activity, or on the way
to or from an employment activity, without detour or stop
except as necessary to drop or pick up a co-employee.
(d) Who is attending a school, religious or governmental activity,
which is supervised by adults, or traveling to or from such a
school, religious, or governmental activity without detour or
stop.
(e) Who is participating in, going to, or returning from an activity
involving the exercise of the minor's rights protected under the
First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States
Constitution and Sections 3 and 4 of Article I of the
Constitution of the State of Wisconsin, such as the freedom of
speech and expression and the right of assembly, without
detour or stop.
§ 155-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 155-5
155:186
§ 155-5. Responsibility of operators of hotels, motels and rooming
houses.
No person operating a hotel, motel or lodging or rooming house within the
Village, or any agent, servant or employee of such person, shall permit any
minor to visit, idle, wander or stroll in any portion of such hotel, motel
or lodging or rooming house during curfew hours, unless such child is
accompanied by his parent, legal guardian or other adult person having
legal custody of such child.
§ 155-6. Loitering in school and playground areas.
No person not in official attendance or on official school business shall
enter into, congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in any school
building or in or about any playground area adjacent thereto within the
Village during open hours.
§ 155-7. Enforcement.
§ 155-8. Warning.
The first time a child is detained by law enforcement officers as provided in
§ 155-7, the parent, legal guardian or person having legal custody shall be
advised as to the provisions of this chapter, and any violation of this chapter
occurring thereafter by this child or any other child under such adult's care
or custody shall result in a penalty being imposed as provided in § 155-9.
§ 155-9. Violations and penalties.
A. Before taking any action to enforce this chapter, a police officer shall
ask the apparent offender's age. The officer may ask for proof of the
apparent offender's age and shall be justified in taking action to
ascertain the apparent offender's age in the absence of identification,
such as taking the apparent offender into custody while contacting his
or her parent or guardian, or accompanying the apparent offender to
his or her residence for the purpose of obtaining identification.
B. If the apparent offender is a minor, or cannot produce identification
proving otherwise immediately, the officer shall ask the reason for the
apparent offender's being in a public place. The officer shall not take
any action to enforce this section unless the officer reasonably believes,
based upon the response of the apparent offender as well as the totality
of the circumstances, no exception to this section applies. If the officer
does have such a reasonable belief, the officer on duty may detain any
child violating § 155-2, 155-4, 155-5 or 155-6 until such time as the
parent, legal guardian or other adult person having legal custody of the
child has been immediately notified and the person so notified has, as
soon as reasonably possible thereafter, reported to the Police
Department for the purpose of taking the child into custody and has
signed a release for him.
§ 155-5 CURFEW § 155-9
155:187
Chapter 162
DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 162-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — All equipment, products and materials of any
kind that are used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body
a controlled substance in violation of this chapter.
A. Any parent, legal guardian or person having legal custody of a child
described in §§ 155-2, 155-4, 155-5 and 155-6 who has been warned in
the manner provided in § 155-8 and who thereafter violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-4, of this Code.
B. Any child who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to penalty as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4, of this Code.
"Drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, any of the
following:
Kits used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any
species of plant that is a controlled substance or from which a
controlled substance can be derived.
(1)
Kits used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing
or preparing controlled substances.
(2)
Isomerization devices used, designed for use or primarily intended
for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant that is a
controlled substance.
(3)
Testing equipment used, designed for use or primarily intended
for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or
purity of controlled substances.
(4)
Scales and balances used, designed for use or primarily intended
for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
(5)
Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, designed for use or primarily
intended for use in cutting controlled substances.
(6)
A.
§ 155-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 162-1
162:188
Separation gins and sifters used, designed for use or primarily
intended for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining, marijuana.
(7)
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
designed for use or primarily intended for use in compounding
controlled substances.
(8)
Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, designed
for use or primarily intended for use in packaging small quantities
of controlled substances.
(9)
Containers and other objects used, designed for use or primarily
intended for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
(10)
Objects used, designed for use or primarily intended for use in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine,
hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls.
(a)
(b) Water pipes.
(c) Carburetion tubes and devices.
(d) Smoking and carburetion masks.
Roach clips; meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand.
(e)
(f) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
(g) Chamber pipes.
(h) Carburetor pipes.
(i) Electric pipes.
(j) Air-driven pipes.
(k) Chilams
(l) Bongs.
(m) Ice pipes or chillers.
(11)
"Drug paraphernalia" excludes:
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended
for use in parenterally injecting substances into the human body.
(1)
B.
§ 162-1 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 162-1
162:189
PRIMARILY — Chiefly or mainly.
§ 162-2. Determination.
Any items, including pipes, papers and accessories, that are
designed for use or primarily intended for use with tobacco
products.
(2)
A. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority shall consider, in addition to all other legally relevant
factors, the following:
(1) Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
(2) The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of this chapter.
(3) The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
(4) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
(5) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of
anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he or
she knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this
chapter; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, as to a direct violation of this chapter shall not prevent a
finding that the object is designed for use or primarily intended for
use as drug paraphernalia.
(6) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use.
(7) Descriptive materials accompanying the object that explain or
depict its use.
(8) Local advertising concerning its use.
(9) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
(10) Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
(11) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
(12) Expert testimony concerning its use.
B. In determining under this chapter whether an item is designed for a
particular use, a court or other authority shall consider the objective
physical characteristics and design features of the item.
§ 162-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 162-2
162:190
§ 162-3. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4 of
this Code.
Chapter 165
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 155.
Fire and rescue protection — See Ch. 180.
Towing — See Ch. 332.
§ 165-1. Definitions:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY — Any type of threat of hazard that poses threat to the lives,
property or environment within the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR — A person designated under this
section, if the officer or department head is unavailable, to exercise the
powers and discharge the duties of the position until a successor is
appointed or elected and qualified as provided by law or until the lawful
inxcumbent is able to resume the exercise of the powers and discharge the
duties of the position.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR — The director coordinates
emergency scenes, command posts, or emergency operations centers to
coordinate emergency response of Village departments, mutual aid
agencies, public and private agencies and organizations; performs
necessary administrative, planning, and organizational duties; develops,
revise and implement emergency operations plans, and documents; attends
training sessions and meetings.
EMERGENCY POWERS — The authority given to the Village of Pleasant
Prairie to take extraordinary actions in order to cope with a crisis.
UNAVAILABLE — During a state of emergency resulting from any cause,
either a vacancy in office exists and there is no deputy authorized to
exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties of the office, or the
lawful incumbent of the office and his or her duly authorized deputy are
C. In determining under this chapter whether an item is primarily
intended for a particular use, a court or other authority shall consider
the subjective intent of the defendant.
§ 162-2 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 165-1
162:191
absent or unable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the
position.
§ 165-2. Purpose and declaration of policy.
This chapter is enacted to provide authority to the Pleasant Prairie Village
Board, Village officers and Village employees for actions that must be taken
in response to various types of emergencies or disasters that threaten the
Village. It is intended to grant as broad a power as permitted by statutory
and constitutional authority. Included are all activities and measures
designed or undertaken to minimize the effects upon the people of Pleasant
Prairie that were caused by natural or man-made disasters, or which would
be caused by enemy or other intentional action; to deal with the immediate
emergency conditions which would be created by such activities; and to
effect emergency repairs to, or the emergency restoration of, vital public
infrastructure, utilities and facilities destroyed or damaged by such actions
or disasters.
§ 165-3. Declaration of emergency; emergency powers.
A. Declaration of emergency.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
Village Board of the Village of Pleasant Prairie may declare by
resolution or ordinance an emergency existing within the Village
whenever conditions arise by reason of war, intentional act,
conflagration (fire), flood, heavy snowstorm, blizzard, catastrophe,
disaster, riot or civil commotion, or acts of God, and including
conditions, without limitation because of enumeration, which
impair transportation, food or fuel supplies, medical care, fire,
health or police protection or other vital services within Village.
(2) If the Village Board is unable to meet with promptness, the Village
President is hereby authorized to declare a state of emergency by
proclamation. The proclamation shall be subject to ratification,
alteration, modification or repeal by the Village Board as soon as
that body can meet, but the subsequent action taken by the Village
Board shall not affect the prior validity of the proclamation.
(3) The period of the emergency shall be limited by the ordinance or
resolution to the time during which the emergency conditions exist
or are likely to exist.
B. Authority to act. During a state of emergency, the Village Board by
ordinance or resolution or, in its absence, the Village President by
resolution shall have the authority to legislate for whatever is necessary
and expedient for the health, safety, welfare and good order of the
Village. This shall include, without limitation by enumeration, the
authority to bar, restrict or remove all unnecessary traffic, both
vehicular and pedestrian, from all local highways.
§ 165-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 165-3
162:192
§ 165-4. Emergency Management Director.
C. Emergency powers. In addition to those powers conferred upon the
Village President in the previous sections, during a state of emergency
the Village President, in consultation with the Emergency Management
Director and other Village staff, shall exercise all executive and general
administrative emergency powers, including but not limited to all of the
following:
(1) The authority to direct emergency response activities performed by
Village departments.
(2) The authority to execute contracts for the emergency construction
or repair of public improvements, when the delay of advertising
and public bidding might cause serious loss or injury to the Village,
upon following the procedures regarding emergency
procurements.
(3) The authority to lease real property or structures, or both, that are
deemed necessary for the continued operation of Village
government.
(4) The authority to purchase or lease goods and services deemed
necessary to the Village's emergency response or for the repair of
Village facilities, or both, upon following the procedures regarding
emergency procurements.
(5) The authority to promulgate rules and orders to implement and
clarify the proclamation exercising emergency power.
(6) The authority to delegate any or all of these duties to the
appropriate Village personnel.
(7) The authority to coordinate emergency activities with the Kenosha
County Director of Emergency Management.
D. Actions taken pursuant to the grant of authority contained in this
chapter shall be subject to ratification, alteration, modification or
repeal by the Village Board as soon as that body can meet, but the
subsequent action taken by the Village Board shall not affect the prior
validity of the action taken.
A. Appointment. The Village Administrator shall appoint both the
Emergency Management Director and the Deputy Emergency
Management Director, annually, for the Village of Pleasant Prairie. The
Deputy Director shall have the authority and power to act in the
absence of the Director.
B. Duties. The Emergency Management Director shall be responsible for
the performance and supervision of performance of all duties in
connection with coordinating and carrying out the Village's role in
furnishing services in the event of a declaration of a state of emergency.
§ 165-3 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 165-4
162:193
§ 165-5. Emergency Management Team.
C. The powers and duties of the Emergency Management Director are
pursuant to Ch. 166, and specifically § 166.03(5), Wis. Stats. The
Emergency Management Director shall be responsible to the Village
Administrator and Village Board. The Emergency Management Director
and the Deputy Emergency Management Director shall:
(1) Assist the Village President in the exercise of emergency powers.
(2) Request the Village Board or Village President to declare a state of
emergency when appropriate.
(3) Prepare, under the direction of the Village President and in
consultation with the appropriate Village staff, all necessary
emergency proclamations, rules and orders and implement the
emergency operations plan. The Emergency Management Director
shall also ensure that appropriate media outlets are notified of the
emergency.
(4) Marshal, after the declaration of a state of emergency, all
necessary personnel, equipment and supplies from any department
of the Village to aid in carrying out the emergency operations plan.
(5) Act in coordination with the state and other governmental agencies
as may be necessary to plan and implement a joint jurisdiction
emergency planning and disaster services plan and mutual aid
arrangements.
(6) Control and direct emergency training activities.
(7) Maintain a liaison with other municipal, state, regional and federal
disaster services agencies.
(8) Coordinate the drafting of proposed mutual aid agreements.
(9) Assume other emergency responsibilities as assigned by the Village
President or Village Board.
(10) Recommend for adoption by the Village Board an emergency
operations plan for the Village and recommend for adoption by the
Village Board mutual aid plans and agreements that are deemed
essential for the plan. The Emergency Management Director shall
make continuing studies of the need for amendments and
improvements in such plans.
A. The Emergency Management Team of the Village shall consist of the
Village President, the Village Administrator, the Emergency
Management Director, the Deputy Emergency Management Director,
the Assistant Chief of Fire & Rescue, the Assistant Police Chief, the
Village Engineer and such other Village officers or employees as may be
designated by the Village President or the Emergency Management
Director.
§ 165-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 165-5
162:194
§ 165-6. Emergency procurements.
§ 165-7. Emergency temporary locations.
B. The Emergency Management Team shall work together in the
development and maintenance of an emergency plan and disaster
services plan, emergency training activities, mutual aid agreements,
and continued study of the need for amendments and improvements in
said plans, activities and agreements. All plans of organization shall
substantially conform to recommendations of the federal government,
Kenosha County and the State Office of Emergency Management.
C. During a state of emergency the Emergency Management Team shall
work under the direction and supervision of the Emergency
Management Director in his or her fulfillment of the responsibilities
enumerated in § 165-4.
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, upon
declaration of a state of emergency the Village President, the
Emergency Management Director or either's designee may procure by
purchase or lease such goods and services as are deemed necessary for
the Village's emergency response effort. This emergency procurement
of goods or services may be made in the open market without filing a
requisition or estimate and without advertisement or compliance with
requirements for public bidding for immediate delivery or furnishing.
B. A full written account of emergency procurements made during this
emergency, together with a requisition for the required materials,
supplies, equipment, or services, shall be submitted to the Village
Board within 30 days after their procurement, or as soon thereafter as
is practicable, and shall be open to public inspection for such period as
required by applicable Village ordinance and state statutes.
A. Designation of emergency temporary locations. Whenever during a
state of emergency it becomes imprudent, inexpedient or impossible to
conduct the affairs of local government at the regular or usual place or
places thereof, the Village Board may meet at any place within or
without the territorial limits of the Village of Pleasant Prairie at the
direction of the Village President or his or her successor and shall
proceed to establish and designate, by ordinance, resolution or other
manner, alternate or substitute sites or places as the emergency
temporary locations of government where all, or any part, of the public
business may be transacted and conducted during the emergency
situation.
B. Such alternate or substitute site or places may be within or without the
territorial limits of the Village of Pleasant Prairie. If practicable, they
shall be the sites or places designated as the emergency temporary
locations of government in the current emergency management plan.
§ 165-5 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 165-7
162:195
§ 165-8. Order of succession for officers and department heads.
C. Exercise of governmental authority. While the public business is being
conducted at an emergency temporary location, the Village Board and
officers of the Village of Pleasant Prairie shall have, possess and
exercise, at such location, all of the executive, legislative,
administrative and judicial powers and functions conferred upon such
body and officers under state law. Such powers and functions, except
judicial, may be exercised in the light of the exigencies of the
emergency situation without regard to or compliance with timeconsuming
procedures and formalities prescribed by law and
pertaining thereto. All acts of such body and officers shall be as valid
and binding as if performed within the territorial limits of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie.
D. Priority of legislation. This section shall control notwithstanding any
statutory, charter or ordinance provision to the contrary or in conflict
herewith.
A. Declaration of policy. Because of the possible unavailability or
incapacity of the Village President, Village Board, Village Administrator,
or department heads during an emergency, it is determined and
declared to be necessary to assure the continuity and effective
operation of the Village of Pleasant Prairie in the event of an emergency
by providing for additional persons who can temporarily exercise the
powers and discharge the duties of these positions.
B. Emergency interim successors. Subject to such regulations as the
Village Board may adopt from time to time, local officials and all
department heads for the Village of Pleasant Prairie shall designate by
title, if feasible, or by named person emergency interim successors and
specify their order of succession.
C. Each officer or department head shall review and revise, as necessary,
designations made pursuant to this section to ensure their current
status. The officer or department head shall designate a sufficient
number of persons so that there will be not fewer than three or more
than seven deputies or emergency interim successors or any
combination thereof at any time.
D. If any officer or department head or his or her deputy provided for
pursuant to law is unavailable, the powers of the office shall be
exercised and duties shall be discharged by his or her designated
emergency interim successors in the order specified. The emergency
interim successor shall exercise the powers and discharge the duties of
the office to which designated until such time as a vacancy which may
exist is filled in accordance with the Constitution, statutes or
ordinances or until the officer or his or her deputy or a preceding
emergency interim successor again becomes available to exercise the
powers and discharge the duties of the position.
§ 165-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 165-8
162:196
§ 165-9. Declaration of emergency; line of succession in Village
President's absence.
§ 165-10. Police power of Police Chief and police officers.
E. Status and qualifications of designees. No person shall be designated or
serve as an emergency interim successor unless he or she is eligible
under the Constitution, statutes and ordinances to hold the office to
which powers and duties he or she is designated to succeed, but no
constitutional or statutory provision prohibiting local or state officials
from holding another office shall be applicable to an emergency interim
successor.
F. Formalities of taking office. Emergency interim successors shall take
such oath as may be required for them to exercise the powers and
discharge the duties of the office to which they may succeed. No
person, as a prerequisite to the exercise of the powers or discharge of
the duties of an office to which he or she succeeds, shall be required to
comply with any other provision of law relative to taking office.
A. Declaration of emergency. If the Village Board is unable to meet with
promptness, and the Village President, or the Village President Pro-Tem
or the Village Administrator is unavailable to confer either in person or
by telephone regarding the need for a declaration of an emergency, the
Village President, any two members of the Emergency Management
Team in coordination with the Emergency Management Director or
Deputy Director or, in the absence of the Emergency Management
Director or Deputy Director, any three members of the Emergency
Management Team may declare such an emergency.
B. Executive decisions. In the absence of the Village President, or the
Village President Pro-Tem or the Village Administrator the executive
decision authority of the Village when an emergency exists shall
succeed as follows: interim Village Board President; the acting Village
Administrator; Emergency Government Director; and Deputy
Emergency Government Director.
A. The Police Chief and his/her designees shall have authority to suppress
any tumult or disorder and to order all individuals, groups or companies
to leave the neighborhood of any disturbance or emergency scene and
to command from the inhabitants of the Village all needful assistance.
Officers shall also have authority to go upon and enter any property or
premises and to do whatever may reasonably be necessary to protect
the health, safety, welfare and good order of the inhabitants of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie. This shall include, without limitation by
enumeration, the authority to bar, restrict or remove all unnecessary
traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, from all local highways.
[Amended 6-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-09]
(1) The community service officer(s) and/or firefighter(s), as duly
appointed by the Chief of Police, shall be designated as traffic
§ 165-8 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 165-10
162:197
§ 165-11. Police power of Chief of Fire & Rescue.
The Chief of Fire & Rescue, Emergency Management Director and their
designees shall have authority to suppress any tumult or disorder and to
order all individuals or companies to leave the neighborhood of any fire
or first aid scene and to command from the inhabitants of the Village all
needful assistance for the suppression of fires and in the preservation of
property exposed to fire. The officers above enumerated shall also have
authority to go upon and enter any property or premises and to do whatever
may reasonably be necessary in the performance of their duties while
engaged in the work of extinguishing any fire or performing any duties
incidental thereto. Such officers shall also have authority to go upon and
enter any property or premises and do whatever may reasonably be
necessary in the performance of their duties while engaged in the work of
aiding persons or minimizing the loss to property, or at a first aid scene.
§ 165-12. General police powers not limited.
Nothing within this chapter shall be construed to limit in any way the
general police powers and authority of the Village of Pleasant Prairie, its
officers and officials.
§ 165-13. Duration of emergency orders; termination of emergency
powers.
Proclamations, rules, and orders issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until withdrawn by the
Village Board, Village President or other issuing authority. However, those
proclamations, rules, and orders shall be withdrawn by the Village Board,
Village President, or other issuing authority and those persons acting
pursuant to this chapter shall cease to exercise emergency powers at such
time as the conditions giving rise to the emergency cease.
officers pursuant to the meaning of §§ 340.01(70) and 346.04, Wis.
Stats., for the sole purpose of directing vehicular and pedestrian
traffic on public and/or private property and in the right-of-way
areas of the Village and shall be authorized to direct and regulate
vehicular traffic of this Code.
B. Removal of vehicles. Two hours after the broadcast of an emergency
declaration, the Police Department may cause to be removed any
vehicle parked in any municipal parking lot, alley or street that impedes
the necessary work resulting from the emergency situation. The owner
of each vehicle removed from any municipal parking lot, alley or street
shall be issued a citation. The forfeiture for such violation shall not be
more than $50, plus the cost of towing and storage as set forth in
§ 332-7 of this Code. The Village and its employees shall not be
responsible for any damage incurred to the removed vehicles during
towing or storage.
§ 165-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 165-14
162:198
§ 165-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, adult or juvenile, violating a proclamation of emergency, a
subsequent proclamation exercising emergency powers, a rule or order,
which proclamation, rule or order is issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, or any order or directive given by a peace officer or designated
emergency services personnel acting pursuant to this chapter, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4, of this Code.
Chapter 170
ESCORTS AND ESCORT SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented uses and
establishments — See Ch. 108.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 214.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 250.
§ 170-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes, including, without limitation, §§ 61.34(1) and 66.0415(1), Wis.
Stats.
§ 170-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of the Village that the licensing of escorts
and escort services be regulated so as to further the public interest, safety
and welfare by providing minimum qualifications and to regulate, prevent,
combat, control and mitigate the harmful secondary effects of escorts and
escort services operated within the Village, in a manner that is fully
consistent with the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.
§ 170-3. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village. Any
word, term or phrase that is defined in this chapter shall have the meaning
stated in its definition. Any undefined word, term or phrase shall have its
common, ordinary meaning unless some other particular meaning is clearly
suggested by the context in which it appears. As used in this chapter,
"shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Headings are provided in this
chapter only for convenience and ease of reference, and such headings shall
not be used to interpret the meaning, purpose or effect of any provision
of this chapter. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing statements regarding
interpretation, this chapter shall be interpreted so as to be fully consistent
with the requirements of the First Amendment of the United States
Constitution.
§ 165-14 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 170-4
162:199
§ 170-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESCORT — Any person who, for a fee, commission, salary, hire, profit,
payment or other monetary considerations, accompanies or offers to
accompany another person to or about social affairs, entertainment or
places of amusement or consorts with another person about any place of
public resort or within any private quarters or agrees to privately model
lingerie, perform a striptease or perform in a nude or seminude state for
another person or persons.
ESCORT SERVICE — Service provided by any person who, for a fee,
commission, salary, hire, profit, payment or other monetary consideration,
furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons who may accompany other
persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement or
who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any
private quarters or agrees to privately model lingerie, perform a striptease
or perform in a nude or seminude state for another person or persons.
LOCATION-SPECIFIC ESCORT SERVICE — An escort service in which the
actual services of an escort are performed at a defined address associated
with the escort service.
§ 170-5. Exemptions.
§ 170-6. License required.
A. Other than as stated below in this section, this chapter does not apply
to businesses, agencies and persons licensed by the State of Wisconsin
or the Village of Pleasant Prairie pursuant to a specific statute or
ordinance and employees employed by a business so licensed and which
performs an escort or an escort service function as a service merely
incidental to the primary function of such profession, employment or
business and which do not hold themselves out to the public as an
escort or an escort service, or unlicensed individuals performing
substantially the same function as an employee employed by a licensed
business which performs an escort or an escort service function as a
service merely incidental to the primary function of such profession,
employment or business and who do not hold themselves out to the
public as an escort or an escort service, including but not limited to
individuals engaged in child-care activities, companions to the elderly,
and health care workers accompanying individuals.
B. This chapter prohibits holders of adult-oriented use licenses as defined
in Chapter 108, and employees employed by a business holding such
licenses, from holding licenses provided under this chapter.
Accordingly, those businesses or employees are not exempt from this
prohibition or prohibition against acting as an escort or escort service
without a license. All other conduct of adult-oriented uses, however, is
governed by Chapter 108 and not this chapter.
§ 170-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 170-6
162:200
§ 170-7. Application for license.
A. No escort service shall operate or provide service in the Village of
Pleasant Prairie without first obtaining an escort service license issued
by the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
B. No person shall escort in the Village of Pleasant Prairie unless
employed by an escort service licensed by the Village of Pleasant
Prairie and properly registered pursuant to § 170-13.
C. Any person, partnership or corporation which desires to operate or
provide services from more than one location must have a license for
each location.
D. No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person,
partnership or corporation.
E. No person may advertise indicating that an escort service is available in
the Village of Pleasant Prairie unless that service possesses a valid
license. No escort service may in any manner advertise its services as
licensed by the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
F. No location-specific escort service shall operate from the same physical
address as an adult-oriented use establishment as defined in Chapter
108.
G. No escort service shall hold an escort service license and also hold an
adult-oriented use license as defined in Chapter 108.
H. All escort services and location-specific escort services existing in the
Village at the time of the adoption of this chapter must submit an
application for a license within 60 days of the adoption of this chapter.
A. Any person desiring to secure a license under this chapter shall make
application to the Village Clerk.
B. The application for a license shall be on a form approved by the Village
Clerk and accompanied by the required fee. An applicant for a license
(which shall include each partner and limited partner of a partnership
applicant, each officer and director of a corporate applicant, each
stockholder holding 10% or more of the stock or beneficial ownership
and every other person who is interested directly in the ownership or
operation of the business) shall furnish the following information under
oath:
(1) Name and address, including all aliases;
(2) Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age;
(3) All residential addresses of the applicant for the past 10 years;
(4) The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for 10
years immediately preceding the date of application;
§ 170-6 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 170-7
162:201
§ 170-8. Standards for license issuance.
To receive a license to operate an escort service, an applicant must meet
the following standards:
(5) Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other
state, county or village under an escort service license or similar
business license, whether the applicant has ever had such a license
revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business entity
or trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject
to the suspension or revocation;
(6) All convictions and pending charges of felony, misdemeanor or
ordinance violations, except minor traffic violations;
(7) Fingerprints and photograph registration with the Pleasant Prairie
Police Department;
(8) The address of the escort service to be operated by the applicant;
(9) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the
name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the
name and address of the registered agent and all officers and
directors of the corporation.
C. Additional information. Each service shall furnish the following
information under oath at the time of application:
(1) The trade name of the escort service. An escort service may
operate under only one trade name per license.
(2) The complete address of the proposed business location with a
copy of the deed, lease, or other document pursuant to which the
applicant occupies, or will occupy, such premises.
(3) The service's federal employer identification number.
(4) A written plan setting forth:
(a) A description of the nature of the business to be conducted and
services to be offered;
(b) The hours that the service will be open to the public;
(c) Copies of contracts to be used with escorts and customers.
D. Fees. The application fee for a license or any renewal thereof shall be
$500. There is no proration of fees for any license issued for less than a
one-year period, nor shall there be any prorated refund for a license
which is suspended or revoked. If the application for the initial license
or any renewal is denied, the license fee less 20% to defray the costs of
administration and investigation of the application shall be refunded.
A. If the applicant is an individual:
§ 170-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 170-8
162:202
(1) The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age;
(2) Subject to Ch. 111, Wis. Stats., the applicant shall not been
convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere, or no contest, to a felony
or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or
other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction;
(3) The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony,
misdemeanor or ordinance violation which substantially relates to
the licensed activity;
(4) The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated
this chapter within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application;
(5) The applicant shall not be the holder of an adult use license, be
employed by the holder of an adult use license, work as an
independent contractor for the holder of an adult use license or
hold a financial interest in the holder of an adult use license.
B. If the applicant is a corporation:
(1) All officers, directors and others required to be named under
§ 170-7B shall be at least 18 years of age;
(2) Subject to Ch. 111, Wis. Stats., no officer, director or other person
to be named under § 170-7B(9) shall have been convicted of or
pleaded nolo contendere, or no contest, to a felony or any crime
involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of
a sexual nature in any jurisdiction;
(3) No officer, director or other person required to be named under
§ 170-7B shall have been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or
ordinance violation which substantially relates to the licensed
activity;
(4) No officer, director or other person required to be named under
§ 170-7B shall have been found to have previously violated this
chapter within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application;
(5) The applicant shall not be the holder of an adult use license, work
as an independent contractor for the holder of an adult use license
or hold a financial interest in the holder of an adult use license.
C. If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of
organization where two or more persons have a financial interest:
(1) All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall be at least 18 years of
age;
§ 170-8 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 170-8
162:203
§ 170-9. Renewal of license.
Every license issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate on December
31 following its issuance, unless sooner revoked. Application for renewal
shall be on a form provided by the Village Clerk and accompanied by the
license fee.
§ 170-10. Denial of application.
Whenever an initial application is denied, the duties of the Village Clerk and
the rights of the applicant shall be as set forth in § 214-2 of the Pleasant
Prairie Municipal Code.
§ 170-11. Suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of license.
(2) No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall, subject to Ch. 111, Wis.
Stats., have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere, or no
contest, to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude,
prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any
jurisdiction;
(3) No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall have been convicted of a
felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation which substantially
relates to the licensed activity;
(4) No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall have been found to have
violated any provision of this chapter within five years immediately
preceding the date of the application;
(5) The applicant shall not be the holder of an adult use license, work
as an independent contractor for the holder of an adult use license
or hold a financial interest in the holder of an adult use license.
D. No license shall be issued unless the Pleasant Prairie Police
Department has investigated the applicant's qualifications to be
licensed.
E. If any charges are currently pending which, if resulting in a conviction,
would disqualify the applicant pursuant to Subsections A, B or C above,
Pleasant Prairie may postpone action on the application until such time
as the charge is resolved. Should the Village Board fail to fact upon an
application with 60 days of the resolution of the charge, the application
shall be deemed granted.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended for not less than
10 days nor more than 90 days, or revoked, pursuant to § 214-2,
Pleasant Prairie Municipal Code. The same provisions shall apply to
denial of an application for renewal of a license issued under this
chapter.
§ 170-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 170-11
162:204
§ 170-12. Responsibilities of the operator.
§ 170-13. Registration of employees.
B. Any violation of the requirements of this chapter shall be grounds for
revocation of a license issued under this chapter.
A. The operator of an escort service shall maintain a register of all
employees or independent contractors, showing the name and aliases
used by the employee, home address, birth date, sex, telephone
numbers, social security number and date of employment and
termination. The above information on each employee shall be
maintained in the register on the premises for a period of three years
following termination.
B. Records and reports required. Every escort and escort service shall
provide to each patron a written contract and receipt of payment for
services. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to be
performed, the length of time such services shall be performed, the
total amount of money such services shall cost the patron, and any
special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed.
C. The operator of an escort service shall make the register of employees
available immediately for inspection by police upon demand of a
member of the Pleasant Prairie Police Department at all reasonable
times.
D. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct. The operator
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
E. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license
shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
F. No person shall escort or agree to escort a person under the age of 18
years.
A. All operators or employees working for any escort service and
independent contractors shall, prior to beginning employment or
contracted duties, obtain a photo identification card from the Village
Clerk. Prior to issuance, the person shall provide:
(1) Name, address, birth date, any aliases used, telephone numbers,
date of employment and name of employer;
§ 170-11 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 170-13
162:205
§ 170-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a forfeiture of $2,000 for his or her first offense, $3,000 for his
or her second offense within a calendar year of the first offense, and $5,000
for each additional offense within a calendar year of the first offense.
§ 170-15. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is deemed invalid or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall
not affect the other provisions of same.
Chapter 173
FAIR HOUSING
(2) Photographs and fingerprinting with the Village of Pleasant Prairie
Police Department.
B. Upon registration, the Village of Pleasant Prairie Police Department will
provide to each registered employee or independent contractor an
identification card, provided by the Village Clerk, containing the
employee's or independent contractor's photograph identifying the
person as such, which shall be kept available for production upon
request.
C. All identification cards shall expire on December 31 following its
issuance.
D. The applicant shall pay a fee of $500 for each identification card and for
each renewal or reissuance thereof. There is no proration of fees for any
identification card issued for less than a one-year period, nor shall there
be any prorated refund if an identification card is suspended or
revoked. If the application for an initial identification card or any
renewal is denied, the card fee less 20% to defray the costs of
administration and investigation of the application shall be refunded.
E. Any escort employed by more than one escort service shall submit a
separate registration for each service by which the escort is employed.
F. All individuals employed as an escort in the Village at the time of the
adoption of this chapter must register for an identification card within
60 days of the adoption of this chapter.
G. No individual may possess at the same time both an adult use work
permit, as described in Chapter § 108-18, and an escort service photo
identification card, as described in this section.
§ 170-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 173-1
173:206
§ 173-1. Adoption.
The Village Board of the Village of Pleasant Prairie hereby adopts § 106.50,
Wis. Stats., and all subsequent amendments thereto.
§ 173-2. Complaints.
The Village of Pleasant Prairie shall maintain forms for complaints to file
under § 106.50, Wis. Stats., and shall assist any person alleging a violation
thereof in the Village of Pleasant Prairie to file a complaint thereunder with
the Wisconsin Department of Commerce for enforcement of § 106.50, Wis.
Stats.
Chapter 180
FIRE AND RESCUE PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police and Fire Commission — See Ch. 18, Art.
IV.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 114.
Emergency management — See Ch. 165.
Nuisances — See Ch. 234.
Police services — See Ch. 260.
Building and Mechanical Code — See Ch. 370.
§ 180-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (ALS) — Emergency medical care provided
by emergency medical technicians - paramedics that requires the use of
life-sustaining equipment, utilizing an ambulance equipped with radio or
constant telephone contact with a physician/hospital.
ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (ALS) - WITHOUT TRANSPORT — Emergency
medical care provided by emergency medical technicians - paramedics
that requires the use of life-sustaining equipment, with radio or constant
telephone contact with a physician/hospital, without transport.
ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT INTERCEPTS - PARAMEDIC — When it is
necessary for a patient that is being transported by a nonparamedic
ambulance service to require the services of a paramedic - advanced life
support ambulance service. This includes when it is necessary for two
ambulance services to be involved in the transport of a patient, when
either the patient is transferred from the nonparamedic ambulance to the
paramedic ambulance or where the paramedic staff and/or equipment
boards the nonparamedic ambulance.
§ 173-1 FAIR HOUSING § 180-1
173:207
APPROVED —
AREA — The maximum horizontal projected area on one floor of a building
or structure using the exterior walls or between approved fire walls,
including fire walls.
ATTIC — The space not used for human occupancy located between the
ceiling of the uppermost story and the roof.
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION — The Village of Pleasant Prairie Fire
& Rescue Department.
AUTOMATIC CLOSING DEVICE — A device that functions without human
intervention and is actuated as a result of the predetermined temperature
rise, rate of rise of temperature, combustion products or smoke density.
AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM — An integrated system of
underground and overhead piping designed in accordance with fireprotection
and engineering standards. The system includes a suitable water
supply, such as a gravity tank, fire pump, reservoir or pressure tank or
connection beginning at the supply side of an approved gate valve located
at or near the property line where the pipe or piping system provides
water used exclusively for fire protection and related appurtenances and
to standpipes connected to automatic sprinkler systems. The portion of
the sprinkler system above the ground is a network of specially sized or
hydraulically designed piping installed in a building, structure or area,
generally overhead, and to which sprinklers are connected in a systematic
pattern. The system includes a controlling valve and a device for actuating
an alarm when the system is in operation. The system is usually activated
by heat from a fire and discharges water over the fire area.
AUTOMATIC FIRE-SUPPRESSION SYSTEM — A mechanical system
designed and equipped to detect a fire, actuate an alarm and suppress
or control a fire using water, water spray, foam, carbon dioxide, or other
approved suppression agent.
BASEMENT — Any story where less than half the height between floor and
ceiling is above the average level of a street, sidewalk or finished grade.
BASIC LIFE SUPPORT (BLS) — Emergency first aid services that do not
meet the ALS criteria.
BONFIRE — A recreational fire larger than three feet in diameter or three
feet tall.
CENTRAL STATION —
A. Acceptable to the Fire & Rescue Department.
Accepted by a recognized testing laboratory and/or the State of
Wisconsin and its agencies or departments.
B.
An off-site facility equipped to receive and process fire alarms and that
may act as the automatic fire alarm receiving center retained by the
Village.
A.
§ 180-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-1
173:208
CHANGE OF USE (NOT REPORTED) — A change in the use of property
that was not made known by the owner to the Fire & Rescue Department
through procedures established by the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
CHANGE OF USE (REPORTED) — A change in the use of property which
has been made known by the owner to the Fire & Rescue Department
through procedures established by the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
CHIEF — The Chief of the Fire & Rescue Department.
CLOSING DEVICE (FIRE DOOR) — A closing device that will close the door
and be adequate to latch or hold, or both, a hinged or sliding door in closed
position. An automatic closing device is one that functions without human
intervention and is actuated by a fire detection or suppression device.
COMM — The Wisconsin Department of Commerce, formerly the fire code
writing agency of the state, formerly known as DILHR, the Department
of Industry, Labor and Human Relations. Now known as the "Department
of Safety and Professional Services," also known as "DSPS" or
"SPS."[Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
COMMERCIAL WASTE — Any material, including yard waste, that is
transferred, delivered or received for the purpose of disposal by open
burning.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS — Lumber; piping used in plumbing,
including but not limited to plastics, polyvinyl chloride, copper, lead,
galvanized steel and cast iron; plaster; drywall; insulation, including but
not limited to Styrofoam, cellulose fiber, fiberglass, rock wool vermiculite,
various extruded foams, and asbestos; shingles, including but not limited
to wiring, electrical boxes, transformers and outlets; paints, including but
not limited to varnishes, stains, paint thinners and removers; and painting
supplies.
DEPARTMENT — The Fire & Rescue Department.
DEPUTY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE — The Chief is the Deputy
of the Department of Commerce and is responsible for the enforcement of
the state codes identified within this chapter.
DILHR — The division of state government formerly known as the
Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations, now known as the
"Department of Safety and Professional Services," also known as "DSPS" or
"SPS."[Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
The use of a system, or group of systems, in which the operations
of circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in,
maintained by, and supervised from a listed or approved central station
having competent and experienced servers and operators who, upon
receipt of a signal, take such action as required by this chapter. Such
service is to be controlled and operated by a person, firm, or
corporation whose business is the furnishing and maintaining of
supervised signaling systems or whose properties are the protected
premises.
B.
§ 180-1 FAIR HOUSING § 180-1
173:209
DISPOSABLE MEDICAL SUPPLIES — That equipment designed to have a
one-time use and then be properly disposed of, to aid in the prevention and
spread of infectious disease.
DSPS — The Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services,
formerly known as the "Wisconsin Department of Commerce (COMM)," the
fire code writing agency of the state, and prior to COMM formerly known as
"DILHR," the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations.[Added
12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
DWELLING — Any building that contains one or two dwelling units.
DWELLING STRUCTURE — Any structure containing one or more rooms
providing sleeping and sanitary facilities, but not including a hotel, hospital,
nursing home, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or that part of a structure which is used or
intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one person or
by two or more persons maintaining a common household, to the exclusion
of all others.
ELEVATOR — Shall be defined within Department of Safety and
Professional Services, Ch. SPS 318, Elevator Code, Wis. Adm. Code.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN - PARAMEDIC — An emergency
medical technician who has more extensive training than the EMT Basic and
under medical direction provides, but is not limited to, airway management,
the starting and administration of intravenous fluids, advanced rescue,
emergency care and resuscitation, cardiac rhythm interpretation and
defibrillation, advanced assessment, insertion of advanced airways,
parenteral injections, treatment of shock and burns, and administration of
emergency medications.[Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN - BASIC — A person licensed to
provide basic life support and properly trained to transport sick, disabled
and injured individuals. Training includes, but is not limited to, anatomy
and physiology, treatment of bleeding and shock, use of pneumatic shock
garment, soft tissue injuries, fractures and dislocations, emergency
childbirth, burns and hazardous materials, and automatic
defibrillation.[Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
FALSE ALARM — The reporting of an emergency and/or the activation of an
alarm box and/or the intent to deceive the Department, when no emergency
exists.
FIRE & RESCUE CHIEF — The Chief of the Fire & Rescue Department,
the Fire Chief or, in the absence of the Chief, the designee in charge of the
Department.
FIRE & RESCUE DEPARTMENT — The provider of essential fire protection
and emergency medical care to the people who live, work or travel through
the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Fire & Rescue Department or, in the
absence of the Chief, the designee in charge of the Department.
§ 180-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-1
173:210
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Fire & Rescue Department.
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTION (FDC) — A connection through which
the Fire Department can pump an auxiliary supply of water into the
sprinkler system for the purpose of maintaining sufficient volume and
pressure.
FIRE INSPECTOR — The Chief shall hold the office of Fire Inspector and
shall appoint one or more inspectors from within the Department who shall
perform the same duties and have the same powers as the Fire Inspector.
The Fire Inspector(s) is responsible for the enforcement of the state codes
adopted within this chapter, as well as the enforcement of this chapter.
FIRE PREVENTION INSPECTION — An examination of public buildings and
places of employment for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be
corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violation of any law or
ordinance relating to fire hazards or the prevention of fire. Fire inspections
shall be conducted at least once in each nonoverlapping six-month period
per calendar year, at the time that occupancy of a building or tenant space
is requested or upon special request.
FIRE-RESISTIVE — The type of construction in which the structural
members, including walls, partitions, columns, floor and roof construction,
are of noncombustible materials with a fire-resistive rating of at least four
hours.
FIRE WALL — A wall which has a fire-resistance rating of not less than four
hours and which subdivides a building or separates a building to restrict the
spread of fire, including a three-foot parapet wall beyond the furthest point
of the sides and roof.
FIREWORKS —
Anything manufactured, possessed or packaged for exploding, emitting
sparks or combustion which does not have another common use,
including but not limited to any of the following:
Any device designed to produce an audible sound, whether or not
it explodes, sparks, moves or emits an external flame.
(1)
Any device that emits smoke, whether or not it emits an external
flame and whether or not it leaves the ground.
(2)
(3) Any cylindrical fountain which emits sparks or smoke.
(4) Any cone fountain which emits sparks or smoke.
(5) Toy snakes, whether or not they contain mercury.
Such other devices which are defined as fireworks under § 167.10,
Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time.
(6)
A.
The definition of "fireworks" in this section does not include any to the
following:
B.
§ 180-1 FAIR HOUSING § 180-1
173:211
GARBAGE — Refuse and accumulation of animal, fruit and vegetable matter
that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storage of meats,
fish, fowl, fruits and vegetables.
GROUND FLOOR — A floor. Example: The ground floor, first floor and
second floor comprise three floors.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL(S) — A substance (solid, liquid or gas) capable of
posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety, the environment or property.
HIGH-HAZARD OCCUPANCY — Any building which by reason of its
construction or highly combustible occupancy involves a severe life hazard
to its occupants, as classified by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services.
INCIDENT COMMANDER — The Chief or other officer or other member
of the Department who is in charge of a fire, emergency medical or other
emergency scene to which the services of the Department have been
requested.
KEY BOX — A secure box placed upon a building that contains the keys
to said building. The Fire & Rescue Department is able to access that box
using standard operating procedures.
MABAS — The Mutual Aid Box Alarm System which is an organized method
of providing mutual aid between departments located in both of the states
of Wisconsin and Illinois.
MINI STORAGE UNITS — A storage occupancy partitioned into areas that
are rented or leased for the purposes of storing personal or business items
where all of the following apply: 1) the storage areas are separated from
each other by less than a one-hour-fire-resistance-rated barrier, 2) the
owner of the facility does not have unrestricted access, and 3) the items
being stored are concealed from view from outside the unit. Garage units
that are primarily intended for vehicular storage as part of a multifamily
development are not intended to be classified as mini storage buildings.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — An apartment building, row house,
townhouse, condominium or manufactured building that does not exceed
60 feet in height or six stories and that consists of three or more attached
living units, or two or more living units with a business occupancy attached,
the initial construction of which is begun on or after January 1, 1993.
"Multifamily dwelling" does not include a facility licensed under State of
Wisconsin Ch. SPS 361.[Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
(1) Fuel or a lubricant.
(2) Firearm cartridge or shotgun shell.
A flare used, possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency
or in the operations of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor
vehicle.
(3)
A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space
heater.
(4)
§ 180-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-1
173:212
MUTUAL AID — The providing of and receiving fire or emergency medical
services to and from other municipalities within the States of Wisconsin and
Illinois with which the Village has signed agreements.
NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION (NFPA) — An organization
that facilitates the development and distribution of firesafety codes and
standards.
NFPA — The National Fire Protection Association, an organization that
facilitates the development and distribution of firesafety codes and
standards.
OCCUPANCY INSPECTION — An inspection performed after the initial
construction of a building or tenant space and prior to occupancy of same,
or an inspection performed within an existing building or tenant space after
a change in owner or occupant or after any modification or renovation.
OPEN BURNING — The act of starting a fire by means of igniting
combustible materials by either a match, torch, or accelerant.
OUTDOOR COOKING — Any cooking activity which occurs in a grill or
barbecue kettle or cooker designed expressly for cooking meals outside.
PUMPER PAD — An area designated for fire engine access to the Fire
Department connection (FDC) and fire hydrant combination. The site can
be a shared portion of the pavement (however it must not cause driveway
access to be blocked) or an area designated for the sole use of the Fire
Department. The Fire Department shall grant final approval.
RECREATIONAL BURNING — A fire to be used for cooking or warmth
similar to that of a campfire. The fire shall be three feet in diameter or less
if it is placed on the ground.
REINSPECTION — The need to perform one or more additional inspections
after the initial fire prevention inspection was performed.
RETEST — The need to witness one or more additional tests after the initial
performance test of a system, device or other part of a fire system was
conducted.
ROOF SPACES — As follows:
RUBBISH AND REFUSE — Old rags, paper, newspaper, furniture, white
goods, metal, plastics, wood other than wood classified as yard waste, and
other combustible materials.
MULTIRESIDENTIAL — Roof spaces shall be subdivided above every
two apartments on the uppermost floor by a one-hour-rated partition.
All openings must have a one-hour-rated self-closing door, except when
the building is fully sprinkled.
A.
COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, GOVERNMENTAL AND
INSTITUTIONAL BUILDINGS — Buildings with a combustible roof shall
all have roof spaces subdivided every 3,000 square feet by a one-hourrated
partition, except when the building is fully sprinkled. All openings
must have a one-hour-rated self-closing door.
B.
§ 180-1 FAIR HOUSING § 180-1
173:213
SELF-CLOSING DEVICE (DOOR) — A device that will maintain a door in a
closed position.
SHALL — Indicates a mandatory requirement.
SHOULD — A recommendation which is advised but not required.
SOLID WASTE — As defined in § 289.01, Wis. Stats.
SPECIAL INSPECTION — An inspection performed at the request of an
owner, occupant, another Village department or court order.
SPS — The Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services
formerly known as the Wisconsin Department of Commerce (COMM), the
fire code writing agency of the state, and prior to COMM formerly known as
DILHR, the Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations.
STANDPIPE — An arrangement of piping, valves, hose connections, and
allied equipment installed in a building or structure with the hose
connections located in such a manner that water can be discharged in
streams or spray patterns through attached fire hose and nozzles for the
purpose of extinguishing a fire and so protecting a building or structure and
its contents in addition to protecting the occupants. This is accomplished
by connections to water supply systems or by pumps, tanks, and other
equipment necessary to provide an adequate supply of water to the hose
connections.
STORY — That part of a building comprised between a floor and the roof
next above.
VILLAGE — The Village of Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin.
WATER FLOW ALARM — A device that is listed for the service and so
constructed and installed that any flow of water from a sprinkler system
equal to or greater than that from a single automatic sprinkler of the
smallest orifice size installed on the system will result in an audible, visual
alarm and send such notification to a central station within one minute after
such flow begins.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, branches, twigs and organic material from
household gardens which have become dried to the extent that they are
combustible without an accelerant.
§ 180-2. Fire & Rescue Department recognized.
A. Pursuant to § 61.65(2)(a) and (b), Wis. Stats., the Village of Pleasant
Prairie Fire & Rescue Department is officially recognized as the
provider of the essential services of fire protection and emergency
medical care to the people that live, work or travel through the Village
of Pleasant Prairie. The Department also provides service to those
communities that reciprocally provide mutual aid to Pleasant Prairie.
The contemporary duties expected of a Fire & Rescue Department
include but may not be limited to paramedic-level emergency care and
transportation, fire prevention inspections, public fire and safety
education, fire suppression, first responder first aid and defibrillation,
§ 180-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-2
173:214
§ 180-3. Department composition.
The Department is comprised of a combination of full-time, part-time and
paid-on-call personnel. The Department shall have a Chief as well as other
officers and personnel as may be authorized by the Village Board and
appointed by the Police and Fire Commission.
§ 180-4. Department funding and compensation.
The Department shall receive the funding necessary to provide service as
determined by the Village Board. The Village Board shall also establish the
level of compensation for all personnel assigned to the Department.
§ 180-5. Department organization.
The organization and internal regulation of the Department shall be
governed by the provisions of this chapter and by such rules, regulations,
standard operating procedures and guidelines as adopted by the
Department and approved by the Police and Fire Commission.
§ 180-6. Appointment, powers and duties of Chief.
hazardous material incident mitigation, rescue from water, ice,
confined space, heights, transportation accidents, construction
accidents, and industrial accidents, and assistance to law enforcement,
as well as operations at natural and man-made disasters. The duties of
the Fire & Rescue Department need to stay current with the needs of a
dynamic community.
B. The Fire & Rescue Department shall be in charge of firefighting and
emergency care where fires, emergency medical incidents, accidents or
disasters threaten life and/or property and those duties related to the
performance of this service within the Village.
C. Unless the context requires otherwise, all references in this Code to the
"Fire Department" or "Department" shall mean the Fire & Rescue
Department and include the provision of emergency medical care and
other rescue services where life(s) is threatened.
A. Fire & Rescue Chief. Unless the context requires otherwise, all
references in this Code to the "Chief," "Fire Chief" or "incident
commander" shall mean the Chief of the Fire & Rescue Department. In
the absence of the Chief, "Chief" shall mean the next highest ranking
officer.
B. Education. The Fire & Rescue Chief shall hold as a minimum
requirement of the position:
(1) Certified Fire Officer.
(2) Certified Emergency Services Instructor I. [Amended 12-5-2016
by Ord. No. 16-44]
§ 180-2 FAIR HOUSING § 180-6
173:215
(3) Certified Fire Inspector.
(4) Paramedic or previously licensed as a paramedic. [Amended
12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
(5) A minimum of an associate degree in fire administration or fire
science or fire technology.
C. Appointment. The Chief shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
Village Board upon recommendation of the Police and Fire Commission.
D. Vacancy. A vacancy in the office of the Chief shall be filled by
appointment by a majority vote of the Police and Fire Commission.
Upon creation of a vacancy in the office of the Chief, the next highest
ranking officer shall perform the duties of the Chief until such time as
an interim Chief has been appointed or until the vacancy has been
filled.
E. Tenure. The Chief shall immediately assume office upon appointment
and shall hold office until removed for cause or after a hearing before
the Police and Fire Commission, unless the services of the Chief are
terminated sooner by residence outside of a fifteen-mile radius of the
Village borders or death. [Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
F. Residency. The Chief, if not a resident of the Village, shall become a
resident of the Village or within a fifteen-mile radius of the Village
borders and remain a resident of said boundaries throughout the term
of the office of Chief of the Department. [Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-44]
G. General supervision. The Chief shall have the responsibility of overall
supervision of the Department and personnel assigned to the
Department, which shall be subject to and not to conflict with this
chapter. The Chief shall be responsible for all activities within the
Department, as well as the personnel, Department budget and general
efficiency of the Department, and shall report directly to the Village
Administrator on all matters that do not conflict with § 66.0105, Wis.
Stats. The Chief shall perform such other duties as are usually
incumbent upon the commanding officer of a Fire & Rescue
Department and as are detailed in the job description for this position.
H. Command at incidents. The Chief shall have all of the authority and
responsibility for command at all firefighting, rescue, and emergency
medical incidents and other incidents that the Department may respond
to where life and/or property is threatened within the Village. The Chief
shall plan the control of the same, direct the actions of the Department
and/or mutual aid personnel and other agencies which may be called to
assist, assure that the Department performs the duties required, and
grant leaves and/or release personnel and equipment from the scene of
the emergency when appropriate. In the absence of the Chief, the next
highest ranking officer or, in the absence of an officer, the most senior
§ 180-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-6
173:216
§ 180-7. Control and care of apparatus, vehicles and equipment.
§ 180-8. Authority of Department at fires, emergency incidents and
other emergencies.
member of the Department shall be in charge and shall have the same
authority and responsibility at incidents as the Chief.
I. Readiness. The Chief shall maintain the Department, personnel and
equipment in a constant state of readiness in anticipation of an
emergency response. The Chief shall keep the Village Board and
Administrator apprised of the Department's readiness and report
deficiencies in the Department's ability to provide service.
J. Mutual aid. The Chief shall recommend and maintain the necessary
mutual aid contracts as approved by the Village Board. Mutual aid with
other municipalities within the States of Wisconsin and Illinois shall be
organized within the Mutual Aid Box Alarm System or with a
community directly when necessary. The Chief shall have the authority
to dispatch units to respond out of the Village in response to mutual aid
requests from signatories of a mutual aid agreement and the
responsibility to assure that the Village is adequately protected during
said incidents.
K. Enforcement of fire prevention ordinances. The Fire Chief of the Village
of Pleasant Prairie or his/her designee shall enforce all fire prevention
ordinances of the Village of Pleasant Prairie and the State of Wisconsin.
The Chief and/or his/her designees are authorized to cite violations of
the fire prevention ordinances of the Village of Pleasant Prairie in
accordance with Chapter 1, Article I, of the Village Code.
L. Fire investigation. The Chief shall cause every fire to be investigated to
determine the cause, origin and other circumstances.
A. Chief responsible. The Chief shall have control of all apparatus, vehicles
and equipment used by the Department and shall be responsible for its
proper maintenance. The Chief may authorize emergency repairs.
B. Use. Fire apparatus and rescue vehicles shall be used for official
purposes only.
C. Injury to equipment. No person shall willfully injure any hose, hydrant,
fire apparatus, rescue vehicle and equipment related to the provision of
said services that belongs to the Village, and no vehicle, streetcar or
railroad equipment shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the
Department when laid down on any street, private driveway, track or
other place to be used at any fire or alarm of fire or other emergency
without the consent of the Chief.
A. Pursuant to § 213.095, Wis. Stats., the Chief or other officer acting as
the incident commander at the scene of a fire, emergency medical call
or other emergency where the Department has been called to perform
§ 180-6 FAIR HOUSING § 180-8
173:217
§ 180-9. Records and reports.
service to persons or property shall have the authority to do the
following:
(1) Suppress any disorder and order all individuals or companies to
leave the neighborhood of any fire, emergency medical incident or
other emergency.
(2) Command from the inhabitants of the Village all necessary
assistance for the suppression of fires and the preservation of
property exposed to fire and the necessary assistance for rendering
aid during an emergency medical incident or other emergencies.
(3) Enter any property or premises to do whatever may be reasonably
necessary in the performance of the officer's duties while engaged
in the work of extinguishing any fire or performing any duties
incidental thereto and/or while engaged in the work of aiding
persons or minimizing the loss to property at an emergency
medical incident or other emergency.
B. The incident commander conducting operations in connection with the
extinguishment and control of any fire, explosion or other emergency
shall have the authority to direct all operations of fire extinguishment or
control and to take the necessary precautions to save life, protect
property, and prevent further injury or damage. During such operation,
including the investigation of the cause of such emergency, the incident
commander shall be permitted to control or prohibit the approach to
the scene of such emergency by any vehicle, vessel or person.
C. No person shall obstruct the operations of the Department in
connection with extinguishing or control of any fire, or actions relative
to other emergencies, or disobey any lawful command of the incident
commander in charge of the emergency, or any part thereof, or any
lawful order of a police officer assisting the Department.
D. The incident commander in charge of an emergency scene shall have
the authority to establish barriers to control access in the vicinity of
such emergency and to place, or cause to be placed, ropes, guards,
barricades, or other obstructions across any street or alley to delineate
such emergency scene barrier. No person, except as authorized by the
incident commander in charge of the emergency, shall be permitted to
cross such barriers.
E. The incident commander in charge of an emergency scene shall have
the authority to have property damaged by fire or other emergency
barricaded or otherwise protected from persons or the elements. The
expense of such preventative action shall be borne by the property
owner.
A. Legal custodian. The Chief is the legal custodian of the reports, records
and property within the Department.
§ 180-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-9
173:218
§ 180-10. Fire inspectors.
B. Fire reports. Per § 101.141, Wis. Stats., the Department shall maintain
a record of all fires. The Department shall participate in the Wisconsin
Fire Reporting System, supplying data collected to the Department of
Safety and Professional Services. Fire reports shall be maintained a
minimum of seven years.
A. Chief to be a Deputy of the Department of Safety and Professional
Services. Pursuant to § 101.14, Wis. Stats., adopted herein, the Chief is
a Deputy of the Department of Safety and Professional Services. The
Chief is responsible for the enforcement of the state codes adopted
within this chapter.
B. Fire inspectors. The Chief shall hold the office of Fire Inspector and
shall appoint one or more inspectors from within the Department who
shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as the Fire
Inspector.
C. Required inspections. The Chief of the Department shall be responsible
for having all public buildings and places of employment inspected for
the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions
liable to cause fire or any violations of any law or ordinance relating to
fire hazards or to the prevention of fires. Repairs or alterations
necessary to remove a hazard or hazardous condition shall be at the
owner's expense and within a reasonable time or sooner if so ordered
by the Chief.
D. Special inspections. The Chief, upon the request of the Village
Administrator or the Administrator's designee, or upon receiving the
complaint of any person or whenever the Chief deems it necessary, shall
inspect any public building and premises where inspections are
required within the Village.
E. Number of inspections. The Chief shall be responsible for determining
the number of public buildings and places of employment to be
inspected within the Village.
F. Scheduling of inspections. Fire prevention inspections shall be
conducted at least once in each nonoverlapping six-month period per
calendar year or more often if ordered by the Chief.
G. Written reports. Written reports of inspections shall be made and kept
on file.
H. Authority to inspect. The Chief acting as the Fire Inspector or other fire
inspectors shall be authorized at all reasonable times to enter and
examine any building, structure, vehicle or premises, excepting only the
interior of private dwellings, where inspections are required for the
purpose of making fire inspections. The owner, agent or occupant of any
such premises who refuses to permit, or prevents or interferes with,
§ 180-9 FAIR HOUSING § 180-10
173:219
any entry into or upon the premises by any such inspector shall be in
violation of this chapter.
I. Special inspection warrant. If consent for entry to personal or real
properties which are not public buildings or to portions of public
buildings which are not open to the public has been denied, the Chief
shall obtain a special inspection warrant under § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
J. Correction of hazards. At such time as the Fire Inspector identifies a
violation or fire hazard, the Fire Inspector shall serve notice in writing
upon the owner of the property, giving such owner a reasonable time in
which to remove the hazard. However, where an extreme or hazardous
condition exists which, for the protection of the public, must be
corrected or removed immediately, the Chief shall have the authority to
take such steps as may be necessary to protect the public and property,
including closing and the vacating of a building, structure or premises.
If the owner fails to comply with the order to correct the hazard within
the time allowed, it shall be deemed a nuisance. The Fire Chief shall
also have the authority to take such steps as may be necessary,
including obtaining appropriate court orders, to enforce any order of
the Chief correcting a hazardous or potential fire condition. The Fire
Chief may also have a hazard corrected or removed by the Village. The
cost of such removal shall be recovered in an action by the Village
against the property owner and may be entered in the tax roll as a
special charge against the property.
K. Compliance. No building or structure, or any part of a building or
structure, land, water, or air space within the Village shall be used or
occupied, and no building or structure within the Village shall be
constructed, placed, moved, extended, reconstructed, structurally
altered or repaired or converted to a new use, and no site development
work shall be conducted in the Village, except in full compliance with
this chapter, Chapter 420, all other applicable Village ordinances and
codes, all applicable decisions, orders, permits and other approvals
made or issued pursuant thereto, and all other applicable federal, state,
or local laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations. [Added
10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-49]
L. Certificate of occupancy. [Added 10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-49]
(1) Requirement. No person shall use or occupy any newly completed
building or structure, and no person shall use or occupy any newly
completed portion of any existing building or structure, unless a
valid certificate of occupancy has first been issued for such use or
occupancy and such permit has neither expired nor been
suspended or revoked. No person shall commence any new
occupancy of any existing building or structure for any use other
than a permitted residential use in a residential zoning district or a
permitted agricultural use in any agriculture zoning district unless
a valid certificate of occupancy has first been issued for such use or
§ 180-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-10
173:220
§ 180-11. Fire prevention.
occupancy and such permit has neither expired nor has been
suspended or revoked.
(2) Preconditions. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless:
(a) All required and applicable permits have been issued, and all
permits, fees and assessments are paid for in full.
(b) The project, as built, was completed in accordance with all
applicable provisions of this chapter, Chapter 370, Chapter 420
and any orders, decisions, permits or other approvals made or
issued pursuant to Village ordinances.
(3) Verbal occupancy. To facilitate occupancy and prevent unnecessary
hardship, the Fire Chief or his designee is authorized to issue a
verbal occupancy with respect to any building or structure, or any
part of a building or structure, for which valid permits have been
issued, prior to completion of the building or structure, provided
that such temporary occupancy will not jeopardize the safety,
health, or public welfare of the occupants or the general public.
Said verbal authorization shall be valid for 30 days, or such other
specified time frame, as determined by the Fire Chief or his
designee, and all outstanding issues shall be satisfied prior to the
Fire Chief issuing a written certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance. The Fire Chief or his designee is authorized to impose
as conditions upon the issuance of such verbal occupancy whatever
temporary precautionary measures may be required to safeguard
the public. No such verbal occupancy shall be construed as vesting
in the applicant any right to receive a certificate of occupancy for a
building or structure, or a part of a building or structure, unless it
satisfies all requirements of this chapter or other ordinances that
would be applicable to such building or structure in the absence of
the verbal occupancy certificate or any activity conducted pursuant
thereto.
A. Wisconsin regulations adopted. The following chapters of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, Department of Safety and Professional Services
(SPS), are hereby adopted by reference with the same force and effect
as if fully set forth herein and as the same may be from time to time
amended:
(1) Explosive materials, Ch. SPS 307.
(2) Flammable and combustible liquids, Ch. SPS 310.
(3) Fire prevention, Ch. SPS 314.
(4) Electrical Code, Ch. SPS 316.
(5) Elevator Code, Ch. SPS 318.
§ 180-10 FAIR HOUSING § 180-11
173:221
§ 180-12. False alarms.
No person shall give a false alarm of fire with intent to deceive, or pull the
lever of any signal box except in case of fire, or tamper, meddle or interfere
with the fire alarm system or any part thereof.
§ 180-13. Open burning. [Amended 7-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-25]
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit or manage the burning
of materials in the Village because of the health risk from air and water
pollution which results from such burning. It is felt that only by completely
prohibiting the burning of rubbish, leaves and green or soft yard waste,
including grass clippings, pine needles and leaves, can this unnecessary
health risk and pollution be abated. (Link to EPA Notice of
Nonattainment.)19
(6) Smoke detectors for UDC, Ch. SPS 328.
(7) Safety, Ch. SPS 332.
(8) Public Employee Safety and Health, Ch. SPS 332.
B. Compliance. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any
chapter of the Wisconsin Administrative Code incorporated herein by
reference is required or prohibited by this section. Any violation of
these provisions constitutes a violation of this chapter.
C. Code updates. Any future updates to the Wisconsin Administrative
Codes are also adopted prospectively by reference.
D. Fire Department access. A road shall be provided to all construction
sites at the commencement of construction having suitable strength
and width to support the apparatus operated by the Department. Such
road will have a minimum clear width of 12 feet and shall be subject to
the approval of the Fire Chief and the Building Department.
E. Final site access. Access shall be provided around the perimeter of the
site for all Fire & Rescue Department apparatus and shall comply with
the State of Wisconsin and the current adopted construction code. A
minimum wall-to-wall turning radius of 45 feet zero inches shall be
allowed for apparatus movement.
(1) All entrances from public streets, as well as road and driveways
around the proposed building, shall be a minimum of thirty feet
zero inches wide.
(2) All exterior pathways as well as access to the fire pump room shall
have a hard surface leading to a hard surface.
(3) An exterior personnel door shall be located in close proximity to
each fire sprinkler riser.
19.Editor's Note: Said EPA notice is on file in the Village offices.
§ 180-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-13
173:222
A. Prohibited fires. No person shall kindle, start, or maintain any fire other
than fires as allowed in Subsection B.
(1) The following fires are prohibited:
(a) The burning of any construction waste, including but not
limited to treated or painted wood, plywood, composite wood
products, and other wood products that are painted, varnished
or treated with preservatives.
(b) The burning of any solid waste, including but not limited to
asphalt and products containing asphalt. (Link to "solid waste"
definition, § 292-5.)
(c) The burning of any rubbish or garbage, including but not
limited to food wastes, food wraps, packaging, animal
carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture, composite
shingles, construction or demolition debris or other household
or business wastes.
(d) The burning of any waste oil or other oily wastes except used
oil burned in a heating device for energy recovery subject to
the approval of the Village.
(e) The burning of any plastic material, including but not limited to
nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic
fabrics, plastic films and plastic containers.
(f) The burning of green or soft yard waste, including grass
clippings, pine needles and leaves.
(g) The burning of commercial waste.
(h) The burning of any rubber, including but not limited to tires
and synthetic rubber-like products.
(i) The burning of any newspaper, corrugated cardboard,
container board, office paper and other materials that must be
recycled in accordance with § 292-5.
(j) The burning or kindling of any fire on any balcony, under any
overhanging portion of a structure or within 10 feet of any
structure or any other combustible structure.
(2) Open burning shall be prohibited when local circumstances make
the fire potentially hazardous. Local circumstances include, but are
not limited to, thermal inversions, wind, ozone alerts, very dry
conditions and during the Village-declared hours for Halloween
trick or treating.
(3) No person shall kindle, start or maintain any fire which can or will
emit smoke and/or objectionable odors which shall result in the
discomfort, annoyance, or danger to the adjacent property owners
§ 180-13 FAIR HOUSING § 180-13
173:223
or the traveling public. The Chief of Fire & Rescue or his/her
designee shall be the one to determine if the fire needs to be
extinguished.
(4) No person shall kindle, start or maintain any fire upon any street,
road, park, right-of-way, ditch, or culvert within the Village, or upon
property of another, without the property owner's permission.
(5) Fires shall not be started within a minimum of:
(a) Fifty feet from any structure.
(b) Fifteen feet from any property line.
B. Permitted fires. Fires allowed by the Fire & Rescue Department are the
following:
(1) The burning of dried branches.
(2) The burning of structures for the purpose of Fire & Rescue
Department training.
(3) The burning of recreational fires.
(4) The burning of outdoor cooking fires.
(5) Fires permitted by the Chief of Fire & Rescue as established in
Subsection C of this section.
C. Rules. The Chief of Fire & Rescue shall establish rules for permits.
(1) Within the limits of this chapter, the Chief of Fire & Rescue may
permit certain fires with the issuance of a permit. Permitted fires
shall include:
(a) Controlled prairie fires for environmental management
purposes.
(b) Bonfires.
(c) Recreational fires.
[1] Recreational fires shall be allowed without a burn permit if
the following conditions are met. If the following
conditions are not met, a burn permit shall be required.
[a] Fires are contained within a portable fire pit or
noncombustible structure with ember-arresting
screens/lids less than three feet by three feet by three
feet in size.
[b] Portable fire pits or noncombustible structures must
be located at least 10 feet away from any structure.
Specific site anomalies and wind conditions may
dictate that the distance be increased.
§ 180-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-13
173:224
[c] Portable fire pits shall be placed on a noncombustible
surface.
[d] Fires shall be attended at all times by a minimum of
one person who is at least 16 years of age.
[e] Adequate fire-suppression equipment, such as a fire
extinguisher, water hose or water container, shall be
present at all times.
[f] Portable fire pits or noncombustible structures shall
be listed by a nationally recognized testing
organization or acceptable to the Fire & Rescue
Department.
[g] Burning of yard waste or other refuse is prohibited;
only clean, dry wood can be used.
[h] Flammable or combustible liquids shall not be used to
ignite the fire.
[i] Smoke shall be limited and shall not become a
nuisance to neighbors or public roads.
[j] No flame shall at any time exceed one foot in height
over the source fuel.
[k] Portable fire pits or noncombustible structures shall
not be used between 11:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
(d) Instructional and training fires.
(e) The burning of dried branches.
(2) The Chief of Fire & Rescue shall establish administrative rules for
the issuance and tracking of burning permits.
(3) Conditions to be satisfied before or during open burning.
(a) The owner of the property shall obtain permits where the
permitted fire will take place.
(b) Fires shall not be ignited with flammable or combustible
liquids, such as gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, diesel fuel, etc.
(c) Hours. Fires are permitted within the following time periods:
[1] Fires (except for cooking) may be started or kindled after
10:00 a.m., when conditions permit.
[2] Fires (except for cooking and recreation) shall be out by
sunset.
[3] All recreational fires shall be out by 11:00 p.m.
§ 180-13 FAIR HOUSING § 180-13
173:225
§ 180-14. Fireworks.
(4) Supervision. A competent person shall constantly attend open fires
and cooking fires until such fires are extinguished. This person
shall have a garden hose connected to the water supply or other
fire-extinguishing equipment readily available for use.
(5) No open flame, candles, or other flame fixtures shall be used in any
public building or structure, except within a duly constituted
church, lodge building or structure. Unattended open flame,
candles, or other open flame fixtures shall not be used in seated
areas of any public assembly room or building, including church or
lodge buildings.
(6) Sky lantern. An airborne lantern typically made of paper with a
wood frame containing a candle, fuel cell composed of waxy
flammable material or other open flame which serves as a source to
heat the air inside of the lantern to cause it to lift into the air,
including "sky candles," "air paper lanterns," and other similar
devices designed to be levitated by open flame and released into
the air uncontrolled are prohibited.
D. Open-burning permits and fees.
(1) Initial or original open-burning permits will be issued by the Fire &
Rescue Department upon completion of a fire prevention inspection
of the site where the burning is intended to take place.
(2) Open-burning permits will be reissued in the following calendar
year when there was a burning permit on record for the previous
year and the location of the burning site has not changed.
(3) Fees.
(a) Initial open-burning permit: $25.
(b) Reissue open-burning permit: $10.
E. Violations. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section, or
any order, rule or regulation made hereunder, may be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 180-24 of this chapter and Chapter 1, § 1-4, of
this Code.
A. Sale. No person shall sell, or possess with intent to sell, fireworks
except:
(1) For the purposes specified under Subsection B(3)(a) to (f).
(2) To a person holding a permit under Subsection B(4)(a) to (f).
(3) To a city, village or town.
B. Use.
§ 180-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-14
173:226
(1) No person shall possess or use fireworks, as defined within this
chapter, without a user's permit from the Village President or from
an official or employee of the Village designated by the Village
President to issue such permit.
(2) No person shall use fireworks, as defined in this chapter, or devices
defined in § 167.10(1)(g), (i), (k), (l), (m) and (n), Wis. Stats., while
attending a fireworks display for which a permit has been issued to
a person listed under Subsection B(4)(a) to (f).
(3) Subsection B(1) does not apply to:
(a) The Village, but the Village fire and law enforcement officials
shall be notified of the proposed use of fireworks at least two
days in advance.
(b) The possession or use of explosives in accordance with rules or
general orders of the Department of Safety and Professional
Services.
(c) The disposal of hazardous substances in accordance with the
rules adopted by the Department of Natural Resources.
(d) The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in
any manufacturing process.
(e) The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in
connection with classes conducted by educational institutions.
(f) A possessor or manufacturer of explosives in possession of a
license or permit under 18 U.S.C. §§ 841 to 848, if the
possession of the fireworks is authorized under the license or
permit.
(4) A permit under this Subsection B shall be issued only to the
following:
(a) A public authority.
(b) A fair association.
(c) An amusement park.
(d) A park board.
(e) A civic organization.
(f) An agricultural producer for the protection of crops from
predatory birds or animals. A person issued a permit for crop
protection shall erect appropriate warning signs disclosing the
use of fireworks for crop protection.
(5) The person obtaining a permit under this Subsection B shall be
required to provide an indemnity bond with good and sufficient
§ 180-14 FAIR HOUSING § 180-14
173:227
sureties or policy of liability insurance for the payment of all claims
that may or may not arise by reason of injuries to persons or
property from the handling, use or discharge of fireworks under the
permit. The bond or policy, if required, shall be taken in the name of
the Village, and any person injured thereby may bring an action on
the bond or policy in the person's own name to recover the damage
the person has sustained, but the aggregate liability of the surety
or insured to all persons shall not exceed the amount of the bond or
policy. The bond or policy, together with a copy of the permit, shall
be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
(6) A permit under this Subsection B shall specify all of the following:
(a) The name and address of the permit holder.
(b) The date on and after which fireworks may be purchased.
(c) An itemized and specific enumeration of the kind and quantity
of fireworks which may be purchased.
(d) The date and location of permitted use.
(e) Other special conditions that may be prescribed by local
ordinance or state statute at the time of the issuance of the
permit.
(7) A copy of the permit under this Subsection B shall be given to the
Village Fire Chief and the Village Police Chief at least two days
before the date of authorized use.
(8) A permit under this Subsection B may not be issued to a minor.
C. Storage, handling or possession. Pursuant to § 167.10(5)(a)2, Wis.
Stats., the Village Board deems it in the best interest of the health,
safety and welfare of its citizens to further prohibit the storage,
handling or possession of fireworks within the Village for sale, at
wholesale or otherwise, by any wholesaler, dealer, jobber or any other
person, regardless of whether delivery is made outside of the state as
otherwise provided for in § 167.10(4), Wis. Stats.
D. Liability. A parent or legal guardian of a minor who consents to the use
of fireworks by the minor is liable for damages caused by the minor's
use of the fireworks.
E. Enforcement.
(1) The Village may petition the Circuit Court of Kenosha County for an
order enjoining violation of this section.
(2) Fireworks stored, handled, sold, possessed or used by any person
who violates this section or a court order under Subsection E(1)
shall be seized. The fireworks shall be destroyed after the
conviction for a violation or otherwise returned to the owner.
§ 180-14 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-15
173:228
§ 180-15. Ambulance service rates.
A. The Village of Pleasant Prairie provides emergency ambulance service
to those needing emergency medical attention after the sudden onset of
a medical condition manifesting itself by acute symptoms of such
severity (including severe pain) that the absence of immediate medical
attention could reasonably be expected to result in placing the patient's
health in serious jeopardy or the serious impairment of bodily functions
or serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part.
B. Fees to be charged for emergency service. Every person receiving
emergency service from the Village by the use of its emergency
equipment, medical drugs and disposable medical equipment in
attending to and/or transporting such person from the scene of an
incident to an emergency hospital shall pay for such service if rendered
within the Village, unless such person is injured as a result of fire
(excluding a fire resulting from a motor vehicle accident).
C. Fees for outlying areas (with a mutual aid agreement). In all cases
where the emergency service of the Village is summoned in response to
an emergency call in areas outside the Village where a mutual aid
agreement does exist, every person receiving such emergency service,
the administration of medical drugs and disposable medical equipment
used in attending at the scene of the incident and transporting such
person to an emergency hospital shall be charged for such service,
consistent with the applicable mutual aid agreement. [Amended
12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 13-55]
D. Fees for outlying areas (without a mutual aid agreement). In all cases
where the emergency service of the Village is summoned in response to
an emergency call in areas outside the Village where no mutual aid
agreement exists, every person receiving such emergency service, the
administration of medical drugs and disposable medical equipment
used in attending at the scene of the incident and transporting such
person to a private or emergency hospital shall be charged for such
service.
E. Fees for paramedic - advanced life support intercepts. In all cases
where paramedic - advanced life support intercept service is requested
from the Village by a municipal ambulance service or rescue squad that
does not provide paramedic level of care, that municipality or rescue
squad shall be billed for the paramedic service provided.
F. Schedule of fees for service, transfer service, medical drugs and
disposable medical equipment. [Amended 12-2-2013 by Ord. No.
13-55; 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
§ 180-15 FAIR HOUSING § 180-15
173:229
§ 180-16. Automatic fire sprinkler, fire suppression and fire alarm
systems and fire hydrants.
Description: Fee
Resident Rates
Basic life support $1,000
Mileage, per loaded miles traveled $15
Basic life support, without transport $1,000
Advanced life support $1,000
Mileage, per loaded miles traveled $15
Advanced life support, without
transport
$1,000
Advanced life support, paramedic
intercept fee
$1,000
Description: Fee
Nonresident Rates
Basic life support $1,200
Mileage, per loaded miles traveled $15
Basic life support, without transport $1,200
Advanced life support $1,200
Mileage, per loaded miles traveled $15
Advanced life support, without
transport
$1,200
Advanced life support, paramedic
intercept fee
$1,200
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety and
welfare of those who live, work, visit, or travel through the Village,
including the fire personnel who serve the Village or assist the Village,
by establishing minimum standards for firesafety through the
standardization of the design, installation, testing and maintenance
requirements for automatic fire sprinkler, fire suppression and fire
alarm systems.
B. Application. The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to public
and private property, and they shall apply to all structures. The
property owner and the occupant of the property shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter. The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall be
the enforcing officer of this chapter.
C. Enforcement. The Village of Pleasant Prairie Fire & Rescue Department
shall be responsible for the enforcement of this section.
§ 180-15 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-16
173:230
D. Compliance. A letter shall be submitted to the Fire & Rescue
Department prior to receiving a building permit, stating that the project
will comply will all requirements of the Village of Pleasant Prairie
ordinances.
E. State regulations. All Building Code requirements, rules and laws of the
State of Wisconsin shall apply to all buildings located within the Village
of Pleasant Prairie, Wisconsin. The requirements of this section shall
not lessen any Building Code requirements, rules or laws of the State of
Wisconsin. Should any conflict arise between this section and the codes,
rules or laws of the state, the more stringent regulation shall govern.
F. Owner's responsibility.
(1) Within buildings that the Fire & Rescue Department is required to
inspect, no owner may construct or alter any building, or portion of
a building, or permit any building to be constructed or altered
except in compliance with this chapter.
(2) The owner is also responsible for maintaining a current set of plans
for all detection, suppression and fire alarm systems.
(3) The owner shall maintain and provide proper testing per the
applicable NFPA code, for all automatic fire sprinkler, suppression
and alarm systems (and the alarm monitoring of those systems)
that were required by the Village as a condition of occupancy.
G. Where installed.
(1) Classification of occupancies. Occupancy classifications for this
standard relate to sprinkler installations and their required water
supplies only. They are not intended to be a general classification of
occupancy hazards.
(a) Light-hazard occupancies: occupancies or portions of other
occupancies where the quantity and/or combustibility of
contents is low and fires with relatively low rates of heat
release are expected.
(b) Ordinary-hazard occupancies:
[1] Group 1: occupancies or portions of other occupancies
where combustibility is low, quantity of combustibles is
moderate, stockpiles of combustibles do not exceed eight
feet in height, and fires with moderate rates of heat
release are expected.
[2] Group 2: occupancies or portions of other occupancies
where combustibility of contents is moderate to high,
stockpiles do not exceed 12 feet in height, and fires with
moderate to high rates of heat release are expected.
§ 180-16 FAIR HOUSING § 180-16
173:231
(c) Extra high hazards: occupancies or portions of other
occupancies where quantity and combustibility of contents are
very high and flammable and combustible liquids, dust, lint, or
other materials are present, introducing the probability of
rapidly developing fires with high rates of heat release. Extra
hazard occupancies involve a wide range of variables that may
produce severe fires. The following shall be used to evaluate
the severity of extra hazard occupancies:
[1] Group 1: includes occupancies with little or no flammable
or combustible liquids.
[2] Group 2: includes occupancies with moderate to
substantial amounts of flammable or combustible liquids
or where shielding of combustibles is extensive.
(d) Special occupancy hazards: include occupancies that contain
flammable and combustible liquids, manufacture and storage
of aerosol products, storage and handling of cellulose nitrate
motion-picture film, storage and handling of liquefied
petroleum gases, fur storage, fumigation and cleaning, general
storage, rack storage, storage of rubber tires, storage of baled
cotton, storage of rolled paper, storage of records and aircraft
hangers. This is not an exhaustive list.
(2) Approved automatic fire sprinkler equipment shall be installed and
maintained in all buildings, including the following: commercial,
office, industrial, institutional, and government buildings and
public buildings.
(a) In all principal buildings, as follows:
[1] Fire-resistive buildings: throughout every building which
is either 3,500 square feet or more in total area or is over
two stories in height.
[2] Non-fire-resistive buildings: throughout every building
which is either 3,500 square feet or more in total area or is
over two stories in height.
(b) Sprinkler water flow, other suppression devices, smoke and
heat detection equipment and manual pull stations shall be
monitored by a central station 24 hours a day throughout the
building and the alarm when activated sent to a central station.
(3) Approved automatic fire sprinkler equipment shall be installed and
maintained in the following accessory buildings and special
principal buildings and building areas, except in mini storage
buildings when in compliance with this chapter, and one- and twofamily
dwellings:
§ 180-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-16
173:232
(a) Garages and open parking structures as follows: garages and
open parking structures within, attached to, above or below
other occupancies and garages and open parking structures
used as passenger terminals. Sprinkler water flow, other
suppression devices, smoke and heat detection equipment and
manual pull stations shall be monitored by a central station 24
hours a day throughout the building and the alarm when
activated sent to a central station.
(b) The basement and subbasements of principal and accessory
buildings, as follows: basements having a total area of 2,500
square feet or more and all subbasements regardless of size.
Sprinkler water flow, other suppression devices, smoke and
heat detection equipment and manual pull stations shall be
monitored by a central station 24 hours a day throughout the
building and the alarm when activated sent to a central station.
(c) Theaters and assembly buildings: Sprinklers shall be designed
and installed throughout all buildings of 3,500 square feet or
more. Sprinkler water flow, other suppression devices, smoke
and heat detection equipment and manual pull stations shall be
monitored by a central station 24 hours a day throughout the
building and the alarm when activated sent to a central station.
(d) Hospitals: throughout all buildings of 3,500 square feet or
more. Sprinkler water flow, other suppression devices, smoke
and heat detection equipment and manual pull stations shall be
monitored by a central station 24 hours a day throughout the
building and the alarm when activated sent to a central station.
(e) Nursing, convalescent, old-age, and adult living centers,
community-based residential facilities (CBRF), and other
similar institutional buildings: throughout all nursing,
convalescent, old-age, and adult living centers, CBRF and
other institutional buildings regardless of size. Sprinkler water
flow, other suppression devices, smoke and heat detection
equipment and manual pull stations shall be monitored by a
central station 24 hours a day throughout the building and the
alarm when activated sent to a central station.
(f) Schools, colleges and universities: throughout every building
which is either 3,500 square feet or more in total area or is
over two stories in height. Sprinkler water flow, other
suppression devices, smoke and heat detection equipment and
manual pull stations shall be monitored by a central station 24
hours a day throughout the building and the alarm when
activated sent to a central station.
(g) Hotels, motels, dormitories, fraternities, and sorority houses:
throughout all buildings, regardless of size. This applies to all
new construction or renovations. Sprinkler water flow, other
§ 180-16 FAIR HOUSING § 180-16
173:233
suppression devices, smoke and heat detection equipment and
manual pull stations shall be monitored by a central station
24 hours a day throughout the building and the alarm when
activated sent to a central station.
(h) Adult and child day-care center: All new construction,
regardless of size, shall have sprinklers. Sprinkler water flow,
other suppression devices, smoke and heat detection
equipment and manual pull stations shall be monitored by a
central station 24 hours a day throughout the building and the
alarm when activated sent to a central station.
(i) Community-based residential facilities (CBRF): All new
construction regardless of size shall have sprinklers. Sprinkler
water flow, other suppression devices, smoke and heat
detection equipment and manual pull stations shall be
monitored by a central station 24 hours a day throughout the
building and the alarm when activated sent to a central station.
(j) Commercial, industrial and industrial garages and service
centers: throughout every building which is either 3,500
square feet or more in total area or is over two stories in
height.
[1] Approved automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed
and maintained in all buildings with a high-hazard
occupancy.
[2] Sprinkler water flow, other suppression devices, smoke
and heat detection equipment and manual pull stations
shall be monitored by a central station 24 hours a day
throughout the building and the alarm when activated sent
to a central station.
(k) Extra-high-hazardous occupancy(ies): as defined in NFPA 13,
3,500 square feet or more in total area or over two stories in
height. Sprinkler water flow, other suppression devices, smoke
and heat detection equipment and manual pull stations shall be
monitored by a central station 24 hours a day throughout the
building and the alarm when activated sent to a central station.
(l) Mini storage buildings are exempt from the requirements of
fire sprinkler protection when the following criteria are met:
[1] No portion of the mini storage building shall exceed 2,000
square feet in size with the separation being a two-hourrated
fire separation. The location of the fire separation
shall be identified on each exterior wall using a Fire &
Rescue Department approved method.
[2] Each mini storage unit shall have a heat detector that,
when activated, illuminates an indicator light outside of
§ 180-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-16
173:234
the unit; a strobe light on the building forward end; and
transmits a fire alarm signal to a central station.
[3] The owner shall include with the leasing documents that
the storage of vehicles, combustible or flammable liquids,
ammunitions and explosives is prohibited.
(4) Multifamily dwelling.
(a) (Reserved)20
(b) Sprinkler water flow, other suppression devices, smoke and
heat detection equipment and manual pull stations shall be
monitored by a central station 24 hours a day throughout the
building and the alarm when activated sent to a central station.
H. How installed.
(1) Incorporation of standards by reference. The most current printed
editions of all NFPA documents are hereby incorporated by
reference into this section.
(2) Material and test certificates. All fire-protection systems installed
in the Village shall be tested in accordance with the requirements
of the Wisconsin state code and NFPA codes and standards. In the
event that a conflict between these documents occurs, the fireprotection
contractor shall comply with the most stringent
requirements. Two copies of each material and test certificate shall
be provided to the Department before an occupancy permit will be
granted.
(3) When using nonpotable water and/or a nonfreeze solution.
Whenever nonpotable water is used to supply a fire sprinkler
system and/or when a fire sprinkler system uses any type of
nonfreeze solution, a backflow prevention device as required by the
State of Wisconsin and the Village of Pleasant Prairie Water Utility
shall be required as part of those systems.
(4) Fire pump test header. Fire pump test headers shall be placed on
the exterior of the fire pump room.
(5) Safety factor. The safety factor for a hydraulically calculated
sprinkler system shall be a minimum of 10% or five psi, whichever
is greater.
(6) A map shall be provided of the fire sprinkler system. The location of
the individual systems shall be displayed on the map. The map shall
be located near in fire riser/fire pump room.
I. Standpipes and hose connections.
20.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G(4)(a), concerning installation of an automatic fire
sprinkler system or two-hour fire resistance in certain multifamily dwellings, was repealed
12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44.
§ 180-16 FAIR HOUSING § 180-16
173:235
(1) Wet automatic standpipes shall be provided in all buildings three
stories or more in height. Standpipes shall be sized and distributed
as described in Subsection G(2).
(2) When the Fire & Rescue Department or NFPA requires the
installation of small hose and small hose valve connections, this
Department will require the installation of two-and-one-half-inch
hose valves in lieu of the former. The two-and-one-half-inch hose
valves shall be supplied from a separate piping system or from
adjacent sprinkler systems. The two-and-one-half-inch NST valve
shall be capable of delivering 250 gpm at 75 psi measured at the
hose valve. The standpipes shall be wet and placed first adjacent to
the exterior exit doors and then move inward to provide the
required coverage. Hose valves shall be no further than 150 feet
apart, per floor.
J. Fire Department connection. The Fire Department connection (FDC)
for both the sprinkler system and standpipe systems shall be located
remote from the building, curbside to a street or driveway. The
minimum distance from the building shall be equal to the height of the
building. FDCs may be placed at a greater distance from the building if
the building is of extra hazard occupancy. The location of the FDC shall
be approved by the Fire Department. The FDC shall have an automatic
drip for drainage of the waterline enclosed within an inspection pit and
accessed through a manhole, when the automatic drip cannot be placed
within the structure.
K. Fire hydrant(s) and pumper pad.
(1) Scope. The requirements of this section apply to fire hydrants and
water main systems supplying private fire hydrants or fire
suppression systems.
(2) Installation and maintenance standards. Private fire hydrants and
water mains shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 24 and the
Village of Pleasant Prairie Water Utility. Private fire hydrants and
water mains shall be maintained in accordance with NFPA 25.
(3) Approval required. Plans shall be submitted to the Fire Chief for
review to determine compliance with the applicable standards
prior to the installation of private fire hydrants.
(4) Approved water hydrant. "An approved water hydrant" shall mean
a water hydrant connected to a municipal water main. The
connecting waterline between the municipal water main and the
approved water hydrant shall not be less than six inches. All water
hydrants shall be installed in such a manner and location so as to
be accessible at all times to the Fire Department. Note: The
hydrant shall be capable of supplying the highest area of fire
sprinkler water demand, including the demand for hose stream
allowance (both inside and outside the building) as well as a safety
§ 180-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-16
173:236
factor of 10% or 5 psi, whichever is greater. [Amended 12-5-2016
by Ord. No. 16-44]
(5) Number of required fire hydrants. A minimum of one fire hydrant
shall be installed on the property where a sprinkler system (or
standpipe system) is installed within the building. The hydrant shall
be located remote from the building at a minimum distance equal
to the height of the building and adjacent (maximum distance five
feet) to the Fire Department connection(s), curbside. Hydrants may
be placed at a greater distance from the building if the building is
of extra hazard occupancy. The FDC and the fire hydrant shall be
incorporated into a pumper pad to assure access for the Fire
Department pumpers. This access must be maintained at all times.
Additional hydrant(s) shall be provided around the perimeter of the
building so that no hydrant is more than 350 feet from other
approved hydrants measured by normal access routes used by Fire
& Rescue Department apparatus.
(6) The pumper pad shall have a space dedicated to the fire apparatus
to be used during emergency operations. The space shall be
located off the normal access route and not interfere with normal
or emergency traffic routes.
(7) Size of the FDC approach and space dedicated to the fire
department apparatus will be determined by the Fire & Rescue
Department.
(8) Approved signage and/or marking of the pumper pad to restrict
vehicle parking may be required by the Fire & Rescue Department.
(9) Setback distances. Private fire hydrants shall be no more than five
feet from the curb or edge of the street or fire apparatus access.
Alternative setback distances may be considered when site
conditions conflict with the provisions of this section.
(10) System design.
(a) Valves. Control valves shall be provided to limit the number of
private hydrants and/or sprinkler systems affected by
maintenance, repair or construction. Valves shall be located at
street intersections and at no more than eight-hundred-foot
intervals, and sectional control valves shall be placed so that
no more than a combination of five hydrants and sprinkler
systems can be isolated between control valves. Valves shall be
provided in each hydrant lead.
(b) Outlet position. All hydrants shall be positioned so that the
largest outlet faces the street or fire apparatus access route.
Sectional control valves for private fire mains and fire sprinkler
riser underground mains (lead-ins) shall be of the aboveground
post indicator (PIV) type and shall be electronically supervised
by the building's fire alarm system.
§ 180-16 FAIR HOUSING § 180-16
173:237
(c) Hydrant height above grade. The center of the lowest outlet
cap of the fire hydrants shall be at least 18 inches above grade
and not more than 23 inches above grade.
(11) Hydrant specifications. All fire hydrants shall meet the
specifications of the Village of Pleasant Prairie Ordinances Chapter
405. [Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
(12) Bollards. Private hydrants shall be protected from vehicular traffic
damage with bollards. Bollards shall be at least six inches in
diameter. The Chief or designee shall determine the number of
bollards needed.
(13) Hydrant colors.
(a) (Reserved)21
(b) (Reserved)22
(c) No person shall alter the color or paint scheme of an approved
municipal fire hydrant or an approved private fire hydrant.
That person or persons who alter the color of a fire hydrant
identified above shall be in violation of this chapter.
(14) Hydrant markers. Whenever the location of a fire hydrant may be
obscured by its placement or due to the placement of a building,
structure, fencing, grade or land, vegetation, snow accumulation or
other obstruction of vision, the Fire Chief may require such fire
hydrants to be identified and marked with above-grade markers.
Above-grade markers are any devices, approved for use by the Fire
Chief, designed to promote and enhance the ready identification of
fire hydrant locations.
(15) Obstructions. No obstructions, including but not limited to
structures, culverts, power poles, landscaping, trees, bushes,
fences or posts, shall be located within five feet of a fire hydrant.
Grade changes exceeding 1.5 feet are not permitted within five feet
of a fire hydrant or hydrant lead. Owners shall remove snow,
vegetation or other material that has covered or obstructed the
view of a hydrant(s) on their property.
(16) Installation prior to construction. Fire hydrants shall be installed,
tested and placed in service prior to combustible construction.
(17) Out-of-service fire hydrants. Private fire hydrants and water
systems placed out of service or made inoperable for maintenance,
repair or construction shall be covered with a durable and weatherresistant
bag to indicate the hydrant is unusable. The Fire &
21.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection K(13)(a), concerning the color for hydrants fed by
municipal hydrants, was repealed 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44.
22.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection K(13)(b), concerning the color for hydrants fed by a fire
pump, was repealed 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44.
§ 180-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-16
173:238
Rescue Department shall be notified immediately when hydrants
and/or systems are out of service. Fire hydrants and/or water
systems shall be repaired and returned to service within 48 hours.
(18) Maintenance. The inspection(s), test and maintenance of required
fire hydrants shall be recorded on forms approved by the Fire
Chief. Completed forms shall be maintained on premises and made
available to the Fire & Rescue Department upon request or during
required fire inspections. Copies of the above records shall be
provided to the Department upon request. Failure to provide the
completed forms as required shall constitute a rebuttable
presumption that required inspections, tests and maintenance have
not been performed.
(19) Mobile home parks. Mobile home parks or additions to existing
mobile home parks shall have an approved fire-protection water
supply system. The system shall include water mains, hydrants and
appurtenances capable of providing a minimum of 500 gpm with
residual pressure of 20 psi at any hydrant on said system. Approved
hydrants shall be installed so that every lot or structure in the
mobile home park is within 500 feet of a hydrant. Materials and
equipment used must meet the standards, rules and regulations of
the Village of Pleasant Prairie Water Utility.
L. Protection of fire hydrants and other control valves. Private fire
hydrants and those fire-protection control valves and devices placed
along drives and parking areas of a building shall be protected by
bollards. The Department shall determine the number of bollards
needed.
M. Strobe light.
(1) A red strobe light shall be placed in the vertical position above the
audible water flow alarm. The light shall be activated by a sprinkler
water flow. Additional strobe lights will be required on the exterior
of buildings that have multiple sprinkler (risers in multiple
locations) systems.
(2) Strobe specifications. The following strobe lights are acceptable for
use: Federal, Model 131 ST/DST, and Whelen, Model 1550.
Alternate manufacturers must be approved by the Department
prior to installation.
N. Annual inspections.
(1) Every standpipe system or sprinkler system required by the Village
Code or by the administrative rules of the State of Wisconsin shall
be inspected at least once within each consecutive twelve-month
period and maintained in accordance with the most current
Wisconsin Administrative Code and NFPA 25, Inspection, Testing
and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection Systems.
§ 180-16 FAIR HOUSING § 180-16
173:239
(2) Every fire alarm system required by the Village Code or by the
administrative rules of the State of Wisconsin shall be inspected at
least once within each consecutive twelve-month period and
maintained in accordance with the current edition of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code and NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm and
Signaling Code.
(3) Annual maintenance permit and inspection form. Prior to
performing the annual inspection required by NFPA 72 and NFPA
25 of a fire alarm system and fire sprinkler system and/or fire
pump, the owner shall obtain a permit and inspection form from the
Fire & Rescue Department. The results of the inspection shall be
recorded on the Department form and copies given to the Fire
Chief, owner and all others authorized by the owner within 10 days
of the date the inspection was performed. In the case that
deficiencies are found, the Department shall be given a schedule as
to when repairs will be made at such time the inspection report is
filed with the Department. In the event that a permit is not obtained
prior to the inspection being performed, the owner may be subject
to an additional fee, in accordance with § 180-17S.
O. Non-hydrant areas. For any building or areas of buildings which have
been described herein and are built in a non-hydrant area of the Village
(no public water mains), said building shall include an approved
sprinkler system. Any approved sprinkler system must be connected to
a sufficient water supply and sufficient pressure prior to occupancy. At
such time municipal water becomes available to the site, connection to
the municipal water system must be made within six months.
P. Completion of work. At such time that each sprinkler project is
completed, the sprinkler contractor shall provide the owner of the
building and the Fire & Rescue Department with a letter stating that
the sprinkler system, or portion thereof, is one-hundred-percent
operational and built according to the design of the licensed and
certified fire-protection engineer.
Q. Maintenance of automatic fire sprinkler, suppression and fire alarm
systems. Sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm systems and
other fire-protective or extinguishing systems or appliances which have
been installed in compliance with a permit or order, or because of any
law or ordinance, shall be maintained in operative condition at all times
in accordance with NFPA 25, Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of
Water-Based Fire Protection Systems, and other applicable NFPA codes
as identified in Subsection H of this section. Further, it shall be unlawful
for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection
so required, except that this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant
from temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection where
necessary to make tests, repairs, alterations or additions. The Chief of
the Fire & Rescue Department shall be notified before repairs,
alterations or additions are begun and shall be notified again when the
system has been restored to service.
§ 180-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-16
173:240
R. Additions, remodeled buildings, and change of use. All existing public
buildings or places of employment and all additions shall conform to
this section, as follows:
(1) More than 50% remodeled or added: if more than 50% of the gross
area of a building is remodeled and/or added, the entire building
shall be provided with the requirements in this section, provided
that the Village determines the existing water supply is adequate.
(2) Twenty-five percent to 50% remodeled or added: if 25% to 50% of
the gross area of a building is remodeled and/or added, that part of
the building which is remodeled and/or added shall be provided
with the requirements of this section, provided that the Village
determines the existing water supply is adequate.
(3) Less than 25% remodeled or added: if less than 25% of the gross
area of a building is remodeled and/or added, the requirements in
this section need not be provided unless the remodeling includes
dwelling units.
(4) If the percentage remodeled or added is done from this date
forward, all percentages are added together every time to get the
total percentages remodeled.
(5) Change of use. If the use of an existing building is changed to a new
use or the building undergoes physical remodeling, the entire
building shall comply with this chapter.
S. Exemptions. Rooms or buildings devoted to the manufacture or storage
of aluminum powder, calcium carbide, calcium phosphate, metallic
sodium or potassium, quicklime, magnesium powder, sodium peroxide
or like materials where the application of water may cause or increase
combustion are exempt from the use of automatic water sprinkling
systems but are required to install other forms of fire-protection
systems approved by the Fire Chief.
T. Early warning detection.
(1) Smoke and heat detection systems shall be installed throughout the
following buildings. These systems shall be monitored 24 hours per
day by a remote central station service. When activated, the
systems shall send an alarm signal to the central station.
(a) Theaters and assembly buildings.
(b) Hospitals.
(c) Nursing homes.
(d) Convalescent homes.
(e) Homes for the aged.
(f) Adult living centers.
§ 180-16 FAIR HOUSING § 180-16
173:241
(g) Adult day-care facilities.
(h) Community-based residential facilities.
(i) Schools and other places of instruction.
(j) Hotels.
(k) Motels.
(l) Dormitories.
(m) Fraternities.
(n) Sororities.
(o) Child day-care facilities.
(p) Multifamily buildings.
(2) Location. Approved fire detection devices shall be located per
NFPA 70 and 72 and any other applicable state or NFPA codes.
(3) Installation. Approved fire detection devices shall be installed per
NFPA 70 and 72 and any other applicable state or NFPA codes.
U. Automatic closing devices.
(1) Where installed:
(a) Except on single- and two-family dwellings, there shall be an
automatic closing device on all fire and smoke doors, except
doors leading directly outside in all buildings, regardless of
size.
(b) On all fire shutters and vents.
(c) Wired into the fire alarm system when a fire alarm system is
required.
(2) How installed: per National Fire Protection Association Standard
80, Standard for Fire Doors and Other Opening Protectives.
(3) How maintained and inspected: per National Fire Protection
Association Standard 80, Standard for Fire Doors and Other
Opening Protectives.
V. Fire alarm systems.
(1) All fire suppression and detection systems shall be monitored by an
approved central station.
(2) The signal for a fire alarm shall be sent to an approved central
station. The signal for tamper and/or supervision shall be sent to
the central station only.
§ 180-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-16
173:242
(3) A minimum of one fire alarm control panel (FACP) shall be placed in
the fire sprinkler riser/fire pump room or a location approved by
the Fire & Rescue Department.
(4) The remote annunciator(s) alarm/indicator panel(s) shall be located
in a location approved by the Fire & Rescue Department. All
functions for alarm silence, reset and area identification shall be
performed at this panel.
(5) The fire alarm system and the annunciator panel shall be
addressable.
(6) The addressable system shall include fire detection and
suppression systems, pull stations, tamper supervision, and audio/
visual devices.
(7) In places of public occupancy, pull stations shall be required in new
construction and during remodel projects.
(8) A map shall be provided of the fire alarm system. The location of
the initiating device and the corresponding fire alarm number shall
be displayed on the map. The map shall be located near the main
fire alarm control panel.
(9) The owner shall maintain all fire alarm systems and monitoring of
those systems that were required by the Village as a condition of
occupancy. No system or part of a system or monitoring thereof can
be removed without approval of the Village. The owner who
removes or causes the removal of the alarm system or monitoring
of the alarm system shall be in violation of this chapter.
(10) The Central Station shall immediately retransmit the fire alarm to
the Pleasant Prairie Dispatch Center, which shall be the first
notification made.
W. Spray booths. All spray booths greater than 10 square feet in area shall
have an approved suppression system per NFPA 15, Standard for Water
Spray Fixed Systems for Fire Protection. The suppression system shall
be interconnected with the required alarm system as an individual
zone.
X. Cooking hoods: shall be connected to the required fire alarm system.
Y. Exit lights and emergency lights.
(1) Exit and emergency lights are required in all places of public
occupancy.
(2) Exit and emergency lights shall have battery backup unless
connected to an emergency generator.
(3) Combination exit and emergency lights are acceptable and
recommended.
§ 180-16 FAIR HOUSING § 180-16
173:243
(4) Emergency lighting shall be installed in the sprinkler riser or fire
pump room.
(5) Emergency lighting shall be installed in any electrical equipment
rooms.
Z. Plan review, approval and conditions.
(1) The plans for all fire sprinkler, fire suppression and fire alarm
systems, both new and modified, must be submitted to the
Department for review. The Department may use a third-party
contractor to perform the review.
(2) No automatic fire sprinkler, fire suppression or fire alarm
equipment shall be installed or altered in a building until plans
have been submitted and approved by the Department. Upon
payment of the review fees, the Fire & Rescue Department shall
issue a permit. Work started before a permit is issued may be
subject to fine up to three times the original permit fee.
(3) The Wisconsin-registered fire-protection contractor or other
contractor(s) who was given the permit to work shall keep at the
job site at all times one set of approved plans bearing the stamp of
conditional approval from the Department and a copy of the
specifications. The plans shall be open to inspection by an
authorized representative of the Department immediately upon
request.
AA. Revocation, extension and liability.
(1) Revocation of approval. The Fire & Rescue Department may revoke
any approval issued under the provisions of this section for any
false statements or misrepresentation of facts on which the
approval was based.
(2) Expiration of plan approval. Plan approvals issued by the
Department shall expire two years after the approval date
indicated on the fire-protection plans.
(3) Extension of plan approval. Upon written request and payment of
the fees specified under § 180-17 of this chapter, the expiration
date described under Subsection AA(2) may be extended for a
single two-year period, provided that the written request and fee
are submitted prior to the expiration date of the original approval
and the originally approved plans are revised to comply with the
requirements of this section at the time that the request is made.
(4) Limitation of liability. The conditional approval of an automatic fire
sprinkler, suppression or fire alarm design by the Fire & Rescue
Department shall not be construed as an assumption of any design
responsibility.
§ 180-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-16
173:244
§ 180-17. Fire protection systems and tank fees. [Amended
12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 13-55]
BB. Appeals. Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove
an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is
claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true
intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief of
the Fire Department to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days
from the date of the decision appealed.
A. Automatic fire sprinkler systems.
(1) The permit fee is based on the total number of sprinklers. The fee
structure shall apply to both new systems and existing systems
undergoing revision.
Number of Sprinklers Permit Fee
1 to 20 $472
21 to 100 $935
101 to 200 $1,288
201 to 300 $1,345
301 to 500 $2,172
Over 500 $2,172 plus $1.80 each sprinkler
over 500
(2) Fast-track plan review. The fee for a fast-track (rush) plan review
shall be added to the fee structure identified within this § 180-17:
(a) Fast-track (rush) plan reviews will reduce the typical review
period of 20 business days to a maximum of seven business
days.
(b) Fast-track (rush) plan review fees will be charged by adding
100% to the base fee, plus the cost of overnight mail service,
when applicable.
(c) Plans that have received a rush review will be returned via
overnight mail service when requested for an additional
shipping charge of $25.
(d) Pleasant Prairie Fire & Rescue retains the right to extend the
review time on large projects for quality assurance.
B. Fire-protection equipment.
(1) Fire protection underground:
§ 180-16 FAIR HOUSING § 180-17
173:245
Distance
(feet) Fee
0 to 200 $560
201 to 500 $640
501 to 999 $720
1,000 or more $799
(2) Fire hydrants: $120 each.
C. Gas suppression and dry chemical system permit fees. The fee is based
on the total pounds of suppression agent used.
Pounds of Suppression
Agent Fee
1 to 50 $521
51 to 100 $552
101 to 200 $697
201 to 300 $871
301 to 400 $1,002
401 to 500 $1,046
501 to 750 $1,220
751 to 1,000 $1,482
Over 1,000 $1,482 plus $0.73 each pound of agent
over 1,000 pounds
D. Restaurant wet chemical systems.
Number of Nozzles Permit Fee
1 to 15 $628
16 to 30 $865
31 to 50 $1,103
Over 50 $1,103 plus $22 for each nozzle over
50
E. Restaurant mechanical hood and duct systems.
(1) Restaurant system: $752 per hood.
(2) Each additional system or hood reviewed at the same time, for the
same building: $392 per hood.
F. Smoke control/management/exhaust systems.
(1) Smoke control system: $1,320 per system, plus hourly rate of $110
per hour.
§ 180-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-17
173:246
G. Fire detection and alarm systems. The permit fee is based on the total
number of devices:
Number of Devices Fee
1 to 10 $515
11 to 25 $766
26 to 50 $1,003
51 to 75 $1,175
76 to 100 $1,526
101 to 125 $1,900
Over 125 $1,900 plus $6 per additional device
over 125
H. Standpipe systems and fire pumps.
(1) Standpipe permit fee: $396 per standpipe.
(2) Fire pump permit fee: $496 per fire pump.
I. (Reserved)23
J. Testing.
(1) Tests must be scheduled a minimum of 48 hours in advance.
(2) Tests shall be scheduled when the contractor can assure the
required work has been completed. Tests scheduled before the job
is complete will be charged a reinspection fee.
(3) Tests must begin within 30 minutes after the arrival of the Fire
Inspector.
K. Triple fees. Contractors that start a job without first obtaining and
receiving the appropriate review and permit will be charged a fee that
is triple the fees identified within this section, and a stop-work order
will be issued.
L. Administrative fee. An administrative fee equal to 20% of the permit fee
will be assessed for a re-review of the same fire alarm, fire sprinkler,
fire-protection water main, fire-suppression plan or component of the
plan that did not pass the initial review.
M. Permits. Permits will be issued only after the plans have been submitted
and receive a satisfactory review.
N. Witness of test fees.
23.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection I, Petroleum/chemical tank, was repealed 12-5-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-44.
§ 180-17 FAIR HOUSING § 180-17
173:247
(1) The fee to witness the following tests is included in the plan review
fee:
(a) Fire-protection water supply hydrostatic test.
(b) Sprinkler system hydrostatic test.
(c) Standpipe system hydrostatic test.
(d) Dry system hydrostatic test.
(e) Dry valve trip test.
(f) Deluge system trip test.
(g) Fire pump acceptance test.
(h) Carbon dioxide system.
(i) Dry chemical system.
(j) Foam system.
(k) Halogenated agents systems.
(l) Special agent systems.
(m) Standpipe system flow test.
(n) Sprinkler system flow test.
(o) Foam system flow test.
(p) Fire hydrant flow test.
(q) Annunciator panel.
(r) Smoke detection.
(s) Heat detection.
(t) Infrared detection.
(u) Ultraviolet detection.
(v) Pull stations.
(w) Automatic fire doors.
(x) Flush underground piping.
(2) Dry pipe and double interlock system(s) air test of 24 hours shall
require an additional permit fee of $232.
O. Fees to witness a retest of systems listed above:
(1) One-hour test: $110.
§ 180-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-17
173:248
(2) Two-hour test: $220.
(3) Each additional hour: $110.
P. Occupancy inspection fees: an inspection performed after the initial
construction of a building or tenant space and prior to occupancy or
performed within an existing building of tenant space after a change in
owner, tenant or use.
Building Square Footage Fee
0 to 5,000 $75
$5,001 to 25,000 $100
25,001 to 100,000 $125
100,001 to 500,000 $175
500,001 to 1,000,000 $225
Over 1,000,000 $275
Q. Special inspection: an inspection performed at the request of the owner,
occupant, a Village of Pleasant Prairie department or court order. A
special inspection fee is charged at $105 per hour, including travel
time.
R. Reinspection fees. This section applies when there is a need to perform
one or more inspections after the initial fire-prevention inspection or
occupancy inspection.
Building Square Footage Reinspection Fee
0 to 5,000 $50
5,001 to 100,000 $75
100,001 to 500,000 $125
500,001 to 1,000,000 $175
Over 1,000,000 $225
S. Annual fire sprinkler (NFPA 25) and fire alarm (NFPA 72) inspection
permits.
(1) Per § 180-16N(3), the fee for an annual inspection permit and
inspection form is as follows:
Risers/Pump Fee
1 to 5 $35
6 to 10 $40
11 to 15 $45
16 to 20 $50
21 to 25 $55
26 or more $60
§ 180-17 FAIR HOUSING § 180-17
173:249
Risers/Pump Fee
Fire pump, per pump $35
Fire alarm system $35
(2) Failure to obtain a permit for an annual inspection form: minimum
of $50 plus triple fee for each applicable item listed above.
(3) Failure to return a completed annual inspection form: minimum of
$50 plus triple fee for each applicable item listed above.
T. Professional services.
(1) Professional services are billed when the Village subcontractor
provides such services and/or on-site inspection of the systems
described within the ordinance.
(2) Fees for professional services (fire-protection consultant) are billed
at $175 per hour, plus mileage.
(3) Performance-based code review(s) is(are) billed at $175 per hour.
(4) The need for professional services or on-site inspections to be
performed by the Village subcontractor will be at the discretion of
the Fire Chief.
U. Overtime fees.
(1) This fee will apply to all fire-protection systems (sprinkler,
detection, alarms, etc.), testing and occupancy inspections.
(a) Tests required before 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
(b) Weekends.
(2) The fee will be assessed at 1.5 times the hourly rate of $110 with a
minimum charge of two hours.
V. Village holidays.
(1) A Village holiday is any weekday that the Village Hall is closed.
(2) The fee will be assessed at two times the hourly rate of $110, with a
minimum charge of two hours.
W. Stop-work order. The inspector may issue a stop-work order for
construction to be stopped for any of the following reasons:
(1) If written violations are not corrected within 30 days.
(2) Construction significantly deviates from approved and permitted
plans, as determined by the inspector.
§ 180-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-17
173:250
§ 180-18. Hazardous materials and spills.
(3) When construction is dangerously unsafe, as determined by the
inspector.
(4) The inspector is denied access to property.
A. Prohibited discharges. No person, firm or corporation shall discharge
or cause to be discharged, leaked, leached or spilled upon any public or
private street or alley, or public, private or Village-owned property, or
onto the ground, surface waters, subsurface waters, or aquifers, within
the Village of Pleasant Prairie, except those areas specifically licensed
for waste disposal activities and to receive such materials, any
explosive, flammable or combustible liquid or gas, any radioactive
material at or above nuclear regulatory restriction levels, etiologic
agents, or any solid, liquid or gas creating a hazard, potential hazard, or
public nuisance or any solid, liquid or gas have a deleterious effect on
the environment.
B. Containment, cleanup and restoration. Any person, firm or corporation
in violation of this section shall, upon direction of the Chief, begin
immediate actions to contain, clean up and remove to an approved
repository the offending material(s) and restore the site to its original
condition. The spiller (offending person, firm, or corporation) is
responsible for all expenses incurred by the Department, mutual aid
departments and contractors retained during the mitigation, removal
and cleanup. Should any person, firm, or corporation fail to engage the
necessary personnel and equipment to comply with or to complete the
requirements of this section, the Chief shall notify the Office of
Emergency Government, which may order the required actions to be
taken by public or private resources and allow the recovery of any and
all costs incurred by the Village and those assisting the Village in this
matter.
C. Response by emergency services. A response by emergency services
includes but is not limited to fire services, emergency medical services,
and police and law enforcement services. A person, firm or corporation
who or which possesses or controls a hazardous substance which is
discharged or who or which causes the discharge of a hazardous
substance shall be responsible for reimbursement to the responding
agencies for actual and necessary expenses incurred in carrying out
their duties under this section.
D. Expenses. Actual and necessary expenses may include but are not
limited to personnel hourly costs; fire and rescue vehicle hourly costs;
equipment expense; replacement of equipment damaged by the
hazardous material; the replacement costs of any extinguishing agent
or chemical, neutralizer or materials used to extinguish a fire or
suppress a vapor; confinement, neutralizing or cleanup of any
flammable or combustible liquid, gas, solid or any hazardous material
or chemical involved in any fire or accidental spill; cleaning,
§ 180-17 FAIR HOUSING § 180-18
173:251
§ 180-19. Health and safety provisions adopted by reference.
Chapter SPS 330, Fire Department Safety and Health, Wis. Adm. Code,
Department of Safety and Professional Services (SPS), is hereby adopted by
reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and as
the same may be from time to time amended.
§ 180-20. Elevators.
decontamination, and maintenance of the equipment specific to the
incident; costs incurred in the procurement and use of specialized
equipment specific to the incident; specific laboratory expenses
incurred in the recognition and identification of hazardous substances
in the evaluation of the response; and decontamination, cleanup and
medical surveillance of response personnel as required by the
responding agency's medical advisor.
A. Purpose; intent. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
requirements relating to the specification and installation of an elevator
within a building or structure that adequately meets the needs of the
Department. It is the intent of this section to ensure adequate access to
any floor or level that is above or below the ground or first floor level. It
has been the past experience that elevators have been specified and
installed within buildings and structures within the Village of Pleasant
Prairie that do not adequately meet the needs of the Department. It is
recognized that an ordinance is needed to identify the minimum size
elevator that will be accepted by the Department.
B. Scope. This section applies to all new construction that is covered
within the Wisconsin Administrative Code. All existing public buildings
or places of employment and all additions shall conform to this section,
as follows:
(1) Additions, remodeled buildings, and change of use.
(a) Any existing building that is to be modified by addition or
remodel in a percentage of 25% or more shall comply with the
intent of this section when a new elevator installation is
required.
(b) If the use of an existing building is changed to a new use and
the building undergoes physical remodeling, the building shall
comply with the intent of this section when a new elevator
installation is required.
(c) Exemptions:
[1] Multitenant dwelling buildings which have separated,
private entrances and that do not share an internal
common corridor.
§ 180-18 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-20
173:252
§ 180-21. Key box system.
[2] Mezzanine levels which are not utilized as work
environments, provided that their primary function is as
storage space.
C. Reference: Department of Safety and Professional Services, Ch. SPS
318, Elevator Code, Wis. Adm. Code.
D. Minimum rated load and capacity for elevators. At least one elevator for
each building or structure shall be designed to accommodate an
ambulance stretcher that is a minimum 80 inches by 24 inches in the
horizontal position along with three Department personnel and all
associated equipment. The door and car size shall permit the entrance
and exit of an ambulance stretcher without tilting the stretcher at any
time.
(1) Acceptable minimum size.
(a) Passenger (general purpose): capacity 3,500 pounds with a
minimum clear cab inside of seven feet eight inches by five feet
five inches. [Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
(b) Hospital/service: capacity 4,500 pounds with a minimum clear
cab inside of five feet eight inches by seven feet 9 1/2 inches.
(c) The proposed elevator shall meet or exceed these minimum
clear cab inside dimensions.
E. Location within the building. The Department shall review and approve
the proposed location being considered for the elevator. This is to
ensure that the elevator is easily accessible and readily available to the
emergency services. This will be done in conjunction with site and
operational approval for a building permit and is not associated with
the shop drawing approval process described in the following sections.
F. Submittal. All shop drawings of proposed elevators for each building or
structure shall be submitted to the Department for review and
approval.
G. All shop drawings will be reviewed and returned accepted or not
accepted within three weeks of being received.
H. The elevator emergency notification device shall report to the Village of
Pleasant Prairie Dispatch Center using the fire emergency phone
number. Notification shall consist of a prerecorded message stating the
name and address of the occupancy and have the capability for the
occupant to speak directly with a Village of Pleasant Prairie dispatcher.
I. No installation shall begin until the Department has completed a
satisfactory review and issued a permit.
§ 180-20 FAIR HOUSING § 180-21
173:253
§ 180-22. Storage tanks.
A. The Department has adopted a key box system requiring the
installation of miniature vaults placed upon the exterior of buildings,
gateposts or other applicable locations. Contained within the vault are
the keys that will allow the Department to access the respective
structure in a timely manner to combat a fire emergency, medical
emergency or other emergency alarms.
B. Key boxes shall be placed on a building of which the Department is
required to perform an inspection or which has a fire alarm or a
combination of fire alarms as well as detection and suppression devices.
The Chief may require one or more boxes dependent on the size of the
structure or facility.
C. Typically, key boxes are placed upon a new structure or during change
of use or occupancy. However, the Chief shall have the authority to
require an owner to place a key box on an existing building. The Chief
shall determine the size and location of the key box so as to be readily
accessible in case of an alarm or emergency.
D. A minimum of one Fire & Rescue-approved material safety data sheet
storage box(s) shall be provided for each tenant to contain data sheets
on all products that are considered hazardous within the facility. The
location of the storage box shall be determined by the Fire & Rescue
Department.
E. The Chief may require the installation of a key box on a private dwelling
where a fire alarm system exists and multiple false alarms have
occurred.
F. The Department shall approve a key box system, prior to the
installation of such system, which meets existing specifications and the
needs of the Department.
G. Knox key boxes and related products used by the Fire & Rescue
Department within the Village of Pleasant Prairie shall be purchased
directly from the Fire & Rescue Department. The sale price shall
include the most current price of each product, the current shipping
and handling costs, plus an administrative fee of 10%.
A. (Reserved)24
B. Department of Safety and Professional Services codes. The installation,
upgrade and/or removal of storage tanks shall be in compliance with
the State of Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services
codes.
24.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A, Plan and permits, was repealed 12-5-2016 by Ord. No.
16-44.
§ 180-21 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-22
173:254
§ 180-23. Fees for response and service on roads, streets, highways,
public waterways and railroads.
The Village of Pleasant Prairie from time to time responds to provide
emergency service on a local street, county trunk highway, state trunk
highway, the interstate system, public waterways, and the railroad system,
where emergencies such as vehicle fires, vehicle accidents, transportation
incidents and spills create a hazardous condition.
C. Violation. Any person failing to obtain a permit is in violation of this
chapter.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COUNTY TRUNK HIGHWAY — A road maintained by the County
Highway Department.
DISPOSABLE SUPPLIES — Any material used to control and/or remove
a hazard and then must be replenished, such as firefighting foam and/
or oil dry.
EMERGENCY VEHICLES — Fire apparatus, ambulance vehicles, and
support vehicles operated by the Village of Pleasant Prairie and/or by
the municipalities that are signatories to the MABAS (Mutual Aid Box
Alarm System) mutual aid agreement that are providing service within
the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
HAZARDOUS CONDITION — A condition or substance (solid, liquid
or gas) capable of posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety, the
environment or property.
NATIONAL HIGHWAY SYSTEM — Any highway maintained by the State
Department of Transportation that is a part of the national system
of interstate highways, including entrance and exit ramps, frontage
access roads, service centers, and inspection and weigh stations.
SERVICE — An act performed by the Fire & Rescue Department upon
the national highway system, state trunk highway or local street that
includes but is not limited to extinguishing a vehicle fire, using
extrication equipment to aid in the removal of victims of a vehicular
accident, and cleanup of a hazardous condition or spill.
SPECIALIZED VEHICLES — Vehicles such as heavy-lifting tow trucks,
cranes, and vacuum trucks, owned or operated by the Village or a
subcontractor to the Village, that are needed to control and/or remove
a hazardous condition.
STATE TRUNK HIGHWAY — A road maintained by the State
Department of Transportation.
STREET — A local thoroughfare or roadway, either private or owned
and maintained by the Village.
§ 180-22 FAIR HOUSING § 180-23
173:255
§ 180-24. Fees for recovery of costs.
The Village of Pleasant Prairie Fire & Rescue Department from time to
time responds to provide a service after which it can be determined that a
fire was intentionally set, a false alarm occurred because a fire or rescue
call was falsely reported either verbally or through the activation of a fire
alarm device, a fire detection device and/or a fire suppression system, or
by the failure of the property owner to properly and adequately make prior
notification that would have prevented the unnecessary response by the
Fire & Rescue Department during a scheduled test, scheduled maintenance
or scheduled repair of either a fire alarm device, fire detection device and/
or fire suppression systems. When in fact it is determined that an event such
as those described above has occurred, the Village will seek to recover the
costs expended during such a response from the responsible party or the
property owner when applicable.
B. Fees to be charged for emergency service. The owner of each and every
vehicle receiving emergency service from the Village for the use of its
emergency fire vehicles, equipment, and disposable supplies, such as
firefighting foam, oil dry and other material used to remove a hazardous
condition, shall pay for such service when rendered within the Village
on a local street, county trunk highway, state trunk highway, the
interstate system, public waterways, and the railroad system.
(1) At such time the Fire & Rescue Department provides the services
described above, the owner of the vehicle(s) is charged the
following fees:
(a) Pumper/tanker: $400 per hour per pumper/tanker.
(b) Engine: $300 per hour per engine.
(c) Ladder truck: $350 per hour per ladder truck.
(d) Tanker fire truck: $300 per hour per tanker fire truck.
(e) Grass fire truck: $150 per hour per grass fire truck.
(f) Command car: $100 per hour per command car.
(g) Ambulance (when used as a fire unit and not an emergency
medical unit): $200 per hour per ambulance.
(2) Personnel charges are billed at the actual rates for the length of
service performed.
(3) Specialized contracted vehicles, equipment and disposable
supplies: actual costs.
(4) An administration charge of 5% of the subtotal will be added.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 180-23 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-24
173:256
FALSE ALARM — A report of an emergency that was found to be not
true and caused by an unintentional or accidental activation.
FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION DEVICE — A device designed to send
a fire alarm thus reporting an emergency and/or which monitors the
products of combustion, most commonly known as "heat," "smoke" and
"radiant energy," and which in fact will send an alarm of emergency
when appropriate.
FIRE, DELIBERATELY SET, LAWFUL — A fire where the evidence
supports the conclusion that the fire was intentionally set but the
circumstances indicate that no law was broken, such as an open
burning fire where there is a valid open burning permit in effect.
FIRE, DELIBERATELY SET, UNLAWFUL — A fire where the evidence
supports the conclusion that the fire was intentionally set and that it
was unlawful, such as an open burning fire where there is no valid open
burning permit in effect.
FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM — A device or system that uses water or
special agents to automatically or manually release for the purpose of
extinguishing a fire.
PROPERTY OWNER — The owner of record.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — The person or persons found to be responsible
for causing the incident.
SERVICE — The service provided by the Fire & Rescue Department
during such events as fires, hazardous material, emergency medical
calls, and other events requiring the Department to contain, control and
remove.
UNINTENTIONAL FALSE ALARM — When a device such as a fire
alarm, fire detection system or fire suppression system is accidentally
tripped, such as being struck by a forklift or falling boxes or excessive
heating of a fusible link.
PREVENTABLE FALSE ALARM — A report of an emergency either
verbally, automatically or during a scheduled test, scheduled
maintenance or scheduled repair of either a fire alarm device, fire
detection device and/or fire suppression system that could have
been prevented by prior notification to the central station and/
or local fire department which in fact would have prevented an
emergency response by the fire department.
(1)
MALICIOUS FALSE ALARM — A report of an emergency that was
found to be not true and caused by an intentional verbal reporting
or manual activation of a fire alarm or fire suppression system.
(2)
B. Cost recovery for emergency service at intentionally set fires. The
person or persons found to be responsible for intentionally setting an
unlawful fire may be charged for the services provided by the Village
and/or by the departments identified within the mutual aid agreement
for the use of emergency fire and rescue vehicles, equipment,
§ 180-24 FAIR HOUSING § 180-24
173:257
disposable supplies, such as firefighting foam, and other material used
to remove a hazardous condition, as well as contracted services and
services from other municipal departments within the Village, and shall
pay for such services when rendered within the Village.
C. Cost recovery for emergency service provided at what is determined to
be a false alarm.
(1) When a person(s) is found to be responsible for a fire or rescue call
that was falsely reported either verbally or through the activation
of a fire alarm device, a fire detection device and/or a fire
suppression system, that person may be charged for the services
provided by the Village and/or by the departments identified within
the mutual aid agreement for the use of emergency fire and rescue
vehicles during the response to the incident described within.
(2) When the property owner fails to properly and adequately make
prior notification that would prevent an unnecessary response by
the Fire & Rescue Department during a scheduled test, scheduled
maintenance or scheduled repair of either a fire alarm device, fire
detection device and/or fire suppression system, the property
owner may be charged for the services provided by the Village and/
or by the departments identified within the mutual aid agreement
for the use of emergency fire and rescue vehicles.
D. Fees to be charged for emergency service.
(1) At such time the Fire & Rescue Department provides the services
described above, the owner of the vehicle(s) is charged the
following fees, at a minimum of one hour, then every quarter hour
thereafter:
(a) Pumper/tanker: $400 per hour per pumper/tanker.
(b) Engine: $300 per hour per engine.
(c) Ladder truck: $350 per hour per ladder truck.
(d) Tanker fire: $300 per hour per tanker fire truck.
(e) Grass fire truck: $150 per hour per grass fire truck.
(f) Command car: $100 per hour per command car.
(g) Ambulance (when used as a fire unit and not an emergency
medical unit): $200 per hour per ambulance.
(2) Personnel charges are billed at the actual rates for the length of
service performed at a minimum of one hour, then every quarter
hour thereafter.
(3) Specialized contracted vehicles, equipment and disposable
supplies: actual costs.
§ 180-24 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-24
173:258
§ 180-25. Outdoor wood-fired boilers/furnaces and ovens.
(4) An administration charge of 5% of the subtotal will be added.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BIOMASS, OTHER — Within this section, refers only to automatically
fed fuels such as wood pellets, shelled corn, and wood chips (which
shall comply with the "natural wood, dried" definition below).
CHIMNEY — A flue or flues or smokestack that carries exhaust created
by the products of combustion from a fire box or burn chamber.
CLEAN WOOD — See "natural wood, dried."
EXISTING NONCONFORMING OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER/
FURNACE — An outdoor wood-fired boiler/furnace which was
purchased, installed with a valid permit and in operation prior to the
effective date of this section.
NATURAL WOOD, DRIED — A wood or wood product that has not been
painted, varnished or coated with a similar material, that has not been
treated with preservatives and does not contain resins or glues as found
in plywood or other composite wood products and is dry, and the leaves
have turned brittle or fallen from any branches.
OPEN BURNING — The act of starting, kindling or maintaining a fire by
igniting combustible materials by a match, torch, or accelerant, where
the products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air
without passing through a chimney.
OUTDOOR BURNING — Open burning or burning in an outdoor woodfired
boiler/furnace.
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER/FURNACE (OWBF) — An OWBF is
any furnace, stove, boiler or device designed to burn dried natural wood
where the unit is not located within a building intended for habitation
by humans or domestic animals. OWBFs provide heating and/or hot
water to a single residence. OWBFs are also known as "water stoves"
(typically look like a small detached utility building with a chimney) or
may also be referred to as an "outdoor wood boiler," an "outdoor wood
furnace," or an "outdoor wood-fired hydronic heater."
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED OVEN — A woodburning pizza/bread oven
made out of clay adobe, refractory fire bricks or refractory concrete.
RESIDENCE — A permanent structure constructed for the primary
purpose of providing housing to a person or persons and being utilized
for that purpose.
RUBBISH AND REFUSE — Old rags, paper, newspaper, furniture, white
goods, metal, plastics, wood other than wood classified as yard waste,
and other combustible materials.
B. Purpose and intent.
§ 180-24 FAIR HOUSING § 180-25
173:259
(1) An OWBF may provide an economical alternative to conventional
heating systems; however, concerns have been raised regarding
the safety and environmental impacts of these heating devices,
particularly the production of offensive odors and potential health
effects of uncontrolled emissions.
(2) This section is intended to ensure that existing nonconforming
OWBFs are utilized in a manner that does not create a nuisance
and is not detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of
the residents of the Village.
C. Use of outdoor wood-fired boilers/furnaces prohibited. The use of an
OWBF is prohibited in the Village, unless the unit has been determined
to be an existing nonconforming OWBF and is in full compliance with
this section.
D. Existing nonconforming wood-fired boilers/furnaces. The use of an
existing nonconforming OWBF is allowed to continue, provided that the
following requirements are met:
(1) The OWBF shall be fueled by dried natural wood, clean wood, or
other biomass as defined within Subsection A of this section.
(2) The OWBF shall not be fueled by rubbish and refuse as defined
within Subsection A of this section.
(3) The OWBF shall not be operated in violation of § 180-13 of the
Village Municipal Code of Ordinances.
(4) The OWBF shall be operated in compliance with the manufacturer's
operating instructions.
(5) The OWBF shall not be operated in such a manner as to become
hazardous, harmful, noxious, or offensive to the surrounding
neighborhood as determined by the Village Building Inspector and/
or Village Fire & Rescue Chief.
(6) The owner of the property which houses the OWBF shall obtain an
annual outdoor wood-fired boiler/furnace operating permit
pursuant to Subsection E of this section.
E. Operating permit required. Upon adoption of this section, the owner of
any existing nonconforming OWBF shall obtain an annual outdoor
wood-fired boiler/furnace operating permit from the Village Fire &
Rescue Department before continuing to operate the existing
nonconforming OWBF.
F. Revocation of permit. The Village Fire & Rescue Chief shall have the
authority to revoke a permit for a nonconforming OWBF for any one of
the following reasons:
(1) The OWBF has not been used for a period of 12 consecutive
months.
§ 180-25 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 180-25
173:260
§ 180-26. Violations and penalties.
(2) The OWBF has been the subject of successful prosecution of a
nuisance complaint(s).
(3) The OWBF is not being operated pursuant to the manufacturer's
operating instructions.
(4) The required annual outdoor wood-fired boiler/furnace operating
permit has not been obtained.
G. Outdoor wood-fired ovens. The use of an outdoor wood-fired oven is
permitted subject to the following conditions:
(1) The outdoor wood-fired oven shall be fueled by dried natural wood,
clean wood, or other biomass as defined within Subsection A of this
section.
(2) The OWBF shall not be fueled by rubbish and refuse as defined
within Subsection A of this section.
(3) The outdoor wood-fired oven shall not be operated in violation of
§ 180-13 of the Village Municipal Code of Ordinances.
(4) The outdoor wood-fired oven must be operated in compliance with
the manufacturer's operating instructions, when such instructions
exist.
(5) Should any outdoor wood-fired oven operating under this section
become hazardous, harmful, noxious, or offensive to the
surrounding neighborhood as determined by the Village Building
Inspector and/or Fire & Rescue Chief, then the owner shall correct,
improve or cease to use the outdoor wood-fired oven.
H. Fees. Annual outdoor wood-fired boiler/furnace operating permit fee:
$20.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any order,
rule or regulation made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4, of the Village Municipal Code.
B. A person who violates a court order under § 180-14E(1) shall be subject
to the penalties provided for in § 167.10(9), Wis. Stats, as may be
amended from time to time.
C. Any other person who violates § 180-14 shall be subject to the penalties
as set forth in § 167.10(9)(b), Wis. Stats., as may be amended from time
to time.
§ 180-25 FAIR HOUSING § 180-27
173:261
§ 180-27. Severe weather shelter.
The building architect shall identify the area within the building that can be
used as a severe weather shelter of safe haven during severe weather such
as a tornado. The designated area shall be identified with signage.
§ 180-28. Automated external defibrillator (AED).
Chapter 181
IMPACT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land division and development control — See
Ch. 395.
Zoning Ordinance — See Ch. 420.
§ 181-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village Impact Fee
Ordinance."
§ 181-2. Purpose.
Consistent with Wis. Stats. § 66.0617, the purpose of this chapter is to
establish the mechanism for the imposition of impact fees upon new
development to finance the capital costs of acquiring, establishing,
upgrading, expanding and constructing public facilities which are necessary
to accommodate the new development. This chapter is intended to ensure
that new development bears an appropriate share of the cost of capital
expenditures necessary to provide public facilities within the Village and its
service areas.
§ 181-3. Intent.
This chapter is intended to impose impact fees in order to finance new
facilities, the demand for which is generated by new development. The
A. An automated external defibrillator shall be located in each building or
tenant of the building. The number and location of AEDs shall be
determined by the Fire & Rescue Department.
B. Employees of the occupancy shall be trained in the use of the AED.
C. AEDs shall be maintained per the device's manufacturer's
recommendations. [Added 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
D. The AED location shall be marked with "AED" or equivalent signage
that has a minimum of two-inch-tall letters and is clearly visible to
building occupants. [Added 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-44]
§ 180-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 181-3
181:262
Village is responsible for and will meet, through the use of general Village
revenues, all capital improvement needs associated with existing
development. Only needs created by new development will be met by impact
fees. Impact fees shall be spent on new or enlarged capital facilities
improvements required by new developments that pay the fees.
§ 181-4. Authority.
Authority for this chapter is provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0617. The
provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of the
Village to adopt any ordinance or fee pursuant to any other source of local
authority or to utilize any other methods or powers otherwise available
for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in lieu of or in
conjunction with this chapter.
§ 181-5. Applicability; effective date.
This chapter shall be uniformly applicable to all new development that
occurs within the Village. The effective date of this chapter shall be August
1, 2005. Any building permit application filed on or after August 1, 2005,
will be liable for impact fees imposed under this chapter.
§ 181-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context indicates another meaning is clearly
intended:
BUILDING PERMIT — The permit required for new construction and
additions pursuant to Pleasant Prairie Municipal Code. However, the term
"building permit," as used herein, shall not be deemed to include permits
required for remodeling, rehabilitation or other improvements to an
existing structure or rebuilding a damaged or destroyed structure, provided
there is no increase in the number of dwelling units resulting therefrom.
CAPITAL COSTS — The capital costs to construct, expand or improve public
facilities, including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering and
design costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, except that
not more than 10% of capital costs may consist of legal, engineering and
design costs.
DEVELOPMENT — The construction or modification of improvements to
real property that requires issuance of a building permit and either creates
additional residential dwelling units within the Village or its service areas
or that result in new nonresidential uses, either of which create a need for
new, expanded or improved public facilities within the Village or its service
areas.
IMPACT FEE — Any charge, fee or assessment levied pursuant to this
chapter to be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit.
NEEDS ASSESSMENT — The needs assessment prepared by Virchow,
Krause & Company, LLP, and approved by the Village Board following public
§ 181-3 IMPACT FEES § 181-6
181:263
hearing on June 20, 2005, which identified the public facility costs for the
purpose of calculating impact fees as defined by Wis. Stats. § 66.0617. The
adopted needs assessment is on file with the Village Clerk.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any development approved by the
Village for residential use.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT or RDU (A.K.A. REU) — A single-family
residence or a separate living area within a multiunit residential apartment
or condominium building. It shall not include a separate residential living
area in a mixed-use commercial/residential building. RDUs for multiunit
residential buildings generally consists of a combination of bedroom(s),
bathroom(s), kitchen(s) and/or living area for the purpose of providing
a separate and distinct living space, or as otherwise may reasonably be
designated as separate by the Village. (Examples: a single-family home
shall count as 1 RDU, a duplex or side-by-side townhouse shall count as 2
RDUs, an eight-unit condominium building shall count as 8 RDUs, a fourunit
apartment building shall count as 4 RDUs). Mixed-use commercial/
residential buildings shall be assessed an impact fee based on assessed
valuation like other nonresidential development.
SERVICE AREA — A geographic area determined by the Village Board
within which the Village provides public facilities.
SUBDIVISION — A plat, certified survey map or other method used to divide
a parcel of property into two or more separate parcels or lots.
§ 181-7. Requirement for payment of impact fee.
§ 181-8. Imposition of impact fee.
A. General requirement. Any person who creates a new development in
the Village shall be required to pay an impact fee as further set forth in
this chapter.
B. Uniform application; discretion; affordable housing.
(1) Impact fees shall be assessed in such a manner that any new
development having the same impacts on capital facilities shall be
assessed the same impact fee.
(2) Subsection B(1) above notwithstanding, the Village Board may
waive or reduce the impact fee required to be assessed against a
new development if that development promotes other policies
established by the Village Board from time to time, including, but
not limited to, the provision of affordable housing. However, no
amount of the impact fee for which the waiver or reduction is
provided may be shifted to any other portion of the development in
which the waiver or reduction has been granted, nor may it be
shifted to any other land development in the political subdivision.
A. Amount and calculation. [Amended 7-5-2006 by Ord. No. 06-32]
§ 181-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 181-8
181:264
§ 181-9. Bonding of facility projects.
The Village may issue bonds, revenue certificates and other obligations of
indebtedness in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be
provided by law in furtherance of the provision of capital improvement
projects. Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates
or other obligations of indebtedness for such projects may include impact
fees and other Village revenues as may be allowed by the Board. Impact
(1) The impact fee for residential development shall be $1,490 per
residential dwelling unit (“RDU”) until amended by the Village
Board; provided, however, that no such amendment shall exceed
$1,490 (as adjusted for inflation) unless a new needs assessment is
prepared as provided in Wis. Stat. § 66.0617. A developer shall be
charged an impact fee for the maximum number of RDUs that could
exist in the subdivision.
(2) The impact fee for nonresidential development shall be $1.94 per
$1,000 of estimated valuation until amended by the Village Board;
provided, however, that no such amendment shall exceed $1.94 (as
adjusted for inflation) unless a new needs assessment is prepared
as provided in Wis. Stat. § 66.0617. For purposes of this subsection,
estimated valuation shall be value at the time of application for a
building permit as determined by the Village Assessor, using the
Village’s current copy of the Marshall & Swift Commercial
Estimator cost estimation software. The estimated value shall be
determined by the Village Assessor based on the final building
plans and specifications.
B. Payment due. The total impact fee assessment for residential and
nonresidential developments shall become due and payable in full
within 14 days of the issuance of a building permit.
C. Annual review. The Village may annually review the impact fee and
make such modifications as are deemed necessary as a result of:
development occurring in the prior year; capital improvements actually
constructed; changing facility needs; inflation; revised cost estimates
for capital improvements; changes in the availability of other funding
sources applicable to public facility projects; and such other factors as
may be relevant.
D. Segregated account. Upon receipt of impact fees, the funds shall be
placed into a separate impact fee account. At the discretion of the
Village, multiple impact fee accounts may be maintained for separate
and distinct development or capital improvements projects. All such
accounts shall be interest-bearing accounts and be held in a bank
authorized to receive deposits of Village funds. Interest earned shall be
credited to that account and shall be used solely for the purposes
specified for such funds. The Village shall maintain and keep accurate
financial records for the account, including the source and
disbursement of all revenues.
§ 181-8 IMPACT FEES § 181-9
181:265
fees paid pursuant to this section, however, shall be restricted to use solely
and exclusively for financing directly or as a pledge against bonds, revenue
certificates and other obligations of indebtedness for the cost of capital
improvements as specified herein.
§ 181-10. Refunds.
§ 181-11. Appeals.
Payment of an impact fee imposed under this chapter may be appealed to
the Village Board as set forth below.
A. Refund requirement: reasonable time. Impact fees imposed and
collected but not used within seven years after collection to pay the
capital costs for which they were imposed shall be refunded on a
prorated proportional basis as determined by the Village Board, to the
current record owner(s) of property on which the impact fee was
originally imposed. The seven-year time limit for using impact fees may
be extended for three years if the Village adopts a resolution stating
that due to extenuating circumstances a hardship in meeting the sevenyear
limit exists and it needs an additional three years to use the impact
fees collected. [Amended 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 32]
B. Refund petition. The applicable owner(s) of record may apply for a
refund of all or part of such fee as follows:
(1) A petition for refund must be filed within one year of the event
giving rise to the right to claim a refund.
(2) The petition for refund must be submitted in writing to the Village
Administrator or his or her duly designated agent. The petition
shall set forth the basis for petitioner's request for the refund.
(3) Within one month of the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the
Village Administrator or his or her duly designated agent must
provide the petitioner, in writing, with a decision on the refund
request, including the reasons for the decision. If a refund is due to
the petitioner, the Village Administrator or his or her duly
designated agent shall request that a refund payment be made to
petitioner.
(4) Petitioner may appeal the determination of the Village
Administrator to the Village Board.
A. The applicant seeking appeal must file a written notice of appeal with
the Village Board within thirty (30) days following either: the denial of
execution of a final plat, certified survey map or other subdivision;
denial of issuance of a building permit; denial of a refund; or date the
impact fee was due, whichever is applicable, and in the event of a
conflict the earliest date applicable.
§ 181-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 181-11
181:266
§ 181-12. Effect of impact fee on zoning and subdivision
regulations.
This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property,
density of development, design and improvement standards and
requirements or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of
capital improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or
other regulations of the Village, which shall be operative and remain in full
force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
§ 181-13. Impact fee as additional and supplemental requirement.
The impact fee is additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of,
any other requirements imposed by the Village on the development of land
or the issuance of building permits. It is intended to be consistent with and
to further the objectives and policies of the Master Plan or Comprehensive
Plan, the capital improvements plan and other Village policies, ordinances
and resolutions by which the Village seeks to ensure the provision of public
facilities in conjunction with the development of land. In no event shall a
property owner be obligated to pay for capital improvements in an amount
in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this chapter; provided,
however, that a property owner may be required to pay, pursuant to Village
ordinances, regulations or policies, for other capital improvements in
addition to the impact fee for capital improvements as specified in this
section.
B. The notice of appeal shall state the applicant's name, address,
telephone number, address, legal description of the applicable lot or
parcel and a statement of the nature of and reasons for the appeal. In
the event payment of an impact fee is being appealed, the notice of
appeal shall be accompanied by full payment of the impact fee if such
payment has not already been provided to the Village.
C. The Village Clerk shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the
Village Board at a regular or special meeting no later than 60 days from
receipt of the notice of appeal. The Village Clerk shall notify the
applicant of the date, time and location of the meeting in writing, by
regular mail, no less than three (3) days before the date of such
meeting.
D. Upon review of the appeal, the Village Board may adjust the amount,
collection, refund or use of the impact fee upon just and reasonable
cause shown and in a manner consistent with the terms of this chapter.
Approval, denial or modification of the appeal request may be made by
regular motion of the Board. The decision of Board shall be a final
administrative determination.
E. No impact fee payment shall be suspended or stayed during the
pendency of any appeal filed pursuant to this section.
§ 181-11 IMPACT FEES § 181-14
181:267
§ 181-14. Liberal construction; severability.
The provisions of this chapter are hereby found and declared to be in
furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the
Village and it shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its
purposes. If any subsection, phrase, sentence or other portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed separate, distinct and
independent, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions thereof.
Chapter 194
INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND FERMENTED MALT
BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented uses and
establishments — See Ch. 108.
§ 194-1. State statutes adopted.
The provisions of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats, defining, describing and regulating
the sale, procurement, dispensing, consumption and transfer of alcohol
beverages, including provisions relating to underage persons, are adopted
and made a part of this chapter by reference. Violation of any such
provisions shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Penalties for violations
by or relating to sale, procurement, dispensing or transfer to underage
persons shall strictly conform to the penalties imposed for violations of
identical offenses defined and described in Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
§ 194-2. Licenses required. [Amended 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-17]
A. No person, except as provided by § 125.06, Wis. Stats., shall distribute,
vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or wholesale, deal or traffic in
or, for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage, or cause the same to be
done, without having procured a license as provided in this chapter, nor
without complying with all the provisions of this chapter and all
statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state and Village applicable
thereto.
(1) In accordance with § 125.06(6), no license or permit is required for
officers or employees of the Village to sell fermented malt
beverages at the RecPlex or Prairie Springs Park for Villagesponsored
events.
§ 181-14 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 194-2
181:268
§ 194-3. Classes of licenses and fees. [Amended 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-26; 3-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-11; 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-41;
5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-17]
There shall be the following classes and denominations of licenses which,
when issued by the Clerk under the authority of the Village Board, after
payment of the fee herein specified, shall permit the holder to sell, deal or
traffic in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats. The fee for Class "A," "Class A," Class "B," "Class B," Reserve "Class
B" and "Class C" licenses obtained under this section during the year shall
be prorated according to the number of months or fraction thereof for which
the license is issued; all other licenses shall not be prorated.
B. A license shall be required for each stand, place, room or enclosure or
for each suite of rooms or enclosures which are in direct connection or
communication to each other where intoxicating liquor or fermented
malt beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale.
A. Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license: $250 per year.
B. Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license: $100 per year.
C. Wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license: $25 per year.
D. Retail "Class A" liquor license: $500 per year.
E. Retail "Class B" liquor license: $500 per year.
F. Retail "Class B" liquor license issued to a full-service restaurant or hotel
pursuant to § 125.51(4)(v), Wis. Stats.: $500 per year.
G. Retail reserve "Class B" liquor license: $500 per year.
H. Initial reserve "Class B" liquor license: $10,000 upon approval of initial
retail reserve "Class B" liquor license application, to be paid in addition
to the annual fee due under Subsection G above, and any other fee
required under this section.
I. Retail "Class C" wine license: $100 per year. See § 125.51(3m), Wis.
Stats. Issued to persons enumerated in § 125.51(3m)(c), Wis. Stats., to
permit the retail sale of wine by the glass or in an opened original
container for consumption on the premises if all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) The premises is a restaurant in which the sale of alcoholic
beverages accounts for less than 50% of gross receipts.
(2) The premises does not have a "barroom," defined herein as a room
that is primarily used for the sale or consumption of alcohol
beverages.
(3) The Village's quota under § 125.51(4), Wis. Stats., prohibits it from
issuing a "Class B" or reserve "Class B" license.
§ 194-2 IMPACT FEES § 194-3
181:269
J. Operator's license. License fee of $65, which includes fee for police
check. (Duplicate License $10)
(1) The Village Clerk, upon recommendation of the Police Chief, may
issue an Operator's License to individuals for the purpose of
complying with §§ 125.32(2) and 125.68(2), Wis. Stats.
(2) Operators' licenses may be issued only on written application on
forms provided by the Village Clerk.
(3) Operators' licenses shall be valid for two years and shall expire on
June 30 of the second year of the licensing term.
(4) Applicants must complete a responsible beverage training course
prior to issuance of a license. Applicants are exempt from the
training course requirement if they are renewing an existing
operator's license, have completed the training course within the
last two years, or have held a retail license, manager's or operator's
license anywhere in the state within the last two years.
(5) There is no statutory residency requirement.
(6) Consideration of granting or denial of an operator's license will be
based upon the conviction record of the applicant subject to the
limitations set forth in § 194-5 of this chapter.
(7) If the Police Chief recommends denial, the Chief shall provide the
reason(s) for such recommendation. The Village Clerk shall in
writing inform the applicant of the denial, the reason(s) therefor
and of the opportunity to request a reconsideration of the
application by the Village Board. Such notice must be sent by mail
to or served upon the applicant at least 10 days prior to the Village
Board's reconsideration of the matter.
K. Provisional operator's license: $15 (valid for 60 days).
(1) The Village Clerk, upon the recommendation of the Police Chief,
may issue a provisional operator's license to a person who has
applied for an operator's license. Only one sixty-day provisional
license period is valid.
(2) No such license shall be issued unless the applicant is enrolled in a
responsible beverage server training course as provided in
Subsection J(4) above.
(3) A provisional license may be revoked by the Village Clerk upon
discovery of false statements by the applicant on his or her
application.
L. Temporary operator's license: $20, which includes the fee for police
check (valid for one to 14 days).
§ 194-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 194-3
181:270
(1) The Village Clerk, upon the recommendation of the Police Chief,
may issue a temporary operator's license to a person who has
applied for said license.
(2) This license may be issued only to operators employed by, or
donating their services to, nonprofit corporations which have been
granted a temporary Class "B" or "Class B" license under
Subsection B above.
(3) No person may hold more than one license of this kind per year.
(4) This license is valid for any period from one day to 14 days, and the
period for which it is valid shall be stated on the license.
M. Provisional retail licenses.
(1) A provisional retail license may be issued by the Village Clerk to a
person who has applied for a Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class
B" or "Class C" license and authorizes only the activities that the
type of retail license applied for authorizes, provided that the
applicant meets all the requirements for receiving such a license.
(2) The fee for a provisional retail license shall be $15, and the license
shall expire 60 days after its issuance or when the Class "A," Class
"B," "Class A," "Class B" or "Class C" license is issued to the holder,
whichever is sooner. The Village Clerk may revoke the provisional
retail license if he or she discovers that the holder of the license
made a false statement on the application.
(3) The Village Clerk may not issue a provisional "Class B" license if
the municipality's quota under § 125.51(4) prohibits the
municipality from issuing a "Class B" license.
(4) No person may hold more than one provisional retail license for
each type of license applied for by the holder per year.
N. Temporary Class "B" Beer and temporary "Class B" wine licenses.
Under §§ 125.26(6) and 125-51(10), Wis. Stats., $10 per event (plus
police investigation fee of $7), except that no additional fee shall be
charged if a temporary beer and temporary wine license are issued
simultaneously.
(1) The Village Clerk, upon the recommendation of the Police Chief,
may issue a temporary Class "B" beer or temporary "Class B" wine
license for only the activities that the type of retail license applied
for authorizes, provided that the applicant meets all the
requirements for receiving such a license.
(2) A temporary Class "B" license (picnic license, beer) may be issued
to organizations enumerated in § 125.26(6), Wis. Stats., to sell or
serve fermented malt beverages at a picnic, meeting or gathering;
provided, however, that the total fees paid during any licensing
year by any one application shall not exceed the fees provided for a
§ 194-3 IMPACT FEES § 194-3
181:271
Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license, as stated
in Subsection B above. The total maximum number of days per
licensing year for which a license may be issued shall not exceed
25 days per applicant.
(3) Temporary "Class B" license (picnic license, wine) may be issued to
organizations enumerated in § 125.51(10), Wis. Stats., to sell or
serve wine containing not more than six-percent alcohol by volume
at a picnic, meeting or gathering; however, not more than two
temporary "Class B" wine licenses may be issued to an organization
under this subsection in any twelve-month period.
(4) Application for such license shall be signed by the president or
corresponding officer of the society making such application and
shall be filed with the Village Clerk, together with the appropriate
license fee, at least 30 days before the event. The application is
subject to and shall include the following:
(a) A single event is limited to three consecutive days.
(b) Alcoholic beverages can only be sold or served between the
hours of 11:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(c) Licenses will not be granted for youth events.
(d) A security and public health and safety plan must be submitted
and approved by the Police and Fire & Rescue Departments. If
the event takes place in Prairie Spring Park, the Parks Director
must also approve the application.
(e) The applicant must sign a hold harmless agreement and
provide the Village with a certificate of insurance written by a
company licensed by the State of Wisconsin covering any and
all liability or obligations which may result from the applicant's
employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors. The
certificate shall name the Village of Pleasant Prairie as an
additional insured and shall be in the minimum amounts:
[1] Per person/injury: $500,000.
[2] Per occurrence/injury: $500,000.
[3] Property damage: $500,000.
[4] Public liability and property damage and excess liability
umbrella policy: $1,000,000.
O. Late penalty fee. The Village Clerk shall charge a late penalty fee of
$100 for each liquor license renewal application that arrives past the
deadline date, as set forth in the renewal notice letter sent each year.
§ 194-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 194-4
181:272
§ 194-4. License application.
Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or fermented
malt beverages shall be made in writing on forms prescribed by the State
Department of Revenue and filed with the Clerk 15 days prior to the
granting of such license.
§ 194-5. Qualifications for licenses. [Amended 7-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-40; 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-17]
A. Natural persons. Licenses related to alcohol beverages issued to
natural persons under this chapter may be issued only to persons who:
(1) Do not have an arrest or conviction record subject to §§ 111.321,
111.322 and 111.335, Wis. Stats. Licenses will not be granted if the
applicant's record indicates the following:
(a) More than two criminal or civil ordinance convictions in the
past five years wherein any of the following apply:
[1] Weapons of any kind were used, displayed or threatened.
[2] Physical violence was used or threatened.
[3] The incident resulting in the conviction occurred on a
licensed premises.
[4] The incident resulting in the conviction involved
consumption of intoxicating beverages.
[5] Possession of drugs or controlled substances.
(b) Any conviction for the manufacture, sale or distribution of
drugs or controlled substances or possession with intent to
deliver such substances in the past five years. [Amended
11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-60]
(c) A conviction of a second offense or greater operating while
intoxicated (OWI) in the past five years.
(2) Have been residents of this state continuously for at least 90 days
prior to the date of filing the application for license.
(3) Have attained the legal drinking age, except that operator's
licenses may be issued to persons who have attained the age of 18.
(4) Have submitted proof of having a seller's permit under § 77.61(11),
Wis. Stats.
(5) Have successfully completed within the two years prior to the date
of application a responsible beverage server training course as
provided in § 125.04(5)(a)5, Wis. Stats., unless the applicant held,
within the past two years, a Class "A," "Class A" or "Class C" license
§ 194-4 IMPACT FEES § 194-5
181:273
§ 194-6. License conditions and restrictions.
In addition to the requirements imposed by provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes adopted by reference in this chapter, the following conditions and
restrictions shall apply to the issuance of licenses or permits pursuant to
this chapter:
or a Class "B" or "Class B" license or permit or a manager's or
operator's license.
B. (Reserved)
C. Corporations. No license or permit may be issued to any corporation
unless the agent of the corporation appointed under § 125.04(6), Wis.
Stats., and the officers and directors of the corporation meet the
qualifications of Subsections A and B above, except that Subsection
A(2) does not apply to operator's license applicants or the officers and
directors of corporations or the members or managers of limited
liability companies.
D. Operator's licenses. Subsection A(2) and (4) above do not apply to
applicants for operator's licenses.
E. The Village Board may, in its discretion, approve a license if in its
findings while determining the applicability of Subsection A(1) approval
is warranted.
A. Review prior to approval. No license or permit shall be issued to any
person or officer or director of a corporation unless the application
therefor shall first have been reviewed and a recommendation received
from the Police Department. [Amended 5-18-2015 by Ord. No.
15-17]
B. Tax delinquencies and claims. [Amended 5-18-2015 by Ord. No.
15-17]
(1) Premises. No initial or renewal alcohol beverage license shall be
granted for operation on any premises upon which property taxes,
personal property taxes, assessments, special assessments, utility
payments, or invoices are delinquent or other financial claims of
the Village are unpaid.
(2) Person. No initial or renewal license shall be granted to any person:
(a) Delinquent in payment of any property taxes, personal
property taxes, assessments, special assessments, utility
payments or invoices or other claims owed to the Village.
(b) Delinquent in payment of a forfeiture resulting from a violation
of any ordinance of the Village.
C. Sanitary, health and safety requirements. No license shall be issued
unless the premises to be licensed conforms to the sanitary, safety and
§ 194-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 194-6
181:274
health requirements of the State Building Code, the State Plumbing
Code, the rules and regulations of the State Board of Health applicable
to restaurants and the Building and Zoning Codes of the Village.25
D. Inspection of application and premises. The Village Clerk shall notify
the Fire & Rescue Department, the Building Inspection Department and
the Community Development Department of all license and permit
applications, which departments shall inspect, or cause to be inspected,
each application and premises to determine whether the applicant and
the premises sought to be licensed comply with the regulations and
ordinances thereto and shall furnish to the Village Clerk, in writing, the
information derived from such inspection. [Amended 5-18-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-17]
E. License quotas. "Class B" intoxicating liquor license and reserve "Class
B" intoxicating liquor license quotas. The number of persons and places
that may be issued "Class B" intoxicating liquor licenses and reserve
"Class B" intoxicating liquor licenses under this chapter is limited as
provided in § 125.51(4), Wis. Stats.
F. Closing hours. [Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-18; 2-6-2012
by Ord. No. 12-09; 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-17]
(1) Premises for which a retail liquor and/or fermented malt beverage
license has been issued either are prohibited from selling alcohol or
cannot be open for business during the following hours in
accordance with §§ 125.32(3) and 125.68(4), Wis. Stats.:
License
Off-Premises
(Carry-Outs) On-Premises Consumption
Class "A" beer 12:00 midnight
to *8:00 a.m.
Not permitted
Class "B" beer 12:00 midnight
to 6:00 a.m.
Monday to Friday, 2:00 a.m.
to 6:00 a.m.
Saturday to Sunday, 2:30 a.m.
to 6:00 a.m.
"Class A" liquor 9:00 p.m. to
*8:00 a.m.
Not permitted
"Class B" liquor 12:00 midnight
to 6:00 a.m.
Monday to Friday, 2:00 a.m.
to 6:00 a.m.
Saturday to Sunday, 2:30 a.m.
to 6:00 a.m.
"Class C" wine Not permitted Monday to Friday, 2:00 a.m.
to 6:00 a.m.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Building and Mechanical Code, and Ch. 420, Zoning.
§ 194-6 IMPACT FEES § 194-6
181:275
License
Off-Premises
(Carry-Outs) On-Premises Consumption
Saturday to Sunday, 2:30 a.m.
to 6:00 a.m.
NOTES:
At 1:00 a.m. on the second Sunday in March, daylight saving time
begins and the standard of time which licensed establishments
must operate under is advanced ahead one hour. Daylight saving
ends at 2:00 a.m. on the first Sunday in November. At that time,
the clocks are moved back one hour.
* In accordance with 2011 Act 97 effective 12-21-2011, the
allowable morning opening hours for retail beer and liquor stores
may be changed to 6:00 a.m., but a municipality may impose more
restrictive hours by ordinance. The morning opening hours for
Class A retail beer and liquor stores in the Village will continue to
be 8:00 a.m.
(2) Hotels and restaurants whose principal business is the furnishing
of food and lodging to patrons, bowling centers, movie theaters,
painting studios, indoor horseshoe-pitching facilities, curling clubs,
golf courses and golf clubhouses may remain open for the conduct
of their regular business, but no intoxicating liquors or fermented
malt beverages shall be sold during prohibited hours.
G. Posting licenses required. Licenses or permits issued under this
chapter shall be posted and displayed as provided in § 125.04(10), Wis.
Stats., and any licensee or permittee who shall fail to post his license or
permit as therein required shall be presumed to be operating without a
license.
H. Search of licensed premises. It shall be a condition of any license issued
hereunder that the licensed premises may be entered and inspected at
any reasonable hour by any police officer or other authorized officer of
the Village without any warrant, and the application for a license
hereunder shall be deemed a consent to this provision. Any refusal to
permit such inspection shall automatically operate as a revocation of
any license issued hereunder and shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
I. Time limit to open and continue operation under license.
(1) Within 90 days from the issuance of a "Class A" liquor license, Class
"A" fermented malt beverage license, "Class B" intoxicating liquor
license, reserve "Class B" intoxicating liquor license or a Class "B"
fermented malt beverage license, the licensee shall be open for
business with stock and equipment. In the event of his failure to do
business within such time, his license shall be subject to revocation
§ 194-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 194-6
181:276
by the Village Board after a public hearing. The Village Board may,
for good cause shown, extend said ninety-day period.
(a) The above requirement to be open for business within 90 days
may be extended to 180 days by the Village Board at the time
the license or licenses are granted if all of the following
conditions have been met:
[1] At the time of application, the real property sought to be
licensed does not have a permanent structure on it; and
[2] At the time of application, the real property sought to be
licensed is either owned by the applicant, or is under lease
to the applicant for a period greater than one year from
the date of application, or is subject to an accepted offer to
purchase, not conditioned on a future event. The deed,
lease or offer to purchase must be presented to the Village
Board for review; and
[3] At the time of application, the applicant submits a floor
plan for the structure intended to be constructed on the
real property, said floor plan specifying that portion of the
structure which is to be licensed; and
[4] The applicant agrees in writing, as part of the application,
to submit to the Village Board within 90 days of granting of
the license or licenses a copy of the building permit and, if
the applicant is not the owner or lessee of the property at
the time of the application, a copy of the deed showing
present ownership of the real property by the applicant;
and
[5] The applicant agrees in writing, as part of the application
to be diligent in all efforts to get the structure built and
stocked within 180 days of the granting of the license.
(b) The Village Board may extend the period of 180 days by a
period of time to be determined by the Board in its sound
discretion where the following conditions have been met:
[1] The licensee has complied with Subsection I(1)(a)[1]
through [5]; and
[2] The applicant shows a need for the extension that did not
arise out of a lack of diligence to satisfy any requirements
contained in this chapter.
(c) If, at any review hearing, the Village Board is satisfied that any
of the conditions in Subsection I(1)(a) and (b) of this section
have not been met, the Board may commence a revocation
hearing pursuant to the procedures contained within this
chapter.
§ 194-6 IMPACT FEES § 194-6
181:277
(2) If any licensee shall suspend or cease doing business for a period of
90 consecutive days or more, his "Class A" liquor license, Class "A"
fermented malt beverage license, "Class B" intoxicating liquor
license, reserve "Class B" intoxicating liquor license or Class "B"
fermented malt beverage license shall be subject to revocation by
the Village Board after a public hearing.
J. Disorderly conduct and gambling prohibited. Each licensed premises
shall at all times be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly,
riotous or indecent conduct or gambling shall be allowed at any time on
any licenses premises. It shall be unlawful for a licensee, his agent or
employee, to permit the following conduct on licensed premises:
(1) The performance of acts, or simulated acts, or "sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or
any sexual acts which are prohibited by law."
(2) The actual or simulated "touching, caressing or fondling of the
breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals."
(3) The actual or simulated "displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or
genitals."
(4) The permitting by a licensee, his agent or employee, or "any person
to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public
view any portion of his or her genitals or anus."
(5) The displaying of films, pictures or video tapes depicting acts of a
live performance of which was prohibited by the regulations quoted
above.26
K. Sales to underage persons restricted. No alcohol beverage shall be
sold, dispensed, given away or furnished to any underage person unless
accompanied by a parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the
legal drinking age.
L. Sales by clubs. No club shall sell intoxicating liquors or fermented malt
beverages except to members and guests invited by members.
M. Violation by agents or employees. A violation of this section by a duly
authorized agent or employee of a licensee shall constitute a violation
of the licensee.
N. Transfer of license. No license shall be transferable from person to
person, except as provided by § 125.04(12)(b), Wis. Stats., or from place
to place, as provided in § 125.04 (12)(a), Wis. Stats.
O. Form and expiration of licenses. All licenses shall be numbered in the
order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the specific
premises for which granted, the date of issuance, the fee paid and the
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Adult-Oriented Uses and Establishments.
§ 194-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 194-6
181:278
§ 194-7. Revocation, suspension and refusal to renew licenses.
A violation of this chapter by an authorized agent or employee of a licensee
or a permit holder shall constitute a violation by the licensee or permit
holder. Whenever the holder of any license or permit under this chapter
violates any portion of this chapter or any regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, any applicable provisions of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., or keeps or
maintains a disorderly or riotous, indecent or improper house, or has sold
or given away any intoxication liquor to any underage person or to any
person intoxicated or bordering upon intoxication, or to any known habitual
name of the licensee and, unless sooner revoked, shall expire on June
30 thereafter, except as otherwise provided.
P. Alcoholic beverages to be stored, sold, consumed or served only in
authorized parts of premises. No alcoholic beverage may be stored,
sold, consumed or served under a Class B license in any portion of the
building or premises not authorized in said license or outside of the
building on the premises or within any temporary shelter or tent on the
premises. The licensee must file a written request with the Village Clerk
to amend the premises description during the license year. It is within
the discretion of the Village Board to approve or disapprove of the
change. Decisions to grant an amendment to any licensed premises will
have no precedential effects. [Added 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-17]
Q. Limitations on other businesses; "Class A" intoxicating liquor license.
[Added 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-48; 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 15-27]
(1) No "Class A" intoxicating liquor license or permit may be granted
for any premises where any other business is conducted in
connection with the premises and shall apply to the following:
(a) Convenience stores.
(b) Other stores where commodities are sold, such as gasoline,
pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, and other nonfood products.
(c) Drug stores and pharmacies.
(2) Exception.
(a) This restriction does not apply if the premises for which the
license or permit is requested is connected to a retail grocer or
similar facility limited to the general sale of food products or to
any commercial retail establishment over 100,000 square feet
in size.
(b) In accordance with § 125.51(2)(e)2, an establishment issued a
Class "A" fermented malt beverage license shall, upon
application, be granted a "Class A" intoxicating liquor cider
only license.
§ 194-6 IMPACT FEES § 194-7
181:279
drunkard, proceedings for the revocation or suspension of such license or
permit may be instituted.
§ 194-8. Violations and penalties.
A. Procedure. The provisions of § 125.12(2) and (3), Wis. Stats., shall be
applicable to proceedings for the revocation, suspension and refusal to
renew all licenses granted under this chapter.
B. Repossession of license. Whenever any license under this chapter shall
be revoked or suspended pursuant to this section, it shall be the duty of
the Village Clerk to notify the licensee of such suspension or revocation
and to notify the Police Chief, who shall take physical possession of the
license wherever it may be found and file it in the Village Clerk's office.
C. Effect of revocation of license. Whenever any license shall be revoked,
at least 12 months from the time of such revocation shall elapse before
another license shall be granted for the same premises, and 12 months
shall elapse before any other license shall be granted to the person
whose license was revoked.
D. No refund of fees. No license or permit fee shall be refunded if a license
or permit is surrendered, suspended or revoked for cause.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any condition
included on a license application or on the license itself or who provides
any false or inaccurate information on a written application shall be
subject to a penalty of not more than $500, unless a greater maximum
penalty is specifically provided for in this chapter, except that where a
lower maximum penalty shall be provided by Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., for
any specific offense such maximum penalty shall prevail for the same
offense committed in violation of this chapter.
B. Nothing in this section shall in any way diminish the authority of the
Village Board to suspend, revoke or nonrenew any license issued
pursuant to this chapter for any violation of this chapter or other Village
ordinance or state law.
§ 194-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 194-8
181:280
Chapter 203
(RESERVED)
Chapter 214
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dog licensing — See Ch. 119, Art. I.
Mass public assemblies — See Ch. 125.
Escorts and escort services — See Ch. 170.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 194.
Manufactured and mobile homes — See Ch.
221.
Massage therapists — See Ch. 225.
Towing — See Ch. 332.
Business licenses — See Ch. 420, Art. VII.
§ 214-1. License fees enumerated.
A license shall be required for the sale of each of the following businesses
or activities at the indicated license fee, which shall be for one year unless
otherwise indicated:
A. Building and zoning permits: Refer to applicable chapter(s).27
B. Cigarette: $100 per year.
C. Business license pursuant to Article VII of Chapter 420, the Village
Zoning Ordinance.28 [Added 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-41]
D. (Reserved)29
E. Dog licensing. [Amended 10-7-2002 by Ord. No. 02-73; 12-20-2004
by Ord. No. 04-55; 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-40]
(1) Male/female not spayed/neutered: $20 per year; after July 1 (for
dogs five months of age after July 1 only): $10. [Amended
11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-45A]
(2) Male/female spayed/neutered: $15 per year; after July 1 (for dogs
five months of age after July 1 only): $7.50. [Amended
11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-45A]
(3) Penalty. If an owner fails to obtain a license prior to April 1 of each
year for a dog five months of age or over, or within 30 days of
27.Editor's Note: See Part III of the Code.
28.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, concerning the license fee for a cabaret, was repealed
5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-14.
29.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, providing the per-season for Christmas trees, as
amended, was repealed 6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-20.
§ 194-8 IMPACT FEES § 214-1
181:281
acquiring ownership of a licensable dog, or if the owner fails to
obtain a license on or before the dog reaches a licensable age: $5.
(4) Dog park tag fees: Ingram Park. [Added 8-5-2013 by Ord. No.
13-34]
(a) Annual.
[1] Village resident for first dog: $20.
[2] Village resident, senior/disabled: $10.
[3] Nonresident for first dog: $25.
[4] Additional tag for each dog (up to two additional): $5.
[5] Annual tag replacement fee: $5.
(b) Daily.
[1] Village resident per dog per day: $2.
[2] Nonresident per dog per day: $5.
F. Escorts and escort services: [Added 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-0430]
(1) Escort services: $500 per calendar year.
(2) Escorts: $500 per calendar year.
G. Fermented malt beverages.
(1) Class "A": $250 per year. [Amended 3-7-2005]
(2) Class "B": $100 per year.
(3) Temporary Class "B" picnic license, beer: $10 per event.
(4) Temporary "Class B" picnic license, wine: $10 per event.
(5) Wholesaler's fermented malt beverage: $25 per year.
(6) Intoxicating liquors.
(a) "Class A": $500 per year.
(b) Regular "Class B": $500 per year.
(c) "Class B, issued to a full service restaurant or hotel: $500 per
year.
(d) Reserve "Class B": $10,000 initial fee; $500 each year
thereafter.
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections F
through Q as Subsections G through R, respectively.
§ 214-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 214-1
181:282
§ 214-2. General licensing requirements.
(e) "Class C" wine: $100 per year.
H. Operator's license: $65 for two years, which includes fee for police
check. (Duplicate license: $10.) [Amended 5-19-2003 by Ord. No.
03-26; 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-43; 5-18-2015 by Ord. No.
15-18]
I. Provisional operator's license: $15 (valid for 60 days). [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 03-26; 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-43]
J. Temporary operator's license: $20, which includes fee for police check
(valid for one to 14 days). [Amended 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 03-26;
7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-43]
K. (Reserved)31
L. Large assemblies: $100 per assembly.
M. Mobile home parks: $100 for each 50 spaces or portion thereof
(minimum $100) per calendar year. [Amended [1-7-2013 by Ord. No.
13-04]
N. Peddlers, canvassers, solicitors and transient merchants: $30, which
includes fee for police check, for three months. [Amended 6-2006;
7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-43; 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
O. Massage therapist: $50 per calendar year. [Amended 1-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-04]
P. Secondhand dealer's licenses: [Added 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-0432
(1) Secondhand article dealer's license: $75 per calendar year.
(2) Secondhand jewelry dealer's license: $75 per calendar year.
(3) Temporary secondhand article dealer's license: $35 per event.
(4) Temporary secondhand jewelry dealer's license: $35 per event.
Q. (Reserved)33
R. Vehicle wrecker or towing service business: $25 application fee, plus
$100 license fee per year.34
31.Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, concerning the license fee for junk dealers, was
repealed 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-14.
32.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections P
through R as Subsection Q through S, respectively.
33.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection Q, providing the yearly fee for drive-in theaters, as
amended, was repealed 6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-20.
34.Editor's Note: Former Subsection S, vicious animals, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 11-4-2013 by Ord. No. 13-53.
§ 214-1 IMPACT FEES § 214-2
181:283
A. Terms interchangeable. The words "license" and "permit" as used
throughout this chapter shall be interchangeable
B. License required. No person shall engage in any business or activity
enumerated in § 214-1 without a license therefor as provided in this
chapter.
C. Application. Application for a license required by this chapter shall be
made to the Clerk on a form furnished by the Village and shall contain
such information as may be required by the provisions of this chapter or
as may be otherwise required by the Village Board.
D. Fees to accompany application; refunds.
(1) Fees to accompany application. License fees imposed under § 214-1
shall accompany the license application. If a license is granted, the
Clerk shall issue the applicant a receipt for his license fee.
(2) Refunds. No fee paid shall be refunded unless the license is denied.
(3) Automatic revocation. For whatever reason, licenses granted and
for which the fee is not tendered within 60 days after granting are
automatically revoked.
E. Tax delinquencies and claims. [Added 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-1435;
amended 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-18]
(1) Premises. No initial or renewal license or permit shall be granted
for operation on any premises upon which property taxes, personal
property taxes, assessments, special assessments, utility payments,
or invoices are delinquent or other financial claims of the Village
are unpaid. [Amended 6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-25]
(2) Person or legal entity. No initial or renewal license or permit shall
be granted to any person or legal entity: [Amended 6-19-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-25]
(a) Delinquent in payment of any property taxes, personal
property taxes, assessments, special assessments, utility
payments or invoices or other claims owed to the Village.
(b) Delinquent in payment of a forfeiture resulting from a violation
of any ordinance of the Village.
(3) In accordance with § 66.0115, Wis. Stats., a dog license issued
under § 174.07 is exempt from this provision.
F. Issuance by Clerk; approval by Village Board; exceptions. Unless
otherwise designated, licenses required by this chapter shall be issued
by the Clerk only with the approval of the Board, except the Clerk may
issue the following licenses subject to the standards established by this
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections E
through O as Subsections F through P, respectively.
§ 214-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 214-2
181:284
chapter without prior approval of the Board: [Added 1-7-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-0436; amended 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-18]
(1) Building and zoning permits (issued by the Community
Development Department).
(2) Cigarette license.
(3) Dog license.
(4) Escort and escort service licenses, upon approval of the
Community Development Department and the Chief of Police.
(5) Peddlers, canvassers, solicitors and transient merchants, upon
approval of the Chief of Police.
(6) Massage therapist license, upon approval of the Chief of Police.
(7) Secondhand article dealer and/or secondhand jewelry dealer
licenses, upon approval of the Community Development
Department and the Chief of Police.
(8) Operator license, upon approval of the Chief of Police.
(9) Temporary Class "B" beer and wine (picnic) license, upon approval
of the Chief of Police.
G. Terms of licenses. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on June 30
in the year of issuance or December 31 when term is noted as a
calendar year or unless issued for a shorter term, when they shall
expire at midnight of the last effective day of the license or unless
otherwise provided by this chapter or state laws. [Amended 1-7-2013
by Ord. No. 13-04]
H. Form of license. All licenses issued hereunder shall show the dates of
issue and expiration and the activity licensed and shall be signed by the
Clerk.
I. Record of licenses. The Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued
J. Display of licenses. All licenses hereunder shall be displayed upon the
premises or vehicle for which issued or, if carried on the person, shall
be displayed to any officer of the Village upon request.
K. Compliance with ordinances required. It shall be a condition of holding
a license under this chapter that the licensee comply with all
ordinances of the Village. Failure to do so shall be cause for suspension
or revocation of the license.
36.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection F(4) and (5) as
Subsection F(5) and (6), respectively.
§ 214-2 IMPACT FEES § 214-2
181:285
L. Transfer of licenses. All licenses issued hereunder shall be personal to
whom issued, and no license shall be transferred without the consent of
the Board.
M. Exemptions. No license other than a liquor or beer license shall be
required under this chapter for any nonprofit educational, charitable,
civic, military or religious organization if the activity which would
otherwise be licensed is conducted for the benefit of the members or for
the benefit of the public generally.
N. Renewal of licenses. All applications for renewal of license hereunder
shall be made to the Clerk at least 30 days prior to the expiration date
of the license term. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-04]
O. Consent to inspection. An applicant for a license under this chapter
thereby consents to the entry of police or authorized representatives of
the Village upon the licensed premises at all reasonable hours for the
purposes of inspection and search, and consents to removal from the
premises and introduction into evidence in prosecutions for violations
of this chapter all things found therein in violation of this chapter or
state law.
P. Revocation and suspension of licenses.
(1) Except as otherwise provided, any license issued under this
chapter may be revoked for cause by the Village Board. No license
shall be revoked except upon written verified complaint filed with
the Village Board by the Village President, a member of the Village
Board, the Chief of Police, the Village Administrator or a resident of
the Village. The licensee shall be served with a written copy of the
charges and shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the
Village Board. The licensee shall be given notice of such hearing,
which shall be not more than 20 or less than five days after notice,
except as otherwise agreed between the parties.
(2) At such hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to be represented by
counsel, shall have the right to present and cross-examine
witnesses and, upon request, may have subpoenas issued by the
Village President or presiding officer of the Village Board to compel
the attendance of witnesses.
(3) After hearing the evidence, the Village Board may revoke such
license or impose a limited period of suspension. The determination
of the Board shall be final, subject to review under Chapter 5 of the
Code of the Village of Pleasant Prairie, provided that the licensee
shall not be entitled to a further hearing unless granted by the
Village Board.
(4) The Police Department shall repossess any license revoked
hereunder.
§ 214-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 214-2
181:286
§ 214-3. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the suspension or revocation of a license issued under this
chapter, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any
regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as
provided by Chapter 1, § 1-4, of the Code of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
Chapter 221
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 221. Zoning Ordinance — See Ch. 420.
§ 221-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
Section 101.935, Wis. Stats., relating to manufactured/mobile home
communities, and § 710.15, Wis. Stats., Mobile home park regulations,
are adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. In case of conflict
between this chapter and § Comm 2.33, Fees,37 Wis. Admin. Code; Ch.
Comm 26, Manufactured Home Communities, Wis. Admin. Code; Ch. ATCP
125, Mobile Home Parks, Wis. Admin. Code, the more stringent provisions
shall apply. This chapter is in addition to and does not supplant § 420-117
of the Village Zoning Ordinance. In the event of a conflict between this
chapter and § 420-117 of the Village Zoning Ordinance, the more stringent
provisions shall apply. A copy of the applicable statutes and Wisconsin
Administrative Code sections shall be kept on file in the office of the Village
Clerk.
§ 221-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning appears from the
context, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A mobile home, or a structure that is designed
to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation and that is
certified by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development as
complying with the standards established under 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 to 5425.
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY — Any park, court, site,
lot, parcel, or tract of land designed, maintained, intended or used for
(5) If the licensee does not apply for a hearing within the time
provided, the license may be revoked by the Village Board.
(6) The Village President or Village Board may suspend the license of a
licensee hereunder without hearing for not to exceed 10 days.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. Comm 2, Fee Schedule, § Comm 2.33, Manufactured homes.
§ 214-2 IMPACT FEES § 221-2
181:287
the purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for three or more
mobile or manufactured/mobile homes and shall include all buildings used
or intended for use as a part of the equipment thereof, whether or not
a charge is made for the use of the mobile home park and its facilities.
"Manufactured/mobile home community" shall not include automobile or
mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for
the purposes of inspection and sale.
MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle or structure intended for or capable of
human habitation, or designed primarily for sleeping purposes, mounted
on wheels or jacks and/or capable of being moved from place to place,
either by its own power or by power supplied by some vehicle used or to
be used, excepting a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks
and excluding recreational vehicles as defined in Chapter 420 of this Code.
This definition shall be construed in a manner consistent with the definition
of "mobile home" in § 101.91(10), Wis. Stats.
OPERATOR — Any person engaged in the business of renting sites in
a manufactured/mobile home community to tenants. "Operator" includes
officers, representatives, agents and employees.
PERSON — Shall be construed to include an individual, partnership, firm,
company or corporation, whether tenant, owner, lessee, licensee, or their
agent, heir or assigns.
RENTAL AGREEMENT — An agreement between an operator and a tenant
for the rental of a site.
SCREENING — The procedure used by an operator to determine that a
prospective tenant meets the operator's minimum financial standards and
other reasonable requirements established by the operator.
SECURITY DEPOSIT — The total of all payments and deposits given by
a tenant to the operator as security for the performance of the tenant's
obligations and includes all rent payments in excess of one month's prepaid
rent.
SITE — Any plot of land which is rented or offered for rental for the
accommodation of a manufactured/mobile home used for residential
purposes. It does not include a plot of land rented for the accommodation of
a manufactured/mobile home which is:
TENANT — Any person renting a site from an operator.
UNIT — A section of ground in a manufactured/mobile home community
of not less than 600 square feet of unoccupied space designated as the
location for only one automobile and/or one manufactured or mobile home.
UTILITY SERVICE —
A. Occupied on a strictly seasonal basis; or
Owned by the operator and occupied by the operator herself or himself
as a residence.
B.
A. Electricity, water, sewer, telephone, and natural gas.
§ 221-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 221-2
181:288
VILLAGE — The Village of Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin.
§ 221-3. Fire extinguishers required.
§ 221-4. Parking of home; use as living quarters; electrical
connections; waste.
§ 221-5. Regulations for manufactured/mobile home communities.
Liquefied petroleum gas other than liquefied petroleum gas in portable
containers.
B.
Fuel oil supplied through a permanent central system in the
manufactured/mobile home community.
C.
A. Each manufactured/mobile home occupied as a place of human
habitation under any of the provisions of this chapter shall be equipped
with a fire extinguisher, conveniently attached thereto; such
extinguisher to be of one unit of fire protection capacity and of a type
suitable for extinguishing Class A or Class B fires, approved by the
Pleasant Prairie Fire & Rescue Department.
B. The use of liquid petroleum gas in occupied manufactured/mobile
homes shall conform in every particular to the laws, rules and
regulations of the State of Wisconsin governing such use.
A. The parking of any occupied manufactured/mobile home outside an
approved manufactured/mobile home community as previously defined
is hereby prohibited.
B. No manufactured/mobile home shall be used for living quarters upon
any street, alley, or public way in the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
C. No person, firm, or corporation shall make any electrical connection for
any mobile home to any building or other source of electricity without
permit and approval of the Electrical Inspector.
D. No person, firm, or corporation shall deposit garbage, waste, water,
rubbish or other waste combustible materials on the premises where an
occupied mobile home is parked or on adjoining premises. Garbage and
rubbish and other waste combustible materials and recycling materials
shall be placed in suitable containers for collection by the Village
pursuant to § 292-6 of the Village Code.38
A. Site and operational plan.
(1) Every manufactured/mobile home or manufactured/mobile home
community shall submit and be in compliance with a site and
operational plan zoning requirements set forth in the Village Code.
The community shall be located on a well-drained area, and the
premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 292, Solid Waste and Recycling, § 292-6, Collection of solid waste.
§ 221-2 IMPACT FEES § 221-5
181:289
accumulation of storm- or other water. No manufactured/mobile
home or manufactured/mobile home community shall be located in
any area that is situated so that drainage or other sources of filth
can be deposited in its location.
(2) Manufactured/mobile home units shall be clearly defined, and the
community shall be so arranged that all units shall abut on a public
or private street for a distance of at least 16 feet. Such street shall
be paved, snowplowed and maintained in good condition, having
natural drainage, be well lighted at night and shall not be
obstructed at any time.
(3) All private and/or public streets shall be paved and well lighted at
night.
(4) New occupied manufactured/mobile homes in a manufactured/
mobile home community shall be located within the community in
accordance with the R-12 Zoning District requirements as specified
in § 420-117 of this Code.
B. Community management.
(1) In every manufactured/mobile home community there shall be
located the office of the attendant or person in charge of such
community. A copy of the community license and of this chapter
shall be posted therein, and the park register shall at all times be
kept in such office.
(2) It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge,
together with the licensee, to:
(a) Keep a register of all occupants, to be open at all times to
inspection by state and federal officers and by the Village
Board, which shall show for all occupants:
[1] Names and addresses.
[2] Number of children of school age.
[3] State of legal residence.
[4] Dates of entrance and departure.
[5] License number of all manufactured/mobile homes; make,
model, and year; and towing or other vehicles.
[6] States issuing such licensing.
[7] Place of last location and length of stay.
[8] Place of employment of each occupant.
(b) Maintain the community in a clean, orderly and sanitary
condition at all times.
§ 221-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 221-5
181:290
(c) Insure that the provisions of this chapter are complied with
and enforced. The manager shall promptly report any
violations to the proper authorities.
(d) Report to the Kenosha County Health Department all cases of
persons or animals infected or suspected of being infected with
any communicable disease.
(e) Collect the monthly municipal permit fee as provided in
§ 221-12 of this chapter. A book shall be kept current showing
the names of the persons paying service charges and the
amount paid, which monies are the property of the Village.
(f) Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises. Every
manufactured/mobile home community shall be equipped at all
times with fire-extinguishing equipment in good working order,
of such type, size and number and so located within the park as
to satisfy applicable reasonable regulations of the Pleasant
Prairie Fire & Rescue Department.
(g) The community manager is required to comply with the Village
garbage and recycling collection requirements per Chapter
292, Solid Waste and Recycling, of the Village Code of
Ordinances.
C. Rental agreement; requirements.
(1) Every rental agreement shall be in writing. A copy of the rental
agreement shall be furnished to the tenant at the time the rental
agreement is executed. If a manufactured/mobile home is
purchased from or through the operator, a copy of the rental
agreement shall be furnished to the tenant before the tenant signs
the manufactured/mobile home purchase contract. The rental
agreement shall conspicuously set forth all terms and conditions
affecting the rental of the site and shall include:
(a) The amount of rent for each rent paying period and all
property, service and facilities provided by the operator and
included in the rent.
(b) The amount of any security deposit, installation charge, or
other charge payable by the tenant under the rental agreement
but not included in the rent, including but not limited to
charges for utility services provided through the operator's
facilities. If utility service charges are based on the amount of
utility service used, the rental agreement shall set forth either
the specific rate or the method by which the charges are to be
computed.
(c) Rules and regulations which shall be included in or attached to
the main body of the rental agreement.
§ 221-5 IMPACT FEES § 221-5
181:291
(d) The approximate size of the site and its location in the
community.
(e) The amount of the municipal permit fee assessed by the Village
and payable by the tenant. If the monthly fee is not known, an
approximation shall be given.
(f) A notice that the operator reserves the right to screen the
purchaser of a tenant's manufactured/mobile home before
renting a manufactured/mobile home site to the purchaser,
subject to § 710.15, Wis. Stats.
(g) A disclosure as to whether the manufactured/mobile home
community contains an emergency shelter and, if the park has
an emergency shelter, the location of the emergency shelter
and procedures for its use.
(2) The initial, and each succeeding rental agreement, shall be for a
term of no less than one year, unless a shorter term is requested in
writing by the tenant and agreed to by the operator. Under any
agreement for a rental term of two months or more, rental
payments shall, at the option of the tenant, be payable in equal
monthly installments.
(3) The operator shall, at the time the rental agreement is entered into,
and throughout the term of the rental agreement, make available to
the tenant the name, address, and telephone number of a person
who may be contacted concerning the maintenance of facilities and
services provided by the operator. Such information shall be
included in the tenant's copy of the rental agreement or in a
separate written notice furnished to the tenant.
(4) Rent and other charges under the rental agreement may not be
increased during the term of the rental agreement. This section
does not apply to:
(a) Municipal parking and building/zoning or other permit fees
charged by the Village.
(b) Charges for utility services delivered and billed directly to the
tenant by a public utility or other outside source.
(c) Charges for utility services purchased by the operator and
delivered and billed to the tenant by the operator but not
included in the rent, if the increase is solely to cover an
increase in charges to the operator by the supplier of the utility
service.
D. Rental agreement limitations.
(1) No community operator may restrict the type of material used for
manufactured/mobile home steps or the type of air-conditioning
equipment serving manufactured/mobile homes in a manufactured/
§ 221-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 221-5
181:292
mobile home community, unless such restrictions are required by
law or are uniformly applied manufactured/mobile home
community requirements made a condition of the tenant's original
rental agreement. Any such restrictions, however, may not be
instituted during the occupancy of an original tenant under the
same, an amended, a renewed or a new rental agreement. Not
withstanding the foregoing, if a tenant's manufactured/mobile
home steps are required by law to be replaced, the community
operator may require that they be made to comply with current
community standards.
(2) No community operator may require the removal of a permanently
attached manufactured/mobile home towing tongue as a condition
of renting a site for the accommodation of a manufactured/mobile
home.
(3) It shall be unlawful to make, as a condition of a new or renewed
rental agreement, the removal of any vehicles, permitted under a
previous rental agreement with the same tenant, unless sufficient
other parking space is provided to the tenant at no charge.
E. Tie-in sales; separate or discriminatory charges. No operator shall:
(1) Require, as a condition to the rental of any site, the purchase of a
manufactured/mobile home from the operator or any dealer,
manufacturer, or agent named by the operator.
(2) Represent to any person that the purchase of a manufactured/
mobile home from the operator or any dealer, manufacturer, or
agent named by the operator will give the purchaser an advantage
over others in the rental or continued occupancy of a site.
(3) Discriminate or threaten to discriminate in rental charges or in any
other respect against a tenant for failure of the tenant to purchase
a manufactured/mobile home from the operator or any dealer,
manufacturer, or agent named by the operator.
(4) Discriminate in rental charges by granting a discount in rental
charges or in any other charges to a tenant who purchase a
manufactured/mobile home from the operator or any, dealer,
manufacturer, or agent named by the operator.
(5) Solicit or receive any payment or other thing of value from any
seller of a manufactured/mobile home for agreeing to rent a site to
the purchaser of such manufactured/mobile home.
(6) Solicit or receive any payment or other thing of value from any
person upon the representation or understanding that such
consideration will give that person an advantage over others in the
rental or continued occupancy of a site.
§ 221-5 IMPACT FEES § 221-5
181:293
(7) Use a manufactured/mobile home site to display a manufactured/
mobile home offered for sale, or rent a site to a manufactured/
mobile home dealer for purposes other than accommodation of a
manufactured/mobile home occupied as a residence, if the use or
rental of the site results in there being no site in the manufactured/
mobile home community available to a prospective tenant who does
not purchase a manufactured/mobile home from the operator or
renting dealer.
F. Manufactured/mobile home relocation.
(1) No tenant shall be required to relocate a manufactured/mobile
home within a community during the term of the rental agreement,
or to assume the cost of any required relocation under a new or
renewal rental agreement, except in an emergency or where the
tenant has violated the terms and conditions of the rental
agreement. This does not apply to a manufactured/mobile home
which has been vacated by the tenant.
(2) Any required relocation shall, except in an emergency, be preceded
by written notice setting forth the reason for such relocation.
Notice shall be given within the time period required under Ch.
704, Wis. Stats., for termination of tenancies.
G. Prohibited consideration of age of manufactured/mobile home.
(1) An operator may not deny a resident the opportunity to enter into
or renew, and may not include, exclude or alter any terms of, a
lease to continue to locate a manufactured/mobile home in the
community solely or in any part on the basis of the age of the
manufactured/mobile home.
(2) An operator may not require the removal of a manufactured/mobile
home from a community solely or in any part on the basis of the age
of the manufactured/mobile home, regardless of whether the
ownership or occupancy of the manufactured/mobile home has
changed or will change.
(3) It shall be considered a prohibited consideration of the age of a
manufactured/mobile home to require a tenant to make alterations,
modifications or improvements to a manufactured/mobile home as
a condition of renewal of a lease or a change in the ownership or
occupancy of a manufactured/mobile home, when the
manufactured/mobile home is otherwise in good repair and it is in
conformance with applicable governmental regulations.
(4) It shall be considered a prohibited consideration of the age of a
manufactured/mobile home to require a tenant to make alterations,
modifications or improvements to a manufactured/mobile home
that is older that five years, when the mobile home is otherwise in
good repair and in conformance with applicable governmental
regulations, and the manufactured/mobile home is in compliance
§ 221-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 221-5
181:294
with community rules and regulations in effect at the time the
manufactured/mobile home originally entered the community.
H. Prohibited consideration of change in ownership or occupancy of
manufactured/mobile home.
(1) An operator may not require the removal of a manufactured/mobile
home from a community solely or in any part because the
ownership or occupancy of the manufactured/mobile home has
changed or will change. An operator may refuse to enter into an
initial lease with a prospective resident or manufactured/mobile
home occupant for any other lawful reason.
(2) It shall be considered a prohibited consideration of a change in
ownership or occupancy of a manufactured/mobile home to require
a tenant to make alterations, modifications or improvements to a
manufactured/mobile home as a condition of permitting a
manufactured/mobile home to remain in a community at the time of
a change in ownership or occupancy, when the manufactured/
mobile home is otherwise in good repair and it is in conformance
with governmental regulations.
I. No interest in real estate; screening permitted. Neither § 710.15(3)(b)
nor § 710-15(4), Wis. Stats., creates or extends any interest in real
estate or prohibits the lawful screening of prospective residents and
manufactured/mobile home occupants by an operator.
J. Changes in rental terms or community rules.
(1) If any change or increase in rent or fees, or any other substantial
change in the terms or conditions of tenancy, is to be made in
connection with the renewal of any rental agreement, a copy of the
proposed new agreement, or amendments to the existing
agreement, shall be furnished to the tenant, in writing, at least 28
days prior to the date on which the proposed new agreement is to
take effect. All changes shall be specifically brought to the tenant's
attention by a separate statement on the proposed rental
agreement or in a separate written document attached to the rental
agreement. The operator or a representative of the operator shall
meet with tenants, or any group of tenants, on the proposed
changes, at their request. Nothing in this section shall be construed
as interfering with the operator's right to terminate any tenancy in
accordance with § 710.15 and Ch. 704, Wis. Stats., and § ATCP
125.00 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, if the tenant declines
to accept the proposed new agreement. This section does not apply
to any changes in Village ordinances that may affect the community
rules.
(2) Rules and regulations which substantially affect the rights or duties
of tenants or the operator under§ 710.15, Wis. Stats., or this
chapter may not be created or changed during the term of the
rental agreement. This includes but is not limited to:
§ 221-5 IMPACT FEES § 221-5
181:295
(a) Rules setting standards and requirements for skirting,
weatherproofing or frostproofing and auxiliary buildings or
sheds.
(b) Rules limiting the occupancy of manufactured/mobile homes
with respect to the number or age of occupants.
(c) Vehicle parking rules imposed by the park operator.
(d) Rules restricting or regulating overnight guests.
(e) Rules restricting or regulating pets.
(f) Rules requiring tenants to repair or maintain their
manufactured/mobile homes.
(g) Rules defining the tenant's and operator's rights and
responsibilities with regard to maintenance of the site.
(h) Rules restricting or regulating tenants' outdoor antennas or
satellite dishes.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in this section, a community operator
may change or create general community rules and regulations
during the term of any rental agreement or tenancy, provided all
tenants are given at least 28 days' prior written notice of any
proposed change and an opportunity to meet with the operator or a
representative of the operator on the proposed change before it
takes effect.
(4) Notice of proposed changes in rental terms and conditions or
community rules and regulations under this section may be
furnished to the tenant in person or by mail. Notice by mail shall be
considered actual notice.
K. Charges for utility services.
(1) Charges for a utility service provided through the operator's
facilities, if not included in the rent, shall be based on the amount
of the utility service used by tenants. Charges for television service
provided through the operator's facilities may be assessed in the
form of a uniform charge to subscribing tenants, subject to
Paragraph (b). Charges, or the method of computing charges for
utility services provided through the operator's facilities shall be
set forth in the rental agreement under § ATCP 125.03(1)(b).
(2) If CATV or broadband service is provided by the operator but not
included in the rent, the operator may not limit a tenant's access to
CATV or broadband service provided by an outside source. This
subsection is not intended to deny to an operator any right which
the operator may have to compensation from a cable television
company for easements or other use of the operator's property.
§ 221-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 221-5
181:296
(3) Charges for utility services provided through the operator's
facilities, if based on amounts used, shall be periodically invoiced in
writing to tenants. Invoices shall specify both the charge and the
amount of the utility service used.
(4) Charges for utility services provided through the operator's
facilities, if not included in the rent, shall be competitive with retail
prices charged for the same or equivalent services by public
utilities or other local sources. If a utility service is provided
directly to tenants by a public utility or other outside source, no
additional charge may be assessed for the service by the operator.
(5) If a manufactured/mobile home community operator purchases
water and sewer service and resells the service to the occupants of
the manufactured/mobile home community, the maximum
allowable water and sewer bill to the average user within the
manufactured/mobile home community may not exceed the lesser
of the manufactured/mobile home community's water and sewer
bill, plus 30%, divided by the number of occupied lots within the
community, or the retail rates of the local municipality's water and
sewer operation applied to the average user.
(6) A manufactured/mobile home community operator may establish
water and sewer rates in excess of those set forth in Subsection
K(5), if the operator has been granted permission by the Public
Service Commission pursuant to PSC 186.31, or has been granted
permission by any other state agency that regulates such water and
sewer rates, as successor agency to the Public Service Commission.
L. Restrictions on choice of vendors. No operator may restrict the choice
of vendors from whom a tenant may purchase goods or services. This
section does not apply to:
(1) Utility services.
(2) Services provided by the operator in the installation of a
manufactured/mobile home on a site or in the removal of a
manufactured/mobile home from a site.
(3) Snow removal, lawn care, or similar site maintenance services
performed by the operator upon the failure of a tenant to fulfill the
tenant's site maintenance obligations under the rental agreement.
No charges may be imposed for site maintenance services
performed by the operator under this subsection unless the tenant,
if available, is given prior notice and a reasonable opportunity to
perform the tenant's obligations under the rental agreement.
Charges for site maintenance services shall be set forth in the
rental agreement.
(4) Services involving the transportation of a manufactured/mobile
home to or from a site within the manufactured/mobile home
community, if the operator can show that the person providing the
§ 221-5 IMPACT FEES § 221-5
181:297
service has damaged the park during a previous move and failed to
compensate the operator for the damages.
(5) A nondiscriminatory prohibition against sales solicitations within
the manufactured/mobile home community.
M. Entrance and exit fees. No operator may charge an entrance fee or exit
fee in return for allowing the movement of a manufactured/mobile
home into or out of a manufactured/mobile home community. This
section does not apply to:
(1) Periodic payments for the rental of a site, pursuant to the rental
agreement.
(2) A security deposit not exceeding the amount of three months' rent
or $350, whichever is less.
(3) Material and labor costs incurred by the operator to move a
tenant's manufactured/mobile home into or out of the
manufactured/mobile home community, to install the
manufactured/mobile home on a site or remove it from a site, or to
connect or disconnect utility services. The amount of any charges,
or the basis upon which charges are to be calculated, shall be
clearly set forth in the rental agreement.
N. Sale of manufactured/mobile home; transfer of tenancy. No operator
may:
(1) Require any tenant to designate the operator, or any person named
by the operator, as agent for the sale of a tenant's manufactured/
mobile home or unreasonably restrict the sale of a tenant's
manufactured/mobile home by the tenant or an agent of the
tenant's own choosing.
(2) Solicit or receive any payment or other thing of value as a condition
to the assignment or sublease of a rental agreement by a tenant or
as a condition to the transfer of tenancy to a buyer of the tenant's
manufactured/mobile home.
(3) Sell, for placement in a manufactured/mobile home community
owned or operated by the operator, any manufactured/mobile home
purchased from a tenant who was prohibited from selling the home
directly for placement in the manufactured/mobile home
community.
(4) Refuse to rent a manufactured/mobile home site to the purchaser of
a tenant's manufactured/mobile home except for a reason specified
under § 710.15(5m), Wis. Stats. This section does not prohibit the
screening of prospective tenants by an operator.
(5) Limit a tenant's ability to post, on the tenant's manufactured/
mobile home or on the site on which the manufactured/mobile
home is located, a "for sale" sign or other advertisement
§ 221-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 221-5
181:298
announcing the tenant's offer to sell the tenant's manufactured/
mobile home if the limitation is not applied uniformly to every
person, including the operator and any manufactured/mobile home
dealer, who sells or offers to sell a manufactured/mobile home on
site in the manufactured/mobile home community.
(6) This section does not create or extend any interest in real estate or
prohibit the lawful screening of new tenants by the operator.
O. Termination of tenancy.
(1) Whenever an operator terminates any rental agreement or refuses,
upon the expiration of a lease, to renew the lease or to enter into a
new rental agreement, the operator shall provide the tenant with
written notice setting forth the reason for such termination or
refusal. Notices of termination shall comply with the requirements
of § 710.15 and Ch. 704, Wis. Stats., as applicable. If the rental
agreement does not comply with the requirements of § ATCP
125.03(1) (introduction) and (2), the operator shall comply with the
notice requirements of § 704.17(2), Wis. Stats., when terminating a
tenancy, unless the community operator or tenant proves that other
notice requirements under § 704.17(1) or (3), Wis. Stats., are
applicable.
(2) No operator shall terminate a rental agreement or refuse, upon
expiration of a lease, to renew the lease or to enter into a new
rental agreement for the reason that:
(a) The tenant has reported a violation, by the operator, of this
chapter or any other law to any governmental authority or filed
suit alleging such violation. Any termination, refusal to renew a
lease, or refusal to enter into a new lease shall be presumed to
be retaliatory if committed within six months after the tenant
has reported a violation by the operator of this chapter or any
other law, to any governmental authority or within six months
after the tenant has filed suit alleging such violation. In order
to overcome this presumption that such termination or refusal
is retaliatory, the operator must show by a preponderance of
evidence that such termination was based on good cause.
(b) The tenant is a member of a tenants' union or association.
(c) The operator wishes to make a site available to a person
purchasing a manufactured/mobile home from the operator or
an agent of the operator.
(3) No operator may solicit or receive any payment or other thing of
value, except for normal rental payments, in return for permitting a
tenant to leave the tenant's manufactured/mobile home in the
community upon termination of tenancy.
P. Prohibited practices. No operator shall:
§ 221-5 IMPACT FEES § 221-5
181:299
§ 221-6. Existing communities.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit or prevent the
licensing of any manufactured/mobile home community existing on
September 28, 1998. Should any of these existing manufactured/mobile
home communities wish to expand, they shall then be compelled to bring
their additional community area into compliance with the provisions of the
Village's ordinances.
§ 221-7. Inspection and enforcement.
No manufactured/mobile home community license shall be issued until the
Village Clerk has notified the Village Board and the Village Board shall
have inspected each application and the premises on which manufactured/
mobile homes will be located to insure compliance with the regulations,
ordinances and laws applicable thereto. No license will be renewed without
a reinspection of the premises. For the purposes of making inspections and
securing enforcement, such officials or their authorized agents shall have
the right and are hereby empowered to enter on any premises on which a
manufactured/mobile home is located, or about to be located, and to inspect
the same and all accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable
time. Each premises on which a licensed manufactured/mobile home is
located shall have at least one sanitary inspection per year.
(1) Make any false, deceptive, or misleading representation to induce a
manufactured/mobile home sale or site rental or make any
representation inconsistent with or contrary to the written rental
agreement.
(2) Impose any term or condition, any rule or regulation which the
operator knows or reasonably ought to know is in conflict with this
chapter or applicable law.
(3) Require any tenant to make permanent improvements to the
manufactured/mobile home community or any of its facilities or
assess any separate charge therefor.
(4) Enter a tenant's manufactured/mobile home without the tenant's
permission and reasonable notice to the tenant. This does not
prohibit the operator from entering a tenant's manufactured/
mobile home if the tenant cannot be contacted and the operator
reasonably believes that entry is necessary because of emergency
or to preserve and protect the manufactured/mobile home or
community.
(5) Unreasonably limit a tenant's ability to post, on the tenant's
manufactured/mobile home or on the site on which the
manufactured/mobile home is located, any sign complying with
Village ordinances and which supports any candidate or political
position.
§ 221-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 221-8
181:300
§ 221-8. Manufactured/mobile home stands.
The area of the manufactured/mobile home shall be improved to provide
adequate support for the placement and tie-down of the manufactured/
mobile home, thereby securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding,
rotation and overturning.
§ 221-9. Commercial and manufacturing uses prohibited.
No person shall at any time use a manufactured/mobile home for the
purpose of advertising or conducting a commercial or manufacturing
business of any kind except a home occupation pursuant to Article VII of
Chapter 420 of this Code.
§ 221-10. Applicability of other construction and zoning
regulations.
All plumbing, electrical, building and other work done on or at any
community licensed under this chapter shall be in accordance with the
ordinances of the Village and the requirements of the state Plumbing,
Electrical and Building Codes39 and the regulations of the state Department
of Health and Family Services. In addition, all work shall be consistent with
applicable Village Zoning Codes. Licenses and permits granted under this
chapter grant no right to erect or repair any structure, to do any plumbing
work, any HVAC work or any electrical work.
§ 221-11. License required; manufactured/mobile community
approval.
A. The manufactured/mobile home stand shall not shift or settle unevenly
under the weight of the manufactured/mobile home due to inadequate
drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the structure.
B. The manufactured/mobile home stand shall be provided with anchors
and tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete "dead men," eyelets
imbedded in concrete foundations or runways, screw augers,
arrowhead anchors, or other devices securing the stability of the
manufactured/mobile home.
C. Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at least at each corner of the
manufactured/mobile home stand, and each shall be able to sustain a
minimum tensile strength of 2,800 pounds.
D. The manufactured/mobile home stand shall provide a skirt enclosure
from stand to bottom of manufactured/mobile home that will be
harmonious to the unit and well maintained.
A. License required. No person shall establish, operate or maintain or
permit to be established, operated, or maintained upon any property
owned, leased or controlled by him a manufactured/mobile home
39.Editor's Note: See Part III, Land Use Legislation, of this Code.
§ 221-8 IMPACT FEES § 221-11
181:301
§ 221-12. Monthly municipal permit fee.
community, as defined in § 66.0435 of the Wisconsin Statutes, within
the Village without having first obtained a license for said community
from the Village Board pursuant to this chapter.
B. Application. The application for such license, or the renewal thereof,
shall be filed with the Village Clerk and shall include the name and
address of the owner in fee of the tract (if the fee is vested in some
person other than the applicant, a statement that the applicant is
authorized by him to construct or maintain the manufactured/mobile
home community and to apply for the license) and such a legal
description of the premises upon which the manufactured/mobile home
community is to be or is located as will readily identify and definitely
locate the premises. A new, addition, or remodel application shall be
accompanied by two copies of the Village-approved site and operational
plan per Chapter 420 of the Village Code.
C. License fee. The application for such license, or the renewal thereof,
shall be filed with the Village Clerk with the annual license fee of $100
for each 50 spaces within a minimum of 50 spaces per community, or
fraction thereof, within the existing or proposed community, and a
surety bond in the sum of $5,000. This bond shall guarantee the
collection by the licensee of the monthly parking permit fee provided
for in § 221-12 and the payment of such fee to the Village Treasurer, the
payment by the licensee of any forfeiture, including legal costs,
imposed upon or levied against such licensee for a violation of the
ordinances of the Village pursuant to which such license is granted, and
shall also be for the use and benefit, and may be prosecuted and
recovery had thereon, by any person who may be injured or damaged by
reason of the licensee violating the provisions of this chapter.
D. Term of license. The term of the license shall be for the calendar year
and shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year and may be
renewed annually thereafter by any licensee and after approval of the
Village Board of the Village of Pleasant Prairie and upon payment of the
annual license fee. Upon such renewal, the Village Clerk shall issue a
certificate renewing the license for another year unless sooner revoked.
The application for renewal shall be in writing signed by the applicant
on forms furnished by the Village Clerk, and submitted with a current
list of park tenants. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-58]
E. Transfer of license. Upon application for a transfer of license, the
Village Clerk, after approval of the application by the Village Board,
shall issue a transfer upon the payment of a fee of $10.
A. Pursuant to § 66.0435(3), Wis. Stats., there is imposed a monthly
municipal permit fee on each occupied nonexempt manufactured/
mobile home which shall have parked in such community at any time
during the month. Such fee shall be as prescribed by § 66.0435(3)(c),
Wis. Stats. It is required that the licensee of a manufactured/mobile
§ 221-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 221-12
181:302
§ 221-13. Revocation and suspension.
The Village Board is hereby authorized to revoke any license or permit
issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter in accordance with § 66.0435,
Wis. Stats.
§ 221-14. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person found to be in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any rule, order or regulations
made hereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as
prescribed by Chapter 1, § 1-4, of the Village Code.
home community collect the proper amount from each manufactured/
mobile community and pay to the Village Treasurer such monthly
municipal permit fees on or before the 10th of the month following the
month for which such fees are due in accordance with the terms of this
chapter.
B. A licensee may request permission from the Village Administrator to
have the occupants of the manufactured/mobile home community pay
their monthly municipal fee directly to the Village Treasurer on or
before the 10th day of each month.
(1) The Village Administrator may permit the licensee to direct the
tenants of the manufactured/mobile home community to make
direct payments to the Village Treasurer if the following conditions
are met:
(a) No more than 5% of the manufactured/mobile homes in the
licensee's community are delinquent in the payment of their
municipal permit fees.
(b) The licensee is in complete compliance with all other
requirements of the ordinances of the Village.
(2) It shall remain the responsibility of the licensee to assure that all
monthly municipal permit fees are paid to the Village, and it shall
be the responsibility of the licensee to review the payment records
to determine what payments have not been made.
C. If the Village determines that the licensee, having selected not to
collect the monthly municipal permit fee, has not assured that the
accounts in his respective community are current, the Village
Administrator shall provide the licensee with notice that within the next
30 days the licensee shall be responsible for the collection of the proper
amount from each manufactured/mobile home and shall also be
responsible for the direct payment to the Village Treasurer of such
monthly municipal permit fees on or before the 10th day of each month
following the month for which such fees are due and that the Village
will no longer collect the individual municipal permit fees.
§ 221-12 IMPACT FEES § 221-14
181:303
Chapter 225
MASSAGE THERAPISTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 214.
§ 225-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of the Village that the licensing of massage
therapists be regulated so as to further the public interest, safety and
welfare by providing minimum qualifications for massage therapists.
§ 225-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GOOD MORAL CHARACTER — To be law abiding, to conduct regulated
activity in accordance with licensing and permitting regulations, and to be
honest and trustworthy.
MASSAGE THERAPIST — A health care provider who, for valuable
consideration, either direct or indirect, treats the tonus system of the body
through massage therapy.
MASSAGE THERAPY — A health care service involving the palpation and
manipulation of the soft tissues of the body in order to improve circulation,
reduce stress, increase range of motion, and relieve soft tissue pain.
Massage therapy may also involve, but is not limited to, exercises that
promote balance in the musculoskeletal, postural, and biomechanical
systems. Additionally, massage therapy may involve topical applications.
The therapeutic purpose of the above is to enhance health and well-being.
§ 225-3. Prohibitions.
No person, party, firm or corporation, unless otherwise provided herein,
shall, for valuable consideration, either directly or indirectly:
A. Act as a massage therapist without obtaining and maintaining a license
therefor. Excepted from this requirement are state licensed health care
professionals who provide massage therapy within the scope of their
license and their training and/or massage therapists licensed pursuant
to Chapter 440 of the Wisconsin Department of Regulation and
Licensing Administrative Code. [Amended 10-7-2002 by Ord. No.
02-74]
B. Operate as a massage therapist contrary to the terms of this chapter.
§ 221-14 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 225-3
225:304
§ 225-4. Licensing provisions.
Massage therapist licenses shall be granted by the Village Board and issued
by the Village Clerk when all conditions of license issuance have been met.
C. Massage the genital area of any client, including the breasts of any
female client.
D. File an application for a license which is not true, correct and/or
complete in all material respects.
E. Operate as a massage therapist as a home occupation in residential
zoning districts.
A. Application. Application for such a license shall be made to the Village
Clerk upon form provided by the Village and accompanied by the
required fee.
B. Recommendation. The Village Clerk shall send the application to the
Police Department, who shall report, in writing, to the Village Clerk as
to the arrest and conviction record of the applicant, which may reflect
upon good moral character. The Village Clerk, or designee thereof, shall
examine said record and make recommendation based thereon as to
whether or not the application should be licensed. A recommendation
for denial shall consider only such portions of the record as are
materially related to the licensed activity. Such reports and application
shall be delivered to the Village Board for its consideration.
C. Term. The license term shall be January 1 through December 31.
D. Fee. The license fee shall be $50.
E. Revocation, nonrenewal and suspension of license. Any massage
therapist license issued under this chapter shall be subject to
suspension, revocation or refusal of renewal by the Village Board for
violation of any provision of this chapter or for any grounds that would
warrant the denial of the issuance of such license. Within five days
following any such suspension, revocation or refusal to renew, the
Village Clerk shall notify the licensee of the grounds for such action and
shall give the licensee an opportunity to appeal such action within 15
days following the date of such notice. Upon the hearing of such appeal,
which shall be held by the Village Board, testimony shall be taken under
oath and final action determined.
F. Reports by Police Chief. The Police Chief shall file reports with the
Village Clerk advising the conduct by a licensee, or employees thereof,
which may constitute a basis for disciplinary action. The Village Clerk,
at license renewal time, or at any earlier time deemed appropriate,
shall bring such matters to the attention of the Village Board for its
consideration.
§ 225-3 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 225-4
225:305
G. Scope of license. A licensed massage therapist may perform massage
therapy at a site appropriately zoned for the business and possessing a
valid occupancy permit from the Community Development Department
or at the place of residence or business of a client receiving massage
therapy. Massage therapy shall not be performed as a home occupation
in a residentially zoned district.
H. Criteria/requirements for license issuance.
(1) An applicant for massage therapist license shall comply with the
following as a condition of being licensed:
(a) Be 18 years of age or older, verified by a birth certificate or
driver's license.
(b) Be of good moral character.
(c) Provide verification of immunization against Rubella and
Hepatitis B at the time of original application. Provide
verification of negative results of tuberculosis through
Mantoux PPD Test or chest X-ray performed within 90 days of
the date of application at time of original application and each
renewal application. In the case of positive results, there must
be a physician's statement that the condition is not contagious.
(d) Graduate from a school providing a minimum of 500 in-class
hours of training in massage therapy in a curriculum approved
by or substantially similar to a curriculum approved by the
American Massage Therapy Association, the International
Myomassethics Federation, Inc., or another national or
international professional massage therapy organization which
has an approved massage therapy curriculum. The applicant
must provide the Village Clerk with documentation of
satisfactory completion of a course having an appropriate
curriculum.
(e) Have and maintain in full force and effect during the license
term a policy of malpractice insurance written by an insurance
company license to do business in the State of Wisconsin, and
verified by a certificate of insurance, in an amount of no less
than $1,000,000 in coverage per person.
(2) A copy of a current massage therapist license issued by the City of
Kenosha will satisfy the conditions of Subsection H(1)(c) through
(e) of this chapter. [Added 1-26-1998]
I. License. The Village Clerk shall issue to each massage therapist
granted a license under this chapter a plastic identification card which
shall include the photograph of the licensee along with his/her
signature, name, address, date of birth, physical description, type of
license and date of expiration. A massage therapist shall keep his/her
massage therapist identification card in his/her possession at all times
§ 225-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 225-4
225:306
§ 225-5. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the suspension or revocation of a license issued under this
chapter, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any
regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as
provided by Chapter 1, § 1-4, of the Code of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
Chapter 234
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 119.
Drugs and drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 162.
Fire and rescue protection — See Ch. 180.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 194.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 203.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 150.
Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 292.
while engaged in massage or offering to engage in massage under this
chapter.
J. Overlapping licenses. This chapter regulating massage therapists shall
not be construed as restraining or restricting the performance of acts
within the definition of massage therapy by state-licensed health care
professionals not licensed hereunder, when such acts are within the
scope of their license.
K. Required abbreviations and title in advertising. Licensed massage
therapists shall, in their advertisements, use one of the following:
"Village of Pleasant Prairie LMT" or "Village of Pleasant Prairie
Licensed Massage Therapist." It shall be unlawful for persons not
licenses by the Village of Pleasant Prairie to use said designations in
any advertisement.
L. Violations. Each calendar day a violation of this chapter continues shall
be considered a separate offense.
§ 225-4 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 225-5
225:307

ARTICLE I
Public Nuisances
[Adopted 5-2-1988 as Ch. 10 of the 1988 Code]
§ 234-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance within the Village.
§ 234-2. Public nuisance defined.
A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property
which continues for such length of time as to:
§ 234-3. Public nuisances affecting health.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are specifically
declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be
construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of
§ 234-2:
A. Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or
safety of the public.
B. In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property.
C. Greatly offend the public morals or decency.
D. Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct
or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable
body of water or other public way or the use of public property.
A. Adulterated food. All decayed, adulterated or unwholesome food or
drink sold or offered for sale to the public.
B. Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended
for human consumption or food which are not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death.
C. Breeding places for insects or vermin. Accumulations of decayed animal
or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing
material, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes,
disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin can breed.
D. Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other
insects can multiply.
E. Privy vaults and garbage cans. Privy vaults and garbage cans which are
not flytight.
F. Noxious weeds. All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation.
All weeds and grass shall be kept cut to a height not to exceed one foot.
The Village may cause all weeds and grass to be cut and removed and
§ 234-1 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 234-3
225:309
§ 234-4. Public nuisances offending morals and decency.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are specifically
declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but
such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances
offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of § 234-2:
brush to be removed and the cost thereof charged to the property under
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
G. Water pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream,
lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial
wastes or other substances.
H. Noxious odors, etc. Any use of property, substances or things within the
Village emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, noxious or
disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to
the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure
or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons
within the Village.
I. Street pollution. Any use of property which causes any noxious or
unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter,
alley, sidewalk or public place within the Village.
J. Air pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes,
gases, fly ash, industrial dust or other atmospheric pollutants within the
Village or within one mile therefrom in such quantities as to endanger
the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or threaten or cause
substantial damage to property in the Village.
A. Disorderly houses. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill
fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to
for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or
gambling.
B. Gambling devices. All gambling devices and slot machines.
C. Unlicensed sale of liquor and beer. All places where intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed,
bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as
provided for by the ordinances of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
D. Continuous violation of Village ordinances. Any place or premises
within the Village of Pleasant Prairie where Village ordinances or state
laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are
openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.
E. Illegal drinking. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of
drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of
the laws of the State of Wisconsin or ordinances of the Village.
§ 234-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 234-5
225:310
§ 234-5. Public nuisances affecting peace and safety.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting
public peace or safety coming within the provisions of § 234-2 of this article:
A. Signs, billboards, etc. All signs and billboards, awnings and other
similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or
places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to
endanger the public safety.
B. Illegal buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered within the
fire limits of the Village of Pleasant Prairie in violation of the provisions
of the ordinances of the Village relating to materials and manner of
construction of buildings and structures within said district.
C. Unauthorized traffic signs. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or
devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or
railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official
traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which because of their
color, location, brilliance or manner of operation interfere with the
effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
D. Obstruction of intersections. All trees, hedges, billboards or other
obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets,
alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when
approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
E. Low-hanging tree limbs. All limbs of full-grown trees which project over
and less than 10 feet above any public sidewalk, street or other public
place.
F. Dangerous trees. All trees which are a menace to public safety or are
the cause of substantial annoyance to the general public.
G. Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by state
laws and Village ordinances.
H. Dilapidated buildings. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or
out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit
for human use.
I. Low-hanging wires and cables. All wires and cables over streets, alleys
or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface
thereof.
J. Noisy animals or fowl. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl,
except animals for production on agriculturally zoned land, which by
frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of
other noises to an extent deemed unreasonable and a nuisance shall be
prohibited. Such determination may be made by any Village of Pleasant
Prairie police officer or in writing by members of at least two
§ 234-5 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 234-5
225:311
§ 234-6. Compression release engine braking systems. [Added
5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 00-38]
households in close proximity to the source of the noise. [Amended
9-9-1991; 11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-48]
K. Obstructions of streets; excavations. All obstructions of streets, alleys,
sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same,
except as permitted by the ordinances of the Village, but including
those which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are
kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after
the purpose thereof has been accomplished or which do not conform to
the permit.
L. Unlawful assemblies. Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property
abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley
or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing
traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks.
A. Definitions. The following terms as used in this section shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMPRESSION RELEASE ENGINE BRAKING SYSTEM — A device that
modifies the timing on the exhaust valves of a diesel engine in such a
manner that the exhaust valve opens right as the piston reaches the
top of the compression stroke, gathering the energy as the compressed
air is released, causing the release or loss of compressed power in the
compression stroke.
COMPRESSION RELEASE ENGINE BRAKING SYSTEM ZONE — The
area of the Village of Pleasant Prairie where the use of compression
release engine braking systems is permitted is defined follows:
(1) The I-94 frontage roads.
(2) STH 165 between 1-94 and STH 31.
(3) CTH "H" between Bain Station and 116th Street.
(4) STH 31 between Bain Station Road and 128th Street.
(5) 80th Avenue between 95th Street and 116th Street.
(6) 116th Street between STH 31 and CTH "H."
(7) 95th Street between STH 31 and CTH "H."
(8) 109th Street between 80th Avenue and CTH "H."
(9) 100th Street between CTH "H" and 78th Avenue.
(10)102nd Street between 86th Avenue and 82nd Avenue.
(11)107th Street between 86th Avenue and 82nd Avenue.
§ 234-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 234-6
225:312
§ 234-7. Lighting.
JAKE BRAKE — A registered trademark of Jacobs Vehicle Systems. The
Jacobs product is only one of a number of engine retarding products.
The intent of this section is not to single out only the products
manufactured by Jacobs Vehicle Systems or its brand name product.
10.0L DISPLACEMENT ENGINE — A diesel engine description used
extensively to describe the engine used in heavy trucks. Federal
transportation regulations require that all vehicles manufactured since
1978 are required to emit sounds less than 80 dBa as they drive by,
measured at a distance of 50 feet from the roadway. 10.0L displacement
engine trucks manufactured after 1978 that have modified or defective
exhaust systems, such as straight or gutted stacks, will emit a sound
louder than 80 dBa when a compression release engine braking system
is engaged.
(12)86th Avenue between STH 165 and 102nd Street.
(13)82nd Avenue between STH 165 and 102nd Street.
(14)86th Avenue between STH 165 and 107th Street.
(15)82nd Avenue between STH 165 and 107th Street.
B. No motor vehicle operator shall engage a compression release engine
braking system in any 10.0L displacement engine, or any motor vehicle,
or any unit, outside of the compression release engine braking system
zone, except in the case of an extreme emergency.
C. Emergency vehicles shall be exempt from this section of the Code.
A. No illuminated sign, yard light, area light, parking lot and service area
light or other illumination shall be permitted or maintained in the
Village without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building
Inspector. Before the Building Inspector issues a permit, the applicant
shall submit data on fixtures and locations in sufficient detail to fully
determine the nature and extent of the work proposed. The Building
Inspector shall examine the data to determine if the same complies with
the Electrical Code. The Building Inspector may require such further
descriptive detail as he may deem necessary.
B. All lighting and glare-producing processes shall be installed so that
direct rays from a light-emitting element or surface shall be shielded by
suitable skirtings, louvers or recessed housings or locations and by
directing fixtures so that the emitted direct rays are not visible beyond
the property line or a parking lane or alley adjacent to the site.
C. Lighting with low surface brightness prisms having a forty-five-degree
under cutoff may be acceptable in some cases without shielding. Bulb,
strip or tube lighting shall not be acceptable unless fully shielded so
that all direct lighting is retained within the property. The brightness
§ 234-6 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 234-7
225:313
§ 234-8. Enforcement; abatement of nuisances.
shall not exceed that of a one-hundred-watt frosted incandescent bulb
operating normally.
D. No illuminated sign, yard light, area light, parking lot or service area
light or other illumination shall be permitted or maintained because of
direction, brilliancy, animation, flashing or other similar features if it is
found by the Building Inspector to be an unreasonable nuisance to
other properties or detrimental to the public safety or general welfare.
The criteria set forth above shall be utilized by the Building Inspector in
determining the suitability of any light in those situations where it
complies with the Electrical Code.
E. Existing lighting for yards and buildings shall be inspected by the
Building Inspector for compliance with this section.
F. "Illuminated sign" shall mean any sign which has characters, letters,
figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous
tubes as part of the sign proper.
A. Enforcement. The Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Building Inspector and the
Health Officer shall enforce those provisions of this article that come
within the jurisdiction of their offices and they shall make periodic
inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that such
provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this section
to abate a public nuisance unless the officer has inspected or caused to
be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and
has satisfied himself that a nuisance does in fact exist.
B. Summary abatement. If the inspecting officer determines that a public
nuisance exists within the Village and that there is great and immediate
danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the
Chairman may direct the proper officer to cause the same to be abated
and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
C. Abatement after notice. If the inspecting officer determines that a
public nuisance exists on private premises but that such nuisance does
not threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety,
peace, morals or decency, he shall serve notice on the person causing or
maintaining the nuisance to remove the same within 10 days. If such
nuisance is not removed within 10 days, the proper officer shall cause
the nuisance to be removed as provided in Subsection B.
D. Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this article shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Village or its
officials in accordance with the laws of the state.
E. Court order. Except when necessary under Subsection B, an officer
hereunder shall not use force to obtain access to private property to
abate a public nuisance but shall request permission to enter upon
§ 234-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 234-8
225:314
§ 234-9. Recovery of costs.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this article for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner,
such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
§ 234-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder, or permit or cause a public nuisance shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4 of this Code.
private property if such premises are occupied and, if such permission
is denied, shall apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order
assisting the abatement of the public nuisance.
§ 234-8 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 234-10
225:315

ARTICLE II
Abandoned Vehicles, Junk and Debris
[Adopted 2-4-2002 by Ord. No. 02-06 (§ 9.09 of the 1988 Code)]
§ 234-11. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include a singular number, and words
in a singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR — The Community Development
Director of the Village of Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, or
her designee.
JUNK — Includes, but shall not be limited to, appliances, refrigerators,
stoves, furnaces, washing machines, tires, wood, machinery, machinery
parts, or other unsightly debris the condition of which is wrecked,
dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded or inoperative in the case of
appliances.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to
travel along the ground, and shall include but not be limited to automobiles,
buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, motor homes, trucks,
tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers, and mopeds.
NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLE — As defined in Ch. 340, Wis. Stats., shall
include any inoperable or unlicensed or unroadworthy or disassembled or
wrecked motor vehicle.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any real property within the Village which is
privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any street or highway, which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the
purposes of vehicular traffic, and shall also mean any other publicly owned
property or facility.
VILLAGE — The Village of Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin.
VILLAGE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Board created by Chapter
18, Article V of this Code.
§ 234-12. Abandoned, wrecked or inoperative motor vehicles.
No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing, or leaving
of any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or partially dismantled condition,
whether attended or not, upon any private property within the Village.
§ 234-11 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 234-12
225:317
The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted,
junked or partially dismantled vehicle, or parts thereof, on public or private
property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such
in accordance with the provisions of this article. In addition, violators shall
be subject to a municipal citation for a monetary forfeiture. This section
shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property
or to any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise lawfully
licensed by the Village and properly operated in the appropriate business
zone pursuant to the zoning laws of the Village.
§ 234-13. Junk and unsightly debris.
§ 234-14. Notice and order. [Amended 5-6-2019 by Ord. No. 19-08]
Whenever the existence of any such nuisance as defined in this article
comes to the attention the Chief of Police or his/her designee, in the case
A. All premises shall be maintained by the responsible person in a clean,
sanitary and reasonably safe condition. No person shall store or permit
to be stored, outside of an enclosed building, without a permit issued by
the Village, any of the following:
(1) Debris.
(2) Rubbish and garbage not placed in proper containers.
(3) Household hazardous waste.
(4) Any condition which encourages rodent infestation or rodent
harborage.
(5) Used building materials.
(6) Animal feces which are present.
(7) Appliances, furnaces, water heaters, water softeners or building
materials which are not integrated into a structure.
(8) Combustible materials which are not used as an integral part of an
authorized business carried out on the premises.
(9) Raw material, equipment parts or bulk commodities, unless said
items are raw material used in a lawful business carried out on the
premises and stored in a lawful manner.
(10) Parts of a motor vehicle, boat or aircraft.
(11) Tires (excluding tires used as sandboxes, swings or playground
equipment).
B. The presence of junk and unsightly debris is hereby declared a public
nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the
provisions of this article. In addition, violators shall be subject to a
monetary forfeiture municipal citation.
§ 234-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 234-14
225:318
of a nuisance motor vehicle, or the Community Development Director or
his/her designee, in the case of other accumulations of junk and unsightly
debris, a notice of violation shall be given to the property owner and/or
occupant of the premises in the following manner.
A. Form. Such notice and order shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the violation with reference to the
applicable provisions of this article.
(a) With respect to nuisance automobiles located on private
property, the notice shall contain an order that the occupant
shall, within 30 days, repair, assemble, make the vehicle
operable and roadworthy and license any vehicle which may
not be licensed or, in the alternative, place such vehicle in a
garage or enclosed structure or remove the vehicle from the
property and place such vehicle within a duly authorized and
licensed sales, repair or salvage business lawfully operating
within a properly zoned area and in compliance with all state
and local laws, rules, regulations, licenses and permits. The
notice shall further advise the owner of the vehicle that if the
nuisance is not corrected, the vehicle is subject to being towed
and stored at the owner's expense and, if not redeemed,
disposed of by the tower as authorized by state law.
(b) With respect to junk and unsightly debris, the notice shall
contain an order to place such junk in an enclosed structure or
remove it from the premises. The notice shall further advise
the owner that if the nuisance is not corrected, the Village may
direct its employees or its agents to enter onto the subject
premises and place the property in compliance and dispose of
the junk and debris, with the costs thereof being charged to the
owner or assessed as a special tax assessment against the real
estate.
(3) Advise the occupant and/or owner that he is additionally subject to
a money forfeiture for each day a violation of this article exists.
B. Method of service. Any of the following methods of service are
acceptable:
(1) In the case of a nuisance automobile, notice shall be given to the
owner of the motor vehicle by personal service or via regular
United States Mail to the owner's address as shown on the records
of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and by posting a
copy of the notice on the vehicle.
(2) In the case of junk and debris, notice shall be given to the owner of
record of the real estate where the junk and debris are located and
to the occupant of any building on said property by personal service
§ 234-14 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 234-14
225:319
§ 234-15. Abatement of nuisance; violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-6-2019 by Ord. No. 19-08]
The following procedures or any combination thereof may be utilized to
eliminate the nuisance:
§ 234-16. Hearings.
or via regular United States Mail. If the property owner cannot be
served as noted above, then said written notice may be given by
posting a copy of the notice on or about the main entrance to the
building of the subject premises.
A. Nuisance motor vehicles.
(1) With respect to nuisance motor vehicles upon private property, if
the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within
the thirty-day period for compliance, the Village or its designee
shall have the right to take possession of the nuisance vehicle and
tow it from the premises, with the cost and expense charged to the
owner or assessed as a special tax assessment against the real
estate. Any unclaimed towed vehicles may be disposed of by towers
through means and procedures authorized by law.
(2) Notice of removal. Within 48 hours of the removal of such junked
motor vehicle, the Chief of Police, or their designee, shall give
notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and to the
owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle
was removed that said vehicle or vehicles have been impounded
and stored for violation of this article. The notice shall give the
location where the vehicle or vehicles are stored and the costs
incurred by the Village for the removal.
B. Other junk and debris. With respect to other junk and debris, if the
violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the
thirty-day period, the Village may direct its employees or its agents to
enter onto the subject premises and place the property in compliance
and dispose of the junk and debris, with the costs thereof being charged
to the owner or assessed as a special tax assessment against the real
estate.
C. Additional remedy. As to any nuisance described herein, the Village may
issue a municipal citation to the owner or occupant for violation of this
article which, upon conviction, would subject the owner or occupant to
a fine not to exceed $691, which includes court costs, for each day the
violation remains in existence following the service of notice for the
violation.
A. Administrative hearing.
(1) Request for administrative hearing. The persons to whom the
notices are directed, or their duly authorized agents, may file a
§ 234-14 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 234-16
225:320
written request for hearing before the Community Development
Director as a designee of the Village Board of Pleasant Prairie
within the thirty-day period of compliance prescribed in § 234-14.
(2) Procedure for administrative hearing.
(a) Purpose of hearing. The only purpose of a hearing hereunder is
to permit the owner or possessor of the nuisance property to
show that the nuisance to be abated is, in fact, not a nuisance
subject to removal or abatement hereunder.
(b) Stay pending hearing. Where a hearing is requested within the
time provided for compliance with this article in the notice, no
action shall be taken to eliminate or abate the nuisance by
removing the subject property from the premises until the
hearing is held.
(c) Date for hearing. The hearing will be held as soon as
practicable after the filing of the request, and the persons to
whom the notices are directed shall be advised, in writing, of
the time and place of said hearing at least five days business
days in advance thereof.
(d) Content of written request for hearing. The request for the
administrative hearing shall state the error alleged in the
initial determination of the Community Development Director
or her designee and shall provide the address and phone
number of the owner of the nuisance property or the occupant
of the premises requesting the hearing.
(e) Failure to appear. The failure of the owner of the nuisance
property or the occupant of the premises to appear at the
scheduled hearing shall constitute a waiver of said right to a
hearing.
(f) Nature of hearing. The person conducting the hearing, which
shall be informal and not subject to the rules of evidence, shall
note in writing the facts presented and the position of the
owner or possessor of the property alleged to be a nuisance,
shall mark and retain exhibits and shall determine, in writing,
whether or not this article has been violated. At any such
hearing, the Village and the persons to whom the notices have
been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as
either party deems necessary.
(3) Administrative hearing decision. A decision shall be made by the
Community Development Director in writing and filed with the
Village Clerk within five business days after the administrative
hearing. If this article has been determined by the Director to have
been violated, the owner or possessor of the property determined
to be a nuisance shall be notified of a compliance date which is not
§ 234-16 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 234-16
225:321
less than 14 days from the date of the written decision. Any further
appeal shall be pursuant to Subsection B of this section.
B. Appeal of the administrative hearing decision. An appeal shall be as
hereinafter provided, the Village electing not to be governed by Ch. 68,
Wis. Stats.
(1) Request for an appeal. An aggrieved party desiring to appeal from
an administrative hearing determination pursuant to Subsection A
shall file a written notice of appeal which must be received by both
the Village Clerk and the Community Development Director prior to
the expiration of the time for compliance with this article provided
in the decision of the Community Development Director.
(2) Procedure for appeal.
(a) Purpose of appeal hearing. The only purpose of an appeal
hearing hereunder is to permit the owner or possessor of the
nuisance property to show that the nuisance to be abated is, in
fact, not a nuisance subject to removal or abatement
hereunder.
(b) Nature of appeal. The review shall be a de novo (new) review of
the decision of the Community Development Director.
(c) Stay pending appeal. Where an appeal is requested within the
time provided for compliance with this article in the notice, no
action shall be taken to eliminate or abate the nuisance by
removing the subject property from the premises until the
appeal is held.
(d) Content of notice of appeal. The notice of appeal shall state the
error alleged in the initial decision and shall provide the
address and phone number of the appellant and a filing fee of
$50.
(e) Appeal board. The appeal shall be heard by a quorum of the
Village Zoning Board of Appeals at a regularly scheduled
meeting or a special meeting called by the Chairman of the
Board.
(f) Notice required. The Village shall file a Class 1 notice pursuant
to the Wisconsin States Statutes, and a written notice shall be
sent via regular mail to the appellant a minimum of five
business days prior to the appeal hearing.
(g) Failure to appear. The failure of the owner of the nuisance
property or the occupant of the premises to appear at the
scheduled appeal hearing shall constitute a waiver of said right
to a hearing.
(h) Nature of appeal hearing. The appeal hearing shall not be
subject to the rules of evidence. However, any witness giving
§ 234-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 234-16
225:322
testimony shall be sworn. The testimony shall be electronically
or stenographically recorded.
(3) Appeal of hearing decision. A decision shall be made by a majority
of the Board. The Board's decision shall be in writing and filed with
the Village Clerk within five business days after the hearing. If the
initial finding of the Community Development Director is upheld,
the appellant shall be notified in writing and given at least 48 hours
to comply with this article and the decision of the Board. Any
further appeal shall be by writ of certiorari to the Circuit Court of
Kenosha County.
§ 234-16 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 234-16
225:323
Chapter 242
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park Commission — See Ch. 18, Art. II.
Animals — See Ch. 119.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 250.
§ 242-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LAKEVIEW RECPLEX — A recreation facility at 9900 Terwall Terrace in
Prairie Springs Park.
PARK or PARKS — All lands and waters acquired by the Village for park or
recreational purposes, and shall include, without limitation, parks, beaches,
swimming pools, golf courses, bicycle/walking trails, ball diamonds and
other athletic fields and privately owned lands, the use of which has been
granted to the Village for park, recreational, athletic or like public services.
PUBLIC BEACH ON PUBLICLY OWNED INLAND LAKE — The area on Lake
Andrea used for swimming, diving or recreational bathing, together with
the associated land area and appurtenances designated for bather usage.
PUBLICLY OWNED LAND ADJACENT TO THE WATER'S EDGE OF LAKE
MICHIGAN — The public land areas adjacent to the waters of Lake
Michigan used for recreational purposes.
§ 242-2. Permits.
All permits issued pursuant to this section shall be obtained before the
proposed activity.
A. The following actions are permitted with a written permit from the
Village Board:
(1) Any person, group or organization may hold or take part in any
musical, theatrical or other entertainment, or any parade,
procession, public meeting or gathering of any kind, or make any
political or religious address, oration or demonstration of any kind,
or use any loudspeaker or amplifying equipment in any park only
with written permission.
(2) Any person, group or organization may sell or offer for sale any
article or perform or offer to perform any service for hire or solicit
for any trade, occupation, business or profession or solicit in any
park only with a written permit.
§ 234-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-2
225:324
(3) Any person, group or organization may place or carry any
structure, bulletin board or advertising device of any kind
whatever, or erect a tent or post any notice, bill poster, sign, wire,
rod or cord to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, fountain, wall, post or
structure, statue, bridge, or monument in any park, or place any
advertising or decoration of any kind whatever therein in any park,
only with a written permit.
(4) (Reserved)40
(5) Any person, group or organization may camp or erect a tent for
sleeping overnight in any Village park only with written permit.
Upon approval, said permit will only be issued upon the submittal
of a list of all registered campers and payment of applicable rental
fees. [Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(6) Any person, group or organization may conduct any gathering or
activity, including reserving a picnic area or ball field, where the
attendance is greater than 500 persons, only with written permit,
insofar as no more than 50% of said facilities in any given park are
reserved for that same period.
(7) Any person, group or organization may be allowed to bring, drink,
possess or give away any beer, liquor or other intoxicating
beverages within any Village park only with a written permit.
[Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-32]
B. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to issue a permit
to any person, group or organization to bring, drink, possess or give
away beer, liquor or other intoxicating beverages within any Village
park. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to issue
permits to reserve park pavilions, picnic areas and ball fields in Village
parks if the following criteria are met: [Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-32]
(1) A complete application is submitted no later than 72 hours prior to
the scheduled event;
(2) The required fee(s) is submitted;
(3) The proposed activity does not violate any prohibited actions in this
chapter;
(4) The proposed activity does not include any activities outlined in
Subsection A;
(5) Not more than 50% of the picnic areas are rented in Prairie Springs
Park for that given day;
40.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), concerning removal of wood from any Village park,
was repealed 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-32.
§ 242-2 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-2
225:325
(6) The proposed activity does not conflict with scheduled Village
events or Village recreational programs; and
(7) The number of people does not exceed 500 persons.
(8) Applicants must be 21 years of age or older.
C. Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit shall obtain and file
a complete application and required fee(s) with the Director of Public
Works. [Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(1) If such permit requires Village Board approval, as outlined in
Subsection A, such permit shall be submitted to the Director of
Public Works at least two weeks prior to a scheduled meeting of the
Village Board.
(2) If such permit allows the Director of Public Works to issue a permit
as outlined in Subsection B, such permit shall be submitted to the
Director of Public Works at least 72 hours prior to the proposed
event.
(3) The permit application shall include:
(a) Name and address of applicant.
(b) Name and address of the person, corporation or association
sponsoring the activity, if any.
(c) The day and hours for which the permit is desired, if
applicable.
(d) The park, or portion thereof, for which the permit is desired, if
applicable.
(e) An estimate of the attendance, if applicable.
(f) Any other information which, in the opinion of the Village
Board, is reasonably necessary to a fair determination of
whether a permit should be issued.
D. Fees. Each application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee
and/or bond as required per § 242-3 of this chapter.
E. Granting of permits.
(1) The Village Board shall issue a permit hereunder when it has found
that:
(a) The proposed activity or use of the park or park area will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general
enjoyment of the park.
(b) The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health,
welfare, safety and recreation.
§ 242-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-2
225:326
(c) The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(d) The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense on the Village.
(e) The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour requested in the application.
(f) The area requested is in compliance with the areas designated
by the Village for the type of use requested.
(2) Permits shall be granted on a first-come-first-served basis, except
that the Village Board may, by regulation, reserve certain areas for
traditional celebrations and services on national holidays by
specific groups. Applications for a permit within a given calendar
year shall not be accepted prior to the first working day in January
of said calendar year.
(3) No more than 50% of designated picnic areas in Prairie Springs
Park shall be reserved for any given day.
(4) When considering an application for a permit to hold a public
assembly, public meeting or gathering, the Village Board shall
grant said permit unless the Board specifically finds that the
granting of said permit is in conflict with any subsection noted
above.
F. Compliance with rules and regulations. A permittee shall be bound by
all of the park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully
as though the same were inserted in such permit, except to the extent
that the permit otherwise specifies.
G. Liability. The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be
liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever
by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such
permit has been issued.
H. Display of permit. As a condition of a permit being issued, it is required
that the permittee have the permit in his or her possession at all times
while it is in effect and that, upon the request of any duly authorized
agent of the Village or duly authorized law enforcement personnel, a
permittee shall present the permit for inspection.
I. Revocation. The Village Board shall have the authority to revoke a
permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good
cause shown.
J. Appeal. Notice of hearing to revoke or appeal a denial of such permit
shall be given to the applicant or holder of said permit 10 days before
the date of hearing by delivering a copy of such notice to the permittee
personally or by mailing a copy of such notice to the permittee or
applicant as stated in the application or permit. If the permittee is a
§ 242-2 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-2
225:327
§ 242-3. Park fees. [Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 02-37;
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 03-27; 2-6-2006 by Ord. No. 06-06; 4-16-2007
by Ord. No. 07-1441]
corporation, delivery of such notice shall be to the registered agent
of such corporation at the address given in the application 10 days
before the date of such hearing. In the event of revocation of a permit,
no refund of application or permit fees shall be made, and the Village
Board may refuse to grant another permit to such permittee or
applicant for such length of time as it deems advisable.
A. Prairie Springs Park fees.
(1) Yearly passes per family to park in a parking lot and use the beach
area and archery range at Prairie Springs Park.
(a) Family membership definition: can only include a maximum of
two adults and dependent family members age 25 and under
living in the same household (ages 19 to 25 must show proof of
full-time student status). Individuals must live in the same
household to qualify for family rates.
[1] Pleasant Prairie resident: $50. [Amended 9-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-46]
[2] (Reserved)
[3] Nonresident: $85. [Amended 10-19-2009 by Ord. No.
09-54; 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-46]
[4] (Reserved)
[5] (Reserved)
[6] (Reserved)42
(b) LakeView RecPlex members are not subject to the above fees
as they are included as part of each paid membership.
(2) Daily passes per person to park in a parking lot and use the beach
area and archery range at Prairie Springs Park.
(a) Guest of RecPlex member and Pleasant Prairie resident: $5.
[Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-46]
(b) (Reserved)
(c) (Reserved)
(d) Nonresident: $7. [Amended 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-54]
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that the effective date of the fees it amended in
this section is 5-1-2007.
42.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1)(a)[6], the out-of-state fee, was repealed 10-19-2009
by Ord. No. 09-54.
§ 242-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-3
225:328
(e) (Reserved)43
(3) Scuba diving yearly permit (in addition to the above-noted park
pass): $10 per person per season.
(4) Sail boarding and windsurfing are permitted activities on Lake
Andrea. The launch site for sail boarders and windsurfers is the
public launch on 93rd Street. There is no fee to use the launch on
93rd Street in Prairie Springs Park. Park pass holders and
LakeView RecPlex members may launch their sail boarding and
windsurfing equipment at sites designated by the Village in Prairie
Springs Park.
(5) No daily pass shall be required for children two years of age and
under.
(6) Proof of residency or employment shall be required at the time a
park pass is purchased.
B. Fees for reserving outdoor recreation facilities, pavilions, equipment,
and services. All picnic areas have a capacity of 250 persons unless
otherwise noted. If the scheduled event will exceed the capacity for the
given area, additional areas shall be reserved. All fees are
nonrefundable. See 242 Attachment 3 for the Outdoor Recreation
Facility, Equipment, and Services Fee Schedule at the end of this
chapter. [Amended 9-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-38; 5-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-32]
C. Ingram Park. [Added 9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 13-44]
(1) Dog park fees. All dogs using the dog park must have a Village of
Pleasant Prairie annual dog park tag, or the owner can pay a daily
fee each day the park is visited. Fees to use the dog park in Ingram
Park are set forth in Chapter 214 of the Municipal Code. No annual
dog park tag shall be granted without proof that a dog is currently
licensed in Kenosha County or another municipality where the dog
is kept.
(2) Dog park rules and regulations. Set forth below are the rules and
regulations for the use of the dog park in Ingram Park.
(a) Park ordinances require an owner/handler clean up and
properly dispose of waste left by his or her dog(s).
(b) Dogs must be kept on a leash until they are in the dog park
entrance and the gate has closed behind them. For the safety of
your pet as well as others, do not keep your dog on a leash
while inside the dog park.
43.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2)(e), the fee for an out-of-state resident, was
repealed 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-54.
§ 242-3 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-3
225:329
(c) The dog owner/handler must be physically capable of
controlling his or her dog. All owners/handlers are required to
remain inside the off-leash area and be in view of their dog(s)
at all times. The limit is three dogs per handler, per visit.
(d) Aggressive dogs or dogs that have been determined to be
vicious are not permitted on the premises. Dogs exhibiting
rough, aggressive or dangerous behavior must be removed by
the owner immediately.
(e) Excessive barking is prohibited. Dogs barking excessively must
be removed by the owner.
(f) All dogs must be current on vaccinations.
(g) All dogs must be licensed by their respective municipality and
display said license/tag while in the dog park. Noncounty
residents must have the current rabies vaccine tag as well as a
dog license tag issued by the governing body where they
reside.
(h) Leashes must be kept on the dog, until inside the double-gates
entry. Remove the leash prior to entering the second gate. Do
the reverse when leaving.
(i) The off-leash dog park is for dogs and their handlers. No other
type of animal (i.e., hunting or other use) is allowed. No
firearms or starting pistols are permitted.
(j) Absolutely no female dogs in heat or puppies under the age of
four months are allowed in the dog park.
(k) No smoking, food, alcoholic beverages, glass containers,
strollers or bicycles are allowed inside the dog park.
(l) Please leave your dog toys at home.
(m) Children under 18 years old must be accompanied and
supervised closely by an adult at all times. It is recommended
that small children not be brought into the off-leash area.
Children are not permitted to run with or chase dogs.
(n) Users of the dog park do so at their own risk. The Village of
Pleasant Prairie is not liable for any injury or damage caused
by any dog or person in this park. Owners and users agree to
assume the full responsibility of any injuries, damages or loss
to themselves, their dogs or property or any damage to other
people or dogs connected with or associated with their use of
the park.
(3) Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in § 242-12 of this chapter.
§ 242-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-3
225:330
D. Other fees for all parks.
(1) All applications shall be completed by a responsible adult over 18
years of age. In addition, a nonrefundable permit application fee of
$25, for applications to be considered by the Village Board or to
secure an alcohol beverage permit, shall be paid at the time an
application is submitted for a permit as outlined in § 242-2.
Applicants must be 21 years of age or older to apply for an alcohol
beverage permit. [Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-32]
(2) In parks without rest room facilities, a fee based on a Village
contract with a sanitation company per required facility shall be
submitted at the time the permit is issued. The number of rest room
facilities shall be based on the requirements as set forth by the
Wisconsin Administrative Code as follows:
Water Closets
Number of Patrons Male Female Urinal
1 to 100 1 1 0
101 to 200 1 2 1
201 to 250 1 3 2
251 to 300 1 4 2
301 to 350 2 5 2
351 to 400 2 6 2
401 to 450 2 7 3
451 to 500 2 8 3
501 to 600 2 9 4
One drinking facility for each 150 occupants or fraction up to 600
people.
One lavatory for each two water closets or urinals required.
(3) If an applicant requests to have alcoholic beverages at the specific
function, an additional fee of $250 per picnic area reserved shall be
required. Said payment will be refundable after an appropriate cost
for cleanup and/or repair of picnic area is required by Village staff.
(4) For rental of a park pavilion in any Village park, a refundable
deposit of $100 shall be submitted one month prior to the
reservation date to secure the site. The deposit shall only be
refunded upon Village inspection that there are no damages or loss
of Village property to the pavilion site. Applicants are held
responsible for any costs associated with the loss or damage of
Village property which may exceed the deposit of $100. [Added
5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-32]
§ 242-3 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-3
225:331
§ 242-4. Park hours.
Except for attendance at or participation in scheduled events, no person
shall remain in any park from dusk until dawn.
§ 242-5. Prohibited actions.
The following activities are prohibited in Village parks. All persons that are
issued a permit or rent a picnic area, pavilion or ball field in any Village
park shall be held financially responsible for any damages to the park and
its facilities.
(5) Cancellation of rental. A fee of no less than 1/2 of the rental fee will
be charged for guests changing or canceling their reservation
within 30 days of the reservation date. Cancellation prior to 30
days will be subject to a fee of no less than $50. (No refunds due to
inclement weather. Deposit refunds may take several weeks to
process after the reservation.) [Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No.
10-32]
E. Selling of concessions in any park:
(1) Village's permanent structure: $100 per weekend day; $75 per
weekday.
(2) Motorized vehicles (per vehicle): $200 per season (15 weeks
maximum).
(3) Pushed or pulled units: $150 per season (15 weeks maximum).
(4) Carried (per person carrying): $100 per season (15 weeks
maximum).
F. Nonmotorized watercraft rental fees at Lake Andrea. [Amended
5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 08-32]
Hourly
VPP and
RecPlex
Members Nonresident
Otter kayaks $8 $10
Double otter kayaks $10 $12
Ocean kayaks $8 $10
Canoes $8 $10
Pedal boats $6 $8
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, group or organization to:
(1) Place any straw, dirt, chips, paper, shavings, shells, ashes or other
rubbish, even though not offensive to health, in or upon any park.
§ 242-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-5
225:332
Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to clean fish and
dispose of fish entrails in other than a designated area.
(2) Remove, destroy, break, injure, mutilate or deface in any way any
structure, monument, statue, fountain, wall, fence, garbage cans,
railing, vehicle, bench, tree, shrub, plant, flower or other property
in any park.
(3) Drive, ride or push any motorcycle, motor vehicle, truck, wagon,
horse or any vehicle or animal in any part of the parks, except on
the regular roadways designated therefor, provided that
wheelchairs, baby carriages and such vehicles as are used in the
park service are not included in the foregoing prohibition.
(4) Place, build or create any fires within any park areas except in
properly constructed grills. All charcoal ashes shall be disposed of
in containers labeled for such disposal. In addition, no person shall
leave any fire unattended or throw away any matches, cigarettes,
cigars or pipe ashes without first extinguishing them.
(5) Wade, bathe or swim except at such pools or beaches as may be
designated for that purpose.
(6) Disturb any bird or other animal or disturb the nest or young of any
bird or other animal, except the taking of any bird or other animal
which is causing property damage or injuries within any Village
park.
(7) Engage in ball throwing, bicycle riding, kite flying or fishing or any
other activity which may endanger the safety of bathers or
spectators in the beach area.
(8) Bring or permit a dog, cat or other household pet animal in any
Village park at any time unless said animal is on a leash not
exceeding 10 feet in length or under the owner's control or to bring
or permit a dog or other household pet in any Village park which is
not properly licensed with all required vaccinations and shots.
Furthermore, no such animal shall be allowed in any beach area
(sand or water) designated for swimming or on any of the
playground equipment.
(9) Bring or permit horses or other livestock, poultry or farm animals
in any Village park, trail or designated park road or parking area.
(10) Go beyond the designated swimming limits outlined by markers,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to use a boat, raft, water
skis, surfboard, windsurfer, sail board or other watercraft within
such swimming limits, unless such devices are a part of a scheduled
class.
(11) Swim at night or when the park is closed.
§ 242-5 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-5
225:333
(12) Operate gasoline-powered vehicles, including jet skis, with the
exception of electric motors which operate with no wake, or with
the exception of emergency and maintenance boats, which shall be
permitted on the beach or on Lake Andrea.
(13) Bring glass containers for beverages on the beach, nor shall any
person place, build or create any bonfires or campfires within any
Village park. Bonfires or campfires are allowed for Villagesponsored
events.
(14) Indulge in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous,
unreasonably loud or otherwise disturbing conduct under
circumstances in which such conduct tends to cause or provoke a
disturbance.
(15) Operate a snowmobile in any Village park, except authorized park
personnel.
(16) Use any type of inflatable device within a designated bathing area.
(17) Launch a boat from a trailer in any park, except that a boat, raft or
watercraft of any type may be launched in a designated launching
area.
(18) Fish in any designated swimming area.
(19) Play baseball, football, frisbee or other games in designated
parking areas.
(20) Perform any mechanical work on automobiles in any park, unless it
is an emergency situation.
(21) Operate any sound truck, loudspeaker, motor or any other
mechanical device that produces undue or unnecessary noises in or
upon any Village park.
(22) Be intoxicated or engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous,
vulgar, lewd, obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct, tending to
create a breach of the peace or to disturb or annoy others, in or
upon any Village park.
(23) Engage in ballplaying or the use of a frisbee or activity of like kind
which interferes with the flow of traffic on any park road.
(24) Park, stop or leave standing, whether attended or unattended, any
vehicle in any manner so as to block, obstruct or limit the use of any
road or trail, or outside any designated parking area, or contrary to
posted notices.
(25) Other than duly appointed law enforcement officers, to have in his
possession or under his control any firearm, air gun, bow and arrow
(except at the archery range) or other weapon, explosives or
fireworks, as defined by §§ 250-3 and 250-5 of the Village Code, of
§ 242-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-5
225:334
§ 242-6. Public beach in Prairie Springs Park.
any kind or discharge any of the same while in or upon any of
the Village parks. Bow and arrow usage is specifically regulated in
§ 242-8 of this chapter.
(26) Conduct business in any Village park, in Prairie Springs Park, on
Lake Andrea or within the LakeView RecPlex without a contract
with the Village of Pleasant Prairie. This contract, or written
agreement, and permit for approved programming should be
readily available as proof of permission to conduct such business in
the park or RecPlex. [Added 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 03-24]
(27) Launch motorized watercraft, including jet skis, from any public
property on the Lake Michigan shoreline in the Village of Pleasant
Prairie. [Added 6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-30]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle,
whether propelled by animal or other power, in any park recklessly, or
at a rate of speed greater than is reasonably proper, having regard for
the traffic, the safety of the public and the use of the parks, or so as to
injure the property, life or limb of any person. Furthermore, at no time
shall the speed of such vehicles exceed 15 miles per hour in Prairie
Springs Park.
C. It shall be unlawful for any aircraft to land in any park or any body of
water in any Village park.
D. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter in any way a
building or area that may be locked or closed to public use or contrary
to a posted notice.
E. It shall be unlawful for any vehicles to be parked in a parking lot at
Prairie Springs Park without an annual park pass or a daily car pass.
F. It shall be unlawful for any vehicles to park against any yellow curb.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person without a scuba diving certificate to
use Lake Andrea for the purpose of scuba diving, with the exception of
scuba diving with a certified diving instructor.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke on the beach at Lake
Andrea. First violation shall result in revocation of the daily pass;
subsequent violations will result in revocation of the annual pass. Any
additional violations will result in penalties in accordance with § 242-12
of this chapter.
I. It shall be unlawful for sailboarders or windsurfers to launch onto Lake
Andrea from any location other than those permitted.
J. It shall be unlawful for any watercraft to use an anchor at any time
when launched in Lake Andrea. [Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No.
10-32]
§ 242-5 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-6
225:335
A. Beach water sampling. At least one set of bacteriological samples shall
be collected by a Village representative at a predetermined location(s)
throughout the swimming area at Prairie Springs Park once a week
during the swimming season and at periods of peak usage as
determined by the Village. The samples shall be tested by the Village. A
set of samples shall be all samples collected during any one day.
B. Closing criteria for a beach. When one or more of the following
subsections are not complied with, the beach shall be closed to the
public until compliance is achieved. The Village may post any public
beach closed until compliance with this section is met.
(1) Microbiological quality. The beach water fecal coliform density
shall be at a safe level based on current water testing procedures.
When it is determined that a beach must be closed, daily samples
shall be collected and analyzed during the period of closure. The
beach may be reopened if the fecal coliform density in two
consecutive daily samples is determined safe.
(2) Chemical quality. The water shall be free of chemical substances
capable of creating toxic reactions or irritations to the skin or
membranes of swimmers.
(3) Air temperature. When the air temperature is below 60° F. the
beach area shall be closed.
(4) Severe weather. Swimming or bathing shall not be permitted
during lightning storms or other inclement weather as determined
by the responsible person in charge of the beach operations.
C. Signs. The posting of signs shall designate the land boundary of a
beach. When no lifeguard is on duty a sign shall be posted that states
"No Lifeguard on Duty. No Swimming Allowed. All Violators Will Be
Prosecuted and Fined per Village of Pleasant Prairie Code Chapter
242."
D. Markers. The perimeter of the beach water area shall be clearly
designated by means of lines attached to swimming area buoys.
E. Lifeguards. During nonswimming hours when no lifeguard is on duty, a
legible sign or signs reading "No Lifeguard on Duty" shall be posted.
Distinguishing apparel or emblems shall identify all lifeguards on duty.
Lifeguard stations shall be located as close as practical to the
swimming area shoreline and within at least 30 feet of the shoreline.
F. Lifeguard certification. Lifeguards shall be certified. Acceptable
certification for a lifeguard shall be a current American Red Cross
lifeguard training certificate or Ellis & Associates lifeguard license.
American Red Cross lifeguards must be certified by Ellis & Associates
within 30 days.
G. Responsibilities and authorities.
§ 242-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-6
225:336
§ 242-7. Use of Lake Andrea in Prairie Springs Park. [Amended
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 03-25]
(1) Any authorized Village employee or designated lifeguard(s) shall
have the authority to clear the beach and designated swimming
area in the event of an emergency, at closing or due to any criteria
listed in this section.
(2) Any authorized Village employee or designated lifeguard(s) shall
have the authority to remove any person, group or organization
from the park that violates any of the prohibited actions as
specified in § 242-5 of this chapter.
(3) Any authorized Village employee or designated lifeguard(s) shall
have the authority to remove any person who has not paid the
required entrance fee.
A. Boating.
(1) Motorboats prohibited area. No person shall operate a motorboat,
as defined in § 30.50(6), Wis. Stats., that is propelled by internal
combustion engine or engines on the waters of Lake Andrea in
Prairie Springs Park, with the exception of emergency boats,
maintenance boats, law enforcement boats and boats which are
used for Village of Pleasant Prairie sponsored special events.
Electric motors only are permitted on said waters.
(2) Posting requirements. The Village of Pleasant Prairie shall place
and maintain a copy of this section at all public access points within
the jurisdiction of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
(3) State boating and safety laws adopted. State boating laws as found
in §§ 30.50 to 30.71, Wis. Stats., are adopted by reference.
(4) Penalties. Wisconsin state boating penalties as found in § 30.80,
Wis. Stats., are adopted by reference.
B. Launching sites defined. Nonmotorized personal watercraft may be
launched in Prairie Springs Park Lake Andrea as follows:
(1) 93rd Place public launch site. Any small watercraft may launch
from the existing 93rd Place North Lake Andrea boat ramp at no
charge.
(2) Picnic areas two and six launch sites: fee-based launch. Any small
nonmotorized personal watercraft may launch from picnic areas
two and six launch sites with a LakeView RecPlex membership,
Prairie Springs Park daily pass or seasonal park pass. This would
include any small nonmotorized personal watercraft, including
sailboards.
§ 242-6 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-8
225:337
§ 242-8. Archery range.
A daily pass is required for any person, group or organization to utilize a
bow and arrow in the designated archery range at Prairie Springs Park Lake
Andrea. All bows must be cased to and from the archery range. The archery
range may not be utilized before sunrise and after sunset. It is unlawful to
have a bow and arrow in any other area of Prairie Springs Park Lake Andrea
or any other park in the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
§ 242-9. RecPlex.44 [Last amended 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 07-1445]
A. User charges for the LakeView RecPlex.
(1) Village residents, annual charges.
(a) Adult primary/individual within a household in the Village of
Pleasant Prairie: $660. "Adult primary/individual" is defined as
14 years or older with use of entire facility. [Amended
10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 07-41; 2-21-2011 by Ord. No.
11-01; 7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 13-30; 12-15-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-34; 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-46]
(b) Adult secondary within a household in the Village: $236. "Adult
secondary" is defined as an addition to an adult primary; must
be a spouse of the adult primary living in the same household.
Only two adults per household. [Amended 7-15-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-30; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-34; 9-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-46]
(c) Youth additional (the first two) within a household in the
Village: $127. "Youth additional" is defined as an addition to an
adult primary; two- to twenty-five-year-old dependent(s) living
in the same household as adult primary (ages 19 to 25 must
show proof of full-time college status to be considered a
dependent). Any youth, ages two to 18, beyond the first two
(i.e., 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, etc.) will be charged a rate of $90
per youth. [Amended 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-34;
10-5-2015 by Ord. No. 15-35; 9-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-46]
(d) Disabled adult, dependent of primary member, age of 19 and
above, will receive youth rate. [Amended 12-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-34]
(e) Any child under the age of two at the time of purchase: $0.
44.Editor's Note: The title of § 242-9 was amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-35.
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date for the fees it amended in
this section of 5-1-2007.
§ 242-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-9
225:338
(2) Village residents, senior citizen annual charges. [Amended
10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 07-41; 2-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01;
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-34; 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-46]
(a) Senior primary of any household in the Village of Pleasant
Prairie: $500; six-month senior primary membership: $279;
three-month senior primary membership: $150. "Senior
primary" is defined as any person 60 or more years old.
(b) Senior secondary within a household in the Village: $210; sixmonth
senior secondary membership: $112; three-month
senior secondary membership: $75. "Senior secondary" is
defined as an addition to a senior primary, must be a spouse of
the adult primary, living in the same household within the
Village.
(3) Village corporate business rate, annual charge. Individual rate per
employee: $687. "This membership" is defined as follows: must be
16 years old, working for a company located in Pleasant Prairie.
Rates are based on the business location. [Amended 10-1-2007
by Ord. No. 07-41; 2-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01; 7-15-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-30; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-34]
(4) (Reserved)46
(5) Nonresident, annual charges. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No.
07-41; 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-39]
(a) Adult primary/individual nonresident: $708. "Adult primary/
individual" is defined as 14 years or older with use of entire
facility. [Amended 2-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01;
7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 13-30; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
14-34; 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-46]
(b) Adult secondary nonresident: $236. "Adult secondary" is
defined as an addition to an adult primary; must be a spouse of
the primary living in the same household. Only two adults per
household. [Amended 2-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01;
7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 13-30; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
14-34]
(c) Youth additional (the first two) within a household in the
Village: $127. "Youth additional" is defined as an addition to an
adult primary; two- to twenty-five-year-old dependent(s) living
in the same household as adult primary (ages 19 to 25 must
show proof of full-time college status to be considered a
dependent). Any youth, ages two to 18, beyond the first two
(i.e., 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, etc.) will be charged a rate of $90
per youth. [Amended 2-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01;
46.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), concerning the four-month college student rate for
Village residents, was repealed 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 07-41, effective 1-1-2008.
§ 242-9 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-9
225:339
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-34; 10-5-2015 by Ord. No.
15-35; 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-46]
(d) Disabled adult, dependent of primary member, age of 19 and
above, will receive youth rate. [Amended 2-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-01; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-34]
(e) Any child under the age of two at the time of purchase: $0.
(6) Nonresident, senior citizen annual charges. [Amended 10-1-2007
by Ord. No. 07-41; 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-39; 2-21-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-01; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-34; 9-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-46]
(a) Senior primary of any nonresident: $543; six-month senior
primary membership: $295; three-month senior primary
membership: $150. "Senior primary" is defined as any person
60 or more years old.
(b) Senior secondary of any nonresident: $210; six-month senior
secondary membership: $112; three-month senior secondary
membership: $75. "Senior secondary" is defined as an addition
to a senior primary, must be a spouse of the senior primary,
living in the same household in Wisconsin.
(7) (Reserved)47
(8) (Reserved)48
(9) (Reserved)49
(10) (Reserved)50
(11) Day passes, charged for day use at the RecPlex. [Amended
10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-5451]
(a) Senior day pass (age 60 and above): $5. [Added 12-15-2014
by Ord. No. 14-34]
(b) Youth/disabled adult day pass (daily).
[1] Village resident/guest of RecPlex member: $8. [Amended
12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-46]
47.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7), Wisconsin corporate business rate, was repealed
2-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01.
48.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(8), concerning the four-month college student rate for
Wisconsin residents, was repealed 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 07-41, effective 1-1-2008.
49.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(9), concerning annual charges for out-of-state
residents as amended, was repealed 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-39.
50.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(10), concerning senior citizens annual charges for
out-of-state residents, as amended, was repealed 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-39.
51.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 10-20-2009.
§ 242-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-9
225:340
[2] Nonresident: $8.52 [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-46]
(c) (Reserved)
(d) Adult RecPlex day pass (daily). [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-46]
[1] Village resident/guest of RecPlex member: $11.
[2] Nonresident: $15.53
(e) Family day pass: up to four people from the same household:
two adults and two children or one adult with three children.
Children must be legal dependents of at least one of the
participating adults.
[1] Village resident: $35. [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-46]
[2] Nonresident: $35. [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-46]
[3] Additional guest of family day pass purchaser: $8.
[Amended 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-46]
(f) One-week trial membership: $40 per person. [Added
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-34; 9-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-46]
(12) Facility fee, charged for every new membership: $125. [Amended
7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 13-3054]
(13) Monthly processing fee (ACH) for bank draft option, per month: $2.
[Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 07-4155]
(14) Replacement tags.
(a) (Reserved)
(b) Membership key tag replacement fee: $3.
(15) Family membership definition: can only include a maximum of two
adults and dependent family members age 25 and under living in
the same household (ages 19 to 25 must show proof of full-time
student status). Individuals must live in the same household to
qualify for family rates.56 [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-46]
52.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(11)(b)[3], the out-of-state user charge, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-54.
53.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(11)(d)[3], the out-of-state user charge, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-54.
54.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 9-1-2013.
55.Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that its effective date is 1-1-2008.
§ 242-9 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-9
225:341
(16) Corporate/corporate partner/organization memberships.
[Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 07-41; 7-20-2009 by Ord.
No. 07-45; 2-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01; 7-15-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-3057]
(a) Corporate membership.
[1] A membership must be purchased by an employee of a
participating corporation who has met the minimum of 10
participating employees.
[2] Each employee of a participating corporation shall receive
a rate of $639, which approximately reflects a discount to
the nonresident rate based on one free membership for
every 10 individual memberships purchased. [Amended
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-34; 9-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-46]
[3] A facility fee of $65 will be charged for each individual
employee membership purchased.
[4] Individuals who have received a corporate membership
may upgrade their membership to reflect the number of
members of their household based upon residency at any
time during their membership.
(b) Corporate partner membership.
[1] A membership must be purchased by an employee of a
participating corporation who has met the requirement of
corporate partner as established in a major sponsorship
agreement with the Village and approved by the Village.
[2] Each employee of a participating corporate partner shall
receive a rate of $574. [Amended 12-15-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-34; 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-46]
[3] A facility fee of $125 will be charged for each corporate
partner membership purchased.
[4] Individuals who have received a corporate partner
membership may upgrade their membership to reflect the
number of members of their household based upon
residency at any time during their membership.
(17) Village business rate.
(a) Anyone working in the Village of Pleasant Prairie will receive
the Village resident rate. Proof of employment is required.
56.Editor's Note: Subsection A(15) was amended in conjunction with Ord. No. 11-01, adopted
2-21-2011.
57.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 9-1-2013.
§ 242-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-9
225:342
(b) Individuals at the Village business rate may upgrade their
membership to include family members at an additional perperson
charge based on residency.
(18) Foster children.
(a) Foster child annual charges. In an effort to accommodate the
short-term placement of foster children and to offer sensitivity
to the financial burden assumed by foster families,
memberships for a foster child shall be sold as a youth
additional membership with dates coinciding with the adult
primary in the same household as follows: [Amended
5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-39; 2-21-2011 by Ord. No.
11-01; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-34; 9-18-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-46]
[1] Pleasant Prairie resident: $127.
[2] Nonresident: $127.
(b) Transferring foster children memberships. Due to the nature of
short-term placement of foster children, the Village of Pleasant
Prairie will allow transfer of the foster child membership in
accordance with the following guidelines:
[1] When a new child is signed up for the amount of an initial
pass and the household credit applied as payment for the
second pass, a new card and membership number for the
new child is then created.
[2] The second child will then be signed up for the amount of
the initial pass and the household credit applied as
payment for the second pass. A new card and membership
number for the new child is then created.
[3] The membership dates for this "floating pass" will remain
consistent with the adult primary membership dates,
regardless of when the floating pass was assigned or
reassigned.
[4] Each year, at the time of renewal for the household, this
pass would also be renewed at the existing annual rate.
(c) If the trial membership is converted to an annual membership
within one week of expiration, the facility fee will be reduced
50%. [Added 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-46]
(19) Military personnel on leave. Immediate family members who are in
the military and who are not included in a current paid RecPlex
membership may use the RecPlex up to 30 days at no charge while
on military leave. Military personnel will need to provide military
identification and leave papers before a temporary thirty-day
§ 242-9 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-9
225:343
membership will be issued. [Amended 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
14-34]
(20) Trial membership monthly rate. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-41; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 14-34]
Type Fee
Adult $90
Adult secondary $30
Youth additional $25
(a) The pass shall be valid 30 days from purchase.
(b) Only one trial membership during a twelve-month period.
(c) If the trial membership is converted to an annual membership
within one week of expiration, the facility fee will be reduced
50% to $50.
(21) Summer membership. [Added 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 07-4158]
(a) Three months: $185. [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-46]
(b) Available for individuals ages 14+.
(c) Under the age of 18 requires the signature of a legal guardian.
(d) Membership length is 99 days from the date of purchase.
(e) First calendar day to purchase is May 1.
(f) Last calendar day to purchase is July 22.
(22) User group partners. [Added 5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 08-32]
(a) A facility user group with at least 10 current RecPlex family
memberships may request to become a RecPlex user group
partner. Individual members of the user group will receive
membership pricing on all programs and services and, if
purchased, facility usage. The user group will receive member/
partner rental rates, be recognized by RecPlex as a partner,
and other defined benefits exclusively reserved for RecPlex
user group partners.
(b) The user group will run one free annual clinic or program
approved by RecPlex. The partner user group will recognize
and promote RecPlex on its website, printed materials and
team apparel. It will communicate and encourage its members
to participate in RecPlex programs or purchase RecPlex
services.
58.Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that its effective date is 1-1-2008.
§ 242-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-9
225:344
(c) To become a user group partner, all participating members of
the facility user group must purchase one of the following
memberships at the start of their season:
[1] Corporate/organization family membership with facility
usage.
[2] Youth membership with facility usage (14 years to 18 years
of age): $250. [Amended 12-19-2016 by Ord. No.
16-46]
[3] Youth membership without facility usage: $75.
(23) Membership options. [Added 12-3-2012 by Ord. No. 12-4359]
(a) All current and new basic full-year memberships for residents,
nonresidents, seniors, corporate, et al. will be referred to as
"Experience Memberships" and include access to a minimum
of 30 free group fitness classes per week and other benefits as
approved by the Recreation Director, Village Administrator and
Village Finance Director. [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-46]
(b) A second level, "Exercise Membership," may be added to any
Primary, Spouse and Youth (14 years of age and older)
Experience Membership for an additional monthly fee of $50.
The "Exercise Membership" level includes free access to all
group fitness classes, mind/body, aquatic fitness, trainer-led
classes, unlimited tanning per State of Wisconsin guidelines
and other benefits as approved by Recreation Director, Village
Administrator, and Village Finance Director. [Amended
12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 13-54]
(c) A third level, "Excellence Add-on," may be added to any
Primary, Spouse and Youth (18 years of age and older)
Experience Membership or Exercise Membership and will
include a discounted rate for personal training, based on a
three-month commitment. Personal training will be billed at
$48 each session for one time per week and $44 each session
for two times per week, and other benefits as are approved by
the Recreation Director, Village Administrator, and Village
Finance Director. [Amended 12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 13-54;
9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-46]
(d) Additional adult membership within a household: $384
annually. "Additional adult" is defined as a nonspouse, non-fulltime
student, 19 years of age or older; must be related to the
primary member and living in the same household. Proof of
residency and family relationship required. [Added
59.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2013.
§ 242-9 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-9
225:345
10-5-2015 by Ord. No. 15-35; amended 9-18-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-46]
B. Rental rates.
(1) Rental rates schedule. See 242 Attachment fee schedule at the end
of this chapter. [Amended 9-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-38;
3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-0360; 2-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-0161;
12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-46]
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Deposits required.
(a) At the time an application is submitted for the rental of the
facilities, a refundable deposit is required as follows:
[1] (Reserved)
[2] Alcohol deposit: $250.62
(b) The deposit shall only be refunded upon Village inspection that
there are no damages or loss of Village property. Applicants are
held responsible for any costs associated with the loss or
damage of Village property which may exceed the deposit of
$100.
(4) Cancellation of rental. If a rental reservation is canceled more than
30 days prior to the scheduled event, the application deposit will be
refunded. If the rental reservation is canceled within 30 days prior
to the scheduled event, the deposit will be refunded only if the
facility is rented during the original time reserved.
C. Program rates. See 242 Attachment fee schedule at the end of this
chapter. [Amended 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-0363; 12-19-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-46]
D. Program services.
(1) Personal training. A personal trainer certified and approved to
provide personal trainer services within the LakeView RecPlex may
only provide personal training. Certified personal trainers
approved by the Village of Pleasant Prairie shall function only
under contract with the Village of Pleasant Prairie, through the
auspices of the Fitness Director of the LakeView RecPlex. Personal
training within the LakeView RecPlex by individuals not certified
and under contract with the Village of Pleasant Prairie is not
60.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 3-3-2009.
61.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 3-1-2011.
62.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3)(a)[3], giving the deposit for LakeView Studio,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 08-32.
63.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 1-1-2009.
§ 242-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-9
225:346
permitted. Adult and individual youth rates: See 242 Attachment
6, Program Services Fees, at the end of this chapter. [Added
9-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-38]
(2) Program services fees: See 242 Attachment fee schedule at the end
of this chapter. [Amended 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-0364;
2-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-0165]
(3) Personal training. A personal trainer certified and approved to
provide personal trainer services within the LakeView RecPlex may
only provide personal training. Certified personal trainers
approved by the Village of Pleasant Prairie shall function only
under contract with the Village of Pleasant Prairie, through the
auspices of the Fitness Director of the LakeView RecPlex. Personal
training within LakeView RecPlex by individuals not certified and
under contract with the Village of Pleasant Prairie is not permitted.
Adult and individual youth rates: See 242 Attachment 6, Program
Service Fees, at the end of this chapter.
(a) (Reserved)
(b) (Reserved)
(c) Partner training equals two RecPlex members with one trainer.
Personal training packages expire in six months. All sessions
are 60 minutes in length. See 242 Attachment 6, Program
Service Fees, at the end of this chapter.66
E. (Reserved)
F. Birthday party and field trip rates: See 242 Attachment fee schedule at
the end of this chapter. [Amended 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-0367;
2-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-0168]
G. Child care. Kids Court Child Care is provided for members to use while
utilizing the facility. See 242 Attachment fee schedule at the end of this
chapter. [Amended 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-0369; 12-19-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-46]
H. (Reserved)70
I. Miscellaneous fees.
64.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date 3-3-2009.
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 3-1-2011.
66.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(4), Massage therapy services, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-46.
67.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 3-3-2009.
68.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 3-1-2011.
69.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 3-3-2009.
70.Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, Summer membership special, was repealed 5-19-2008
by Ord. No. 08-32.
§ 242-9 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-9
225:347
§ 242-10. Ice Arena operation and fees. [Added 8-16-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-40; amended 11-1-2004 by Ord. No. 04-49; 6-20-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-28; 8-1-2005 by Ord. No. 05-33; 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-38;
2-6-2006 by Ord. No. 06-05; 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 06-39; 9-18-2006
by Ord. No. 06-45; 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 07-14; 9-17-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-38; 5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 08-32; 7-19-2010 by Ord. No.
10-40]
(1) NSF check or NSF bank draft (ACH) fee: $25.
(2) Collections fee: $25. [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-46]
(3) Program cancellation fee: $10. [Amended 9-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-46]
J. Operating rules. All RecPlex members and patrons utilizing the
facilities, programs and services of the Recreation Division are
obligated to adhere to the following policies and expectations:
(1) Respect and be courteous of others at all times.
(2) Foul language and inappropriate gestures will not be tolerated.
(3) Physical violence against another individual will warrant police
involvement.
(4) Theft and vandalism will be met with police involvement and arrest.
(5) Membership cards are nontransferable to family members or
friends.
(6) Abide by general rules and regulations set forth in each division.
A. Positions.
(1) (Reserved)
(2) Learn-to-Skate Staff Coach. This position is designed for the
individual interested in teaching ice skating group lessons, as well
as coaching private lessons in the facility. The Coach is a Village
employee when teaching learn-to-skate lessons. The position may
also function independently as a skating coach by contracting with
Ice Arena for time to instruct.
(3) Rink Professionals. This position is designed for the individuals
dedicated to coaching private lessons at the professional level and
committed to providing quality, personal coaching services to our
figure skating customers; they are considered independent
contractors.
(4) Visiting Professionals. This position is designed for the individuals
interested in coaching private lessons on an intermittent basis.
§ 242-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-10
225:348
(5) Director of Recreation. This position is responsible for
management and operation of Ice Arena.
B. Ice facility fees.
(1) Birthday party and field trip rates: See 242 Attachment 5, Birthday
Package and Field Trip Fees, at the end of this chapter.
(2) Rental rates.
(a) Ice rentals:
[1] September through March:
[a] Prime time: $270/hour per sheet. [Amended
8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-35]
[b] Non-prime time: $150/hour per sheet.71
[2] April through August:
[a] Prime time: $200/hour per sheet. [Amended
5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 08-32; 8-5-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-35]
[b] Non-prime time: $150/hour per sheet.72
[3] Prime time: 8:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. [Amended
8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-35]
[4] Late night: 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. daily.
[5] The Recreation Director shall have the authority to
establish ice rentals at a market rate when he/she
determines that ice is available. [Added 7-19-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-40]
(b) Storage cage rental (space under bleachers):
[1] Monthly: $50.
[2] Weekend: $25 (Friday and Saturday night).
[3] Two nights: $25 (any two consecutive nights).
(c) All rental fees are subject to sales tax, which will be added to
the above rental rate.
(d) Event impact fee. Ice Arena reserves the right to charge an
event impact fee for special events that require excess staff
71.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2)(a)[1][c], concerning late night rental, was repealed
8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-35.
72.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2)(a)[2][c], concerning late night rental, was repealed
8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-35.
§ 242-10 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-10
225:349
and or cleaning time. This fee will be noted prior to the
beginning of the contracted special event.
(e) Agreements. All rentals unless otherwise stated will begin with
a resurfaced sheet of ice. The Ice Arena charges for block ice,
which means the user is responsible for paying hourly rental
rate from the time the rental begins until the time the rental
ends. Ice resurfacing is included in the hourly charge for
consecutive rentals but will detract from your actual ice time.
(f) Rental cancellation policy.
[1] Cancellation of ice time. Written notice must be given to
cancel an ice rental. An administrative fee of $25 per slot
will be charged for canceling. If canceled 30 days or more
before the rental day, the rental group or individual will
not be responsible for the full rental fee but will be
charged the administrative fee of $25 per slot. If less than
30 days’ notice is given, the rental group or individual will
be responsible for the administrative fee of $25 per slot
plus the full rental fee if the ice is not rented to another
group.
[2] Rescheduling of ice time. Written notice must be given to
reschedule ice rental. An administrative fee of $25 per slot
will be charged for rescheduling with at least a seven-day
notice. If less than a seven-day notice is given, the rental
group or individual will be charged an administrative fee
of $45 per slot. If the ice is rerented, a fee of $25 per slot
will be assessed.
(g) Rental adjustment policy. The above rate structure may be
adjusted as necessary to meet Ice Arena needs. A minimum of
30 days will be given to contracted users groups prior to
adjustment of hourly rental fees.
(3) Contracted professional skating instructors.
(a) Guidelines. Only skating professionals approved by Ice Arena
staff will be permitted to teach on open freestyle sessions. At
the discretion of the Ice Arena Managers, private lessons may
be permitted during open skating sessions. Proof of insurance
and signed contract must be provided before services can be
rendered. All professional skating instructors must pay each
month, prior to coaching that month. Visiting professionals
must pay prior to each visit. [Amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No.
13-35]
(b) Learn-to-Skate Coach: no fee.
(c) Rink professionals: no fee. [Amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No.
13-35]
§ 242-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 242-10
225:350
§ 242-11. Severability. [Amended 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 04-40;
amended 11-1-2004 by Ord. No. 04-49]
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed severable, and it is expressly
declared that the Village Board would have passed the other provisions of
this chapter irrespective of whether or not one or more provisions may be
declared invalid. If any provision of this chapter or the application to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and
the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall
not be affected.
§ 242-12. Violations and penalties; enforcement. [Amended
8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 04-40; amended 11-1-2004 by Ord. No.
04-49]
(4) (Reserved)
(5) Public skate and family skate. Fees: [Amended 8-5-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-35; 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-46]
(a) Three and under: free.
(b) Four and over: $8.
(c) Teen night: $8.
(d) Teen lock-in: $25.
(6) Skate rental.
(a) Open skate fee: $4. [Amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-35]
(b) Program usage per class: $1.73
C. Program fees. See attachment.
D. Adult hockey league liquor license. A Class "B" fermented malt
beverage liquor license for the sale of beer during adult hockey league
programs from 10:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight is permitted on a one-year
trial basis. The sale of beer will only be allowed to adult hockey league
participants and will be sold and consumed only in the Ice Arena Party
Rooms A and B. The Village Administrator or his designee may at any
time cancel said program if a violation occurs.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $500 for each
violation, plus the costs of prosecution The penalty for nonpayment of
any such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisonment in the Kenosha
County Jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding six months Each
day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate violation.
73.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(7), Annual skate pass, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-35.
§ 242-10 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 242-12
225:351
§ 242-13. Other requirements. [Amended 8-16-2004 by Ord. No.
04-40; amended 11-1-2004 by Ord. No. 04-49; 12-3-2012 by Ord. No.
12-4374]
Chapter 246
SECONDHAND ARTICLE AND SECONDHAND JEWELRY
DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 214.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 254.
Rummage/garage sales — See Ch. 277.
§ 246-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by §§ 134.71 and
61.34, Wis. Stats.
§ 246-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter relates to the regulation of secondhand article
and secondhand jewelry dealers.
§ 246-3. Definitions.
The following definitions set out below shall apply to this chapter with
respect to secondhand article and secondhand jewelry dealers. In the event
of any inconsistency between such definitions and the definitions set out in
any other chapters of the Municipal Code, these shall apply.
B. The Director of Recreation or his/her designees shall administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter, all state laws and rules and
regulations related to the Village parks. Issuance of citations for
violations of said regulations is hereby authorized.
A. The Director of Recreation has authority to act in the best interest of
the RecPlex (a Village of Pleasant Prairie enterprise entity), including
operating outside ordinance fees, when considering new programs,
marketing promotions, memberships, special rates, or implementing
any business practice as related to all sections of Chapter 242 of the
Village ordinances, if approved by Village Administrator. If exception to
ordinance proves beneficial and recurrent, the ordinance shall be
amended upon earliest opportunity.
B. All other Village ordinances or other local, state or federal regulations
that are relevant shall also apply.
74.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2013.
§ 242-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 246-3
225:352
ARTICLE — Any of the following items, except jewelry:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — A corporation, trust or community chest,
fund or foundation, organized and operated exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary or educational purposes or for the prevention
of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures
to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
CUSTOMER — A person with whom a secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer or an agent thereof engages in a transaction
of a purchase, sale, receipt or exchange of any secondhand article or
secondhand jewelry.
JEWELRY — Any tangible personal property ordinarily wearable on the
person and consisting in whole or in part of any metal, mineral or gem
customarily regarded as precious or semiprecious.
PAWNBROKER — Any person who engages in the business of lending money
on the deposit or pledge of any article or jewelry or purchasing any article
or jewelry with an expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell
it back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company or organization of any kind.
A. Audiovisual equipment.
B. Bicycles.
C. China.
D. Computers, printers, software and computer supplies.
E. Computer toys and games, including video toys and games.
F. Crystal.
G. Electronic equipment.
H. Furniture.
I. Fur coats and other fur clothing.
J. Ammunition and knives.
K. Microwave ovens.
L. Office equipment.
M. Pianos, organs, guitars and other musical instruments.
N. Silverware and flatware.
O. Small electrical appliances.
P. Telephones.
§ 246-3 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 246-3
225:353
SECONDHAND — Owned by any person, except a wholesaler, retailer or
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer licensed under this
chapter, immediately before the transaction at hand.
SECONDHAND ARTICLE DEALER — Any person who primarily engages
in the business of consigning, purchasing or selling secondhand articles,
except when engaging in any of the following:
SECONDHAND JEWELRY DEALER — Any person who engages in the
business of any transaction consisting of consigning, purchasing, selling,
receiving or exchanging secondhand jewelry, except for the following:
Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale, estate sale,
antique show, or auction.
A.
Any transaction entered into by a person while engaged in a business
for which the person is licensed under § 246-4B of this chapter or while
engaged in the business of junk collector, junk dealer, auctioneer or
scrap processor as described in § 70.995(2)(x), Wis. Stats.
B.
Any transaction while operating as a charitable organization or
conducting a sale the proceeds of which are donated to a charitable
organization.
C.
Any transaction between a buyer of a new article and the person who
sold the article when new, which involves any of the following:
(1) The return of the article.
(2) The exchange of the article for a different, new article.
D.
Any transaction as a purchaser of a secondhand article from a
charitable organization if the secondhand article was a gift to the
charitable organization.
E.
Any transaction as a seller of a secondhand article which the person
bought from a charitable organization if the secondhand article was a
gift to the charitable organization.
F.
Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale, estate sale,
antique show, or auction.
A.
B. Any transaction with a licensed secondhand jewelry dealer.
Any transaction entered into by a person while engaged in a business of
smelting, refining, assaying or manufacturing precious metals, gems or
valuable articles if the person has no retail operation open to the public.
C.
Any transaction between a buyer of new jewelry and the person who
sold the jewelry when new, which involves any of the following:
(1) The return of the jewelry.
(2) The exchange of the jewelry for different, new jewelry.
D.
§ 246-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 246-3
225:354
TEMPORARY EVENT — A sale, trade show or convention scheduled for
a limited and prescribed time period, as set forth in § 246-8E, wherein
secondhand articles or secondhand jewelry are being purchased or sold by
a secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer.
§ 246-4. License required.
§ 246-5. Pawnbroker prohibited.
Any person who engages in the business of lending money on the deposit
or pledge of any article or jewelry or purchasing any article or jewelry with
an expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell it back at a
subsequent time at a stipulated price is hereby prohibited.
§ 246-6. License application.
A person wishing to operate as a secondhand article dealer or secondhand
jewelry dealer in the Village of Pleasant Prairie shall make application to the
Village Clerk for said license, accompanied by the required fee. The Village
Clerk shall furnish application forms, which, at a minimum, shall require the
following:
Any transaction as a purchaser of secondhand jewelry from a charitable
organization if the secondhand jewelry was a gift to the charitable
organization.
E.
Any transaction as a seller of secondhand jewelry which the person
bought from a charitable organization if the secondhand jewelry was a
gift to the charitable organization.
F.
A. No person may operate as a secondhand article dealer unless the
person first obtains a secondhand article dealer's license under this
chapter.
B. No person may operate as a secondhand jewelry dealer unless the
person first obtains a secondhand jewelry dealer's license under this
chapter.
A. The applicant's name, place and date of birth and residence address.
B. The names and addresses of the business and the owner of the business
premises.
C. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted within the
preceding 10 years of a felony or within the preceding five years of a
misdemeanor, statutory violation punishable by forfeiture or county or
municipal ordinance violation in which the circumstances of the felony,
misdemeanor or other offense substantially relate to the circumstances
of the licensed activity and, if so, the nature and date of the offense and
the penalty assessed.
§ 246-3 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 246-6
225:355
§ 246-7. Investigation of license applicant.
Upon receipt of an application, the Village Clerk shall send copies thereof to
the Community Development Department and the Police Department. The
Community Development Department shall verify that the use is allowed
and if any building or zoning permits/approvals are required for said use
to commence and shall submit a written report to the Village Clerk. The
Police Department shall investigate each applicant for a secondhand article
dealer's or secondhand jewelry dealer's license to determine whether the
applicant complies with § 246-8A(1) and (2). The Police Department shall
furnish the information derived from that investigation in writing to the
Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall make a determination based thereon
as to whether or not the license should be granted, denied or other such
action as may be appropriate within 20 days of the receipt of the
application.
§ 246-8. License issuance; transfer prohibited; term; display;
temporary events.
D. Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership or a
limited liability company, and:
(1) If the applicant is a corporation, the site where incorporated and
the names and addresses of all officers and directors.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all
partners.
(3) If the applicant is a limited liability company, the names and
addresses of all members and managers.
E. The name of the manager or proprietor of the business at the location
the license is being used.
F. Any other information that the Police Department, Community
Development Department, Building Inspection Department or Village
Clerk may reasonably require.
A. The Village Clerk shall grant the license if all of the following apply:
(1) The applicant, including an individual, a partner or an officer,
director or agent of any corporate applicant, member or managers
of any limited liability company, and the manager or proprietor of
the business at the location the license is being used, has not been
convicted of a felony crime within the past 10 years or a
misdemeanor crime, statutory violation punishable by forfeiture or
county or municipal ordinance violation within the past five years
wherein any of the following apply:
(a) Weapons of any kind were used, displayed or threatened.
(b) Physical violence was used or threatened.
§ 246-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 246-8
225:356
§ 246-9. Fees.
The license fees under this chapter are:
§ 246-10. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any determination made by the Village Clerk
pursuant to this chapter may appeal such determination to the Village
Board by filing with the Village Clerk, or the Village Clerk's designee, a
(c) The incident giving rise to the conviction involved robbery,
burglary, theft or other misappropriation of property or money.
(d) The incident giving rise to the conviction involved the
possession or receiving of stolen property or goods.
(e) The incident giving rise to the conviction involved fraud or
fraudulent dealing.
(2) The applicant, including an individual, a partner, an officer, director
or agent of any corporate applicant, member or manager of any
limited liability company, and the manager or proprietor of the
business at the location the license is issued has not been in
violation of a previous license for a secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer issued by the Village Clerk.
B. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred.
C. Each license for a secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer is valid from January 1 until the following December 31, unless a
license issued is for a temporary event.
D. The licensee must display the valid license in a conspicuous place on
the premises.
E. A secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer is required to
obtain a separate license for each temporary event. Each applicant,
including an individual, a partner or an officer, director or agent of any
corporate applicant and the manager or member of any limited liability
company application, and the manager or proprietor of the business at
the location for which the license is issued, is allowed a maximum of
four such licenses per calendar year, and each event shall not exceed
four consecutive calendar days.
A. For a secondhand article dealer's license: $75.
B. For a secondhand jewelry dealer's license: $75.
C. For a temporary event secondhand article dealer's license: $35 per
event.
D. For a temporary event secondhand jewelry dealer's license: $35 per
event.
§ 246-8 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 246-10
225:357
notice of appeal specifying with particularity the grounds for believing that
the Clerk's determination is erroneous. Any such notice of appeal shall
be filed within 30 days after the date of mailing to the appellant of the
Clerk's written determination along with a fee of $25 to help defray the
costs of appeal. The appellant shall be given not less than 10 days' advance
written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. The appellant
may be represented by counsel at the hearing, may present evidence and
arguments relevant to the issues raised by the notice of appeal, and may
question witnesses called to support the Clerk's determination. The Village
Board may reverse, affirm or modify the determination of the Clerk, and the
Board's decision shall be final. The Village Board shall promptly notify the
appellant of its findings in writing.
§ 246-11. License revocation.
The Village Board may revoke any license issued by the Village Clerk under
this chapter for fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in
the application for a license or for any violation of this chapter, of § 943.34
(receiving stolen property), § 948.62 (receiving stolen property from a child)
or of § 948.63 (receiving property from a child), Wis. Stats.
§ 246-12. Dealer requirements.
A. Identification.
(1) No secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer may
engage in a transaction of consignment, purchase, receipt or
exchange of any secondhand article or secondhand jewelry from a
customer without first securing adequate identification from the
customer.
(2) At the time of the transaction, the secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer shall require the customer to present
one of the following types of identification:
(a) A valid county identification card.
(b) A valid state identification card.
(c) A valid Wisconsin motor vehicle operator's license.
(d) A valid motor vehicle operator's license, containing a picture,
issued by another state.
(e) A valid military identification card.
(f) A valid passport.
(g) A valid alien registration card.
(h) A senior citizen's identification card containing a photograph.
§ 246-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 246-12
225:358
(i) Any identification document issued by a state or federal
government, whether or not containing a picture, if the
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer
obtains a clear imprint of the customer's right index finger.
(3) Transactions with minors (under the age of 18 years).
(a) Except as provided in § 246-12A(3)(b), no secondhand article
dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer may engage in a
transaction of purchase, receipt or exchange of any
secondhand article or secondhand jewelry from any minor.
(b) A secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer may
engage in a transaction described under § 246-12A(3)(a), if the
minor is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian at the
time of the transaction or if the minor provides the secondhand
article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer with the parent's
or guardian's written and notarized consent to engage in the
particular transaction.
B. Records. For each transaction of purchase, consignment receipt or
exchange of any secondhand article or secondhand jewelry from a
customer, a secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer
shall:
(1) Require the customer to complete and sign, in ink, the appropriate
form provided by the Village. No entry on such form may be erased,
mutilated or changed. The secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer shall retain an original and a duplicate
of each form for not less than one year after the date of the
transaction, except as provided in § 246-12D, and during that
period shall make the duplicate available to any law enforcement
officer for inspection at any reasonable time.
(2) For every secondhand article consigned to the secondhand article
dealer for sale on the secondhand article dealer's premises, the
secondhand article dealer shall keep a written inventory. In this
inventory the secondhand article dealer shall record the name and
address of each customer, the date, time and place of the
transaction and a detailed description of the article which is the
subject of the transaction. The customer shall sign his or her name,
address and telephone number on a declaration of ownership of the
secondhand article identified in the inventory and shall state that
he or she owns the secondhand article. The secondhand article
dealer shall retain an original and a duplicate of each entry and
declaration of ownership relating to the purchase, receipt or
exchange of any secondhand article for not less than one year after
the date of the transaction, except as provided for in § 246-12D,
and shall make duplicates of the inventory and declarations of
ownership available to any law enforcement officer for inspection
at any reasonable time.
§ 246-12 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 246-12
225:359
(3) Take a color photograph, a digital image or a video recording of:
(a) Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
(b) Every item purchased or sold.
(c) The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being
photographed and/or videotaped by displaying a sign of
sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises.
(d) Requirements:
[1] If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches in
length by two inches in width and must be maintained in
such a manner that the photograph can be readily
matched and correlated with all other records of the
transaction to which they relate. Such photographs must
be available to the Police Chief, or the Chief's designee,
upon request. The major portion of the photograph must
include an identifiable facial image of the person who sold
the item. Items recorded by digital image must be
accurately depicted.
[2] If a digital image it taken, it must be in a format specified
by the Police Department, electronically cross-referenced
to the reportable transaction it is associated with. Such
images must be available to the Police Chief, or the Chief's
designee, upon request. The major portion of the image
must include an identifiable facial image of the person who
sold the item. Items recorded by digital image must be
accurately depicted.
[3] If a video photograph is taken, the video camera must
focus on the person selling the item so as to include an
identifiable image of that person's face. Video recordings
must be available to the Police Chief, or the Chief's
designee, upon request. Items photographed by video
must be accurately depicted. Video photographs must be
electronically referenced by time and date so they can be
readily matched and correlated with all other records of
the transaction to which they relate.
(e) Photographs, digital images and video recordings shall be
retained by the secondhand article dealer or secondhand
jewelry dealer for not less than one year after the date of the
transaction.
C. Holding period.
(1) Except as provided in § 246-12C(2) and (3), any secondhand article
or secondhand jewelry consigned, purchased or received by a
secondhand dealer shall be kept on the secondhand dealer's
§ 246-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 246-12
225:360
premises or other place for safekeeping for not less than 21 days
after the date of purchase or receipt, unless the person is known
by the secondhand dealer to be the lawful owner of the secondhand
article or secondhand jewelry recovers it.
(2) If a secondhand article dealer or a secondhand jewelry dealer is
required to submit a report under § 246-12D concerning a
secondhand article or secondhand jewelry consigned, purchased or
received by the secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer and the report is required to be submitted in an electronic
format, the secondhand article or secondhand jewelry shall be kept
on the secondhand article dealer's or secondhand jewelry dealer's
premises or other place for safekeeping for not less than 10 days
after the report is submitted in addition to the requirements of
§ 246-12C(1).
(3) During the period set forth in § 246-12C(1) and (2) the secondhand
article or secondhand jewelry shall be held separate and apart and
may not be altered in any manner. The secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer shall permit any law enforcement
officer to inspect the secondhand article or secondhand jewelry
during this period. Within 24 hours of a written request of a police
officer during this period, a secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer shall make available for inspection any
secondhand article or secondhand jewelry which is kept off the
premises for safekeeping. Any law enforcement officer who has
reason to believe any secondhand article or secondhand jewelry
was not sold or exchanged by the lawful owner may direct a
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer to hold
that secondhand article or secondhand jewelry for a reasonable
length of time which the law enforcement officer considers
necessary to identify it.
(4) Section 246-12C(1), (2) and (3) does not apply to any of the
following:
(a) A coin of the United States, any gold or silver coin or gold or
silver bullion.
(b) A secondhand article or secondhand jewelry consigned,
purchased or received at a temporary event.
D. Report to Village of Pleasant Prairie Police Department.
(1) Within 24 hours after purchasing or receiving a secondhand article
or secondhand jewelry, a secondhand article dealer or secondhand
jewelry dealer shall make available for inspection by a police officer
the original form completed under § 246-12B(1) or the inventory
under § 246-12B(2), whichever is appropriate.
(2) Every secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer
shall, within seven days after receiving the secondhand article or
§ 246-12 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 246-12
225:361
secondhand jewelry, send to the Police Chief, or the Chief's
designee, a photocopy of the original form completed under
§ 246-12B(1).
(3) Notwithstanding § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats., the Police Department
receiving the original form or inventory or a declaration of
ownership may disclose it only to another law enforcement agency.
(4) Effective no later than 60 days after the Police Department
provides a secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer
with the current version of the software utilized by the Police
Department, a secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer must submit every reportable transaction daily to the Police
Department by transferring it electronically in the manner
designated by the Police Department. All required records must be
transmitted completely and accurately after the close of business
each day in accordance with the standards and procedures
established by the Police Department. A secondhand article dealer
or secondhand jewelry dealer at a temporary event is exempt from
this requirement.
(5) The secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer must
display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place on the
premises, which informs all patrons that all transactions are
reported daily to the Police Department.
(6) If a secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer is
unable to successfully transfer the required reports electronically,
the secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer shall
provide the Police Department with printed copies of all reportable
transactions by 12:00 noon the next business day. A secondhand
article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer at a temporary event is
exempt from this requirement.
(7) If the problem is determined to be in the secondhand article
dealer's or secondhand jewelry dealer's system and is not corrected
by the close of the first business day following the failure, the
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer must
provide the required reports as required by this chapter and shall
be charged a daily reporting failure fee of $10 until the error is
corrected, or if the problem is determined to be outside the
secondhand article dealer's or secondhand jewelry dealer's system,
the secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer must
provide the required reports pursuant to this chapter and resubmit
all such transactions electronically when the error is corrected.
(8) Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that
prevented the secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer from uploading the reportable transactions, upon correction
of the problem, the secondhand article dealer or secondhand
§ 246-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 246-12
225:362
jewelry dealer shall upload every reportable transaction from every
business day the problem has existed.
(9) The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the Police
Department may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances,
delay the implementation of the daily reporting penalty.
E. Exception for customer return or exchange. Nothing in this chapter
applies to the return or exchange, from a customer to a secondhand
article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer, of any secondhand article
or secondhand jewelry purchased from the secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer.
F. Altered serial number. No secondhand article dealer or secondhand
jewelry dealer may receive any item of property that possesses an
altered or obliterated serial number or operation identification number
or any item of property that has had its serial number removed.
G. Business at only one place.
(1) A license under this chapter, except as provided in § 246-12G(2)
authorizes the licensee to carry on its business only at the
permanent place of business designated in the license. However,
upon written request, the Police Chief, or the Chief's designee, may
approve an off-site locked and secured storage facility. The licensee
shall permit an inspection of the facility in accordance with this
chapter. All provisions of this chapter regarding recordkeeping and
reporting apply to the facility and its contents. Property shall be
stored in compliance with all provisions of the Village Municipal
Code. The licensee shall either own the building in which the
business is conducted and any approved off-site storage facility or
have a lease on the business premises that extends for more than
six months.
(2) A temporary event license under this chapter authorizes the
licensee to carry on its business only at the place of business
designated in the license. The licensee shall permit an inspection of
the facility in accordance with this chapter. All provisions of this
chapter regarding recordkeeping and reporting apply for articles
associated with the temporary event. The licensee, if not the owner
of the building shall have written permission from the owner to
conduct said temporary event on the premises.
H. Payment.
(1) All payments of more than $25 made by a secondhand article
dealer for the purchase of any secondhand article shall be made by
check or automated clearinghouse.
(2) All payments made by a secondhand jewelry dealer for the
purchase of any jewelry shall be made by check or automated
clearinghouse.
§ 246-12 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 246-13
225:363
§ 246-13. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the suspension or revocation of a license issued under this
chapter, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any
regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as
provided by § 1-4 of the Code of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
Chapter 250
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 114.
Animals — See Ch. 119.
Mass public assemblies — See Ch. 125.
Block parties — See Ch. 133.
Curfew — See Ch. 155.
Drugs and drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 162.
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 194.
Nuisances — See Ch. 234.
§ 250-1. Offenses against state law subject to forfeiture. [Amended
3-20-1995; 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13; 8-4-2014 by Ord. No.
14-25]
The following statutes defining offenses against the peace and good order of
the state are adopted by reference to define offenses against the peace and
good order of the Village, provided that the penalty for commission of such
offenses hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under Chapter
1, § 1-4, of this Code:
110.075(7) Producing/using inspection sticker fraudulently
134.06 Motor vehicle sales/bonus to chauffeur prohibited
173.10 Animals; investigation of cruelty complaints
175.25 Storage of junked automobiles
254.76 Causing fires by tobacco smoking
218.0146 Used cars/prohibited acts
218.0147 Motor vehicles/sale to minor
285.30(6) Pollution by motor vehicle/failure to repair
346.935 Intoxicants in motor vehicle
939.05 Parties of crime
939.22 Words and phrases defined
940.19(1) Battery; aggravated battery
941.10 Negligent handling of burning materials
§ 246-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 250-1
225:364
941.12(2) and
(3)
Interfering with fire fighting
941.13 False alarms
941.20(1) Reckless use of weapon
941.23 Carrying concealed weapon
941.235 Carrying firearm in public building
941.24 Possession of switchblade knife
943.01(1) Criminal damage to property (less than $1,000)
943.07 Criminal damage to railroads
943.11 Entry into locked vehicle
943.125 Entry into locked coin box
943.13 Trespass to land
943.14 Criminal trespass to dwellings
943.20 Theft (less than $1,000)
943.21 Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper (less than $1,000)
943.24 Issue of worthless checks (less than $1,000)
943.50 Shoplifting
943.61 Theft of library material (less than $1,000)
944.15 Fornication
944.20 Lewd and lascivious behavior
944.23 Making lewd, obscene or indecent drawings
944.30 Prostitution
944.31 Patronizing prostitutes
944.33 Pandering
945.01 Definitions relating to gambling
945.02 Gambling
945.04 Permitting premises to be used for commercial gambling
946.40 Refusing to aid officer
946.41 Resisting or obstructing officer
946.42 Escape
946.44 Assisting or permitting escape
946.70 Impersonating peace officer
946.72 Tampering with public records and notices
947.01 Disorderly conduct
947.012 Unlawful use of telephone
947.0125 Unlawful use of computerized communication systems
947.013 Harassment
§ 250-1 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 250-1
225:365
947.06 Unlawful assemblies
948.60 Possession of a dangerous weapon by a person under 18
951.01 to
951.15
Crimes against animals
961.14(4)(t) to
961.41
Possession of marijuana; prohibited acts; penalties
961.573 Possession of drug paraphernalia (added)
961.574 Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia (added)
961.575 Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor (added)
961.576 Advertisement of drug paraphernalia (added)
961.577 Municipal ordinances (added)
§ 250-2. Public consumption of alcoholic beverages; alcohol
influence by underage persons. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No.
10-53]
§ 250-3. Discharge of firearms restricted. [Amended 6-18-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-27; 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-50; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No.
12-31; 10-7-2013 by Ord. No. 13-47; 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 14-24;
11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-41]
A. No person shall carry or expose to view any open can, bottle or other
container which contains intoxicating liquor, wine or fermented malt
beverage or drink from the same on any public walk or street, in any
park or other public place in the Village or over which the Village has
any lease or legal jurisdiction, or on any parking lot open to and
available to the public, unless such public place shall have issued to it a
license for the sale or use of such beverage.
B. Alcohol influence by underage persons prohibited.
(1) No underage person as defined in § 125.02(20m), Wis. Stats., shall
be under the influence of alcohol in the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
Such prohibition is subject to the exceptions in § 125.07(4)(b), Wis.
Stats.
(2) For the purposes of this section "under the influence" shall mean
any detectable amount of alcohol in the underage person's blood or
breath.
A. No person shall fire or discharge any firearm, air rifle, spring gun or air
gun (commonly referred to as "BB guns," "dart guns," "pellet guns" or
"paintball guns") of any description or fire or discharge any instrument,
bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot or other weapon or device capable
of discharging a single projectile, including an arrow, except this
section shall not apply to the following:
(1) Any authorized officer of the law in the performance of his duties.
§ 250-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 250-3
225:366
(2) At a shooting range, shotgun trap or skeet-shooting field, archery
range, shooting gallery or public or private sportsman's range or
club if allowed by the underlying zoning district.
(3) Gun salutes as a special function at a parade, program or funeral.
(4) The discharge of blank cartridges in a firearm suitable for their
safe use when utilized as a starting signal device at athletic events
or as a prop in any stage performance.
(5) Hunting.
(a) The discharge of a shotgun or use of a bow and arrow for
hunting wild animals and birds under licenses issued pursuant
to Ch. 29, Wis. Stats., including the hunting of deer during the
State of Wisconsin gun and bow and arrow deer seasons.
(b) Anyone engaged in the discharge of a shotgun or use of bow
and arrow for hunting wild animals and birds under this
section shall comply with all state statutes and rules
promulgated by the Department of Natural Resources
pertaining to game, including but not limited to the following:
[1] State-designated hunting seasons, times, and zones.
[2] State limits on the number of game obtained per season.
[3] Safety measures.
[4] Acquisition of necessary permits and licenses.
[5] Penalties and fines for violations and noncompliance.
(6) Shooting or discharging a bow and arrow or crossbow.
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person to hunt with a bow and arrow
or crossbow within a distance of 100 yards from a building
located on another person's land. This restriction shall not
apply if the person who owns the land on which the building is
located allows the hunter to hunt with a bow and arrow or
crossbow within the specified distance of the building. A
building is defined as a permanent structure used for human
occupancy and includes a manufactured home, as defined in
§ 101.91(2), Wis. Stats.
(b) A person who hunts with a bow and arrow or crossbow shall
discharge the arrow or bolt from the weapon toward the
ground.
B. Transporting weapons. No person shall possess, use or transport, while
on the lands of another, within the Village, any firearm, air gun or other
weapon or device capable of discharging a missile, unless the express
permission of the owner or occupant of such land has been first
obtained.
§ 250-3 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 250-3
225:367
§ 250-4. Disorderly conduct.
No person shall engage in disorderly conduct or conduct himself or herself
in a tumultuous, riotous or indecent manner.
C. Hunting and trapping prohibited. Hunting and/or trapping on all
Village-owned property is prohibited.
D. It shall be illegal to discharge a firearm utilizing a single projectile in
the area of the Village bordered by Sheridan Road on the west, Lake
Michigan on the east, 128th Street (Illinois State Line) to the south and
the Village boundary line to the north.
A. Any of the following acts constitute disorderly conduct under this
section, the enumeration of which shall not be deemed exclusive:
(1) Breach of the peace. In a public or private place, making, aiding or
assisting in making any improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of
the peace or act tending to a breach of the peace or engaging in
violent, abusive, boisterous or unreasonably loud or wrathful
conduct under such circumstances in which such conduct tends to
cause or provoke a disturbance or damage to public or private
property.
(2) Assault. Assaulting or striking or intentionally injuring another
person.
(3) Obscene language. Using any profane, obscene, vulgar or insulting
language in such circumstances as tend to cause or provoke a
disturbance.
(4) Fighting. Engaging in or aiding or abetting any fight or similar
disturbance.
(5) Unlawful assembly. Collecting in crowds for unlawful purposes or
for any purpose to the annoyance or disturbance of other persons.
(6) Intoxication. Being intoxicated in a public place or in any place to
the unreasonable annoyance and disturbance of other persons.
(7) Obstructing officer. Resisting or obstructing a police officer in the
performance of his or her duties or impersonating a police officer.
(8) Escape. Assisting any person in the custody of the police to escape
or furnishing any weapon, controlled substance or intoxicating
beverages to any person in police custody or interfering in any way
with the police custody of any person under arrest.
(9) Furnishing intoxicants to juveniles. Furnishing, aiding or assisting
in furnishing a controlled substance or an intoxicating beverage to
any juvenile.
§ 250-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 250-4
225:368
(10) False reporting. Filing any false report by any means whatever to
any Village officer under such circumstances as to reasonably
expect that such officer would make an investigation based on such
report or under such circumstances as to mislead any such officer,
or giving any false alarm of fire, danger or disturbance to any
person.75
(11) Unlawful use of telephone. Making a telephone call with intent to
unreasonably annoy another, whether or not conversation ensues.
(12) Prostitution or gambling. Keeping or maintaining or being in a
place of prostitution or a gambling house or engaging in or
soliciting unlawful sexual acts.
(13) Lewd and lascivious behavior. Engaging in obscene or indecent
activities or entertainment, or any lewd or lascivious behavior, or
appearing in a public place or in view of the public in a state of
nudity.
(14) Stones or missiles. Throwing or discharging stones or missiles in a
public place or at any person or property or using, brandishing or
threatening to use any missile or dangerous weapon or object
against any person or property.
(15) Obscene drawings or writings. Making any lewd, obscene or
indecent drawing or writing in any public place or other place
frequented by the public.
(16) Urination or defecation in public. Urinating or defecating outdoors
in view of the public.
B. Disturbance of meeting. No person shall disturb or annoy any
congregation, audience, public meeting, court session or lawful
assembly of persons of any kind, or join with others in so doing.
C. Annoyance. No person shall maltreat or annoy any person in any public
place.
D. Sleeping in vehicle. No person shall sleep in a motor vehicle on a public
street within the Village between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
E. Disturbing the peace. No person shall disturb the peace and good order
of the Village in any manner.
F. Mashing. No person shall improperly accost, ogle, insult, follow,
pursue, lay hands on or otherwise molest any person of the opposite
sex.
G. Begging. No person shall, in any public place or from place to place,
beg or receive alms without written permission from the Village Board.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-4 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 250-4
225:369
§ 250-5. Sale and use of fireworks.
Section 167.10, Wis. Stats., regulating the sale and use of fireworks,
exclusive of any penalty imposed thereby, is adopted by reference and made
a part of this chapter as though set forth in full.
H. Damage to property. No person shall intentionally cause damage to any
physical property of another without the other's consent.
I. Illegal entry into vehicle. No person shall intentionally enter the
enclosed portion or compartment of the vehicle of another without
consent and with intent to steal therefrom or take possession thereof.
J. Concealed weapon. No person, except a peace officer, shall go armed
with a concealed and dangerous weapon.
K. Threats with weapons. No person shall display in a threatening manner
any dangerous weapon, including but not limited to any pistol,
slingshot, knuckles of brass, lead or metal or any knife or object capable
of being used as a weapon.
L. Nunchakus. No person, except a peace officer, shall make,
manufacture, sell or offer to sell or possess or go armed with
Nunchakus or similar devices.
M. Switchblade knives. No person shall manufacture, sell or offer to sell,
transport, purchase, possess or go armed with any knife having a blade
which opens by pressing a button, spring or other device in the handle
or by gravity or by a thrust or movement.
N. Trespass. No person, without lawful authority or express or implied
consent of the owner or occupant or his agent, shall do any of the
following:
(1) Enter any land, property, building or structure of another;
(2) Enter on, swim or fish from or in any body of water of another;
(3) Enter on any Village property or park after the posted closing time;
or
(4) Fail or refuse to leave the land, building, structure or property of
another when requested to do so by the owner, occupant or an
agent or authorized representative of such owner or occupant.
O. Possession of intoxicants by juveniles. No person under 21 years of age
shall have in his possession or control any intoxicating beverage.76
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 250-6
225:370
§ 250-6. Obstructing streets and sidewalks.
No person shall stand, sit, loaf or loiter or engage in any sport or exercise
on any public street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground within the Village
in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic thereon or to prevent or hinder free ingress to or egress
from any place of business or amusement or any church, public hall or
meeting place.
§ 250-7. Public urination or defecation.
No person shall urinate or defecate outdoors in view of the public.
§ 250-8. Loud and unnecessary noise. [Amended 12-6-1999]
A. Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause
to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any
noise which endangers the health, safety or welfare of the community
or which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, rest,
health, peace or safety of a person of ordinary sensibilities within the
Village of Pleasant Prairie.
B. Unlawful acts enumerated. The following acts, among others, are
declared to be loud, unnecessary and disturbing and a danger to the
health, safety or welfare of the community and its people, in violation of
Subsection A above, but the following shall not be deemed to be
exclusive:
(1) Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any
radio, television, hi-fi, stereo, phonograph or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound which would be
intolerable to a reasonable person.
(2) Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing or the making of
loud and disturbing noises by the use of clappers, bells, horns,
musical instruments or similar devices at any time or place so as to
unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or rest of any
person in any residence, hospital, school, place of business, street
or public place.
(3) The use of any automobile, motorcycle, truck or vehicle so out of
repair or loaded, accelerated and decelerated, or operated in such
a manner, as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise.
(4) The operation or use of any power lawn mower, chain saw or the
like between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., with the
exception of snowblowers or in the case or an emergency.
[Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-53]
(5) Outdoor concerts, except in accordance with permits first obtained
from the Village.
§ 250-6 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 250-8
225:371
§ 250-9. Loitering.
(6) Any construction, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair
which creates a noise disturbance between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety.
(7) Frequent or continuous barking, yelping, whining or cries or any
other domestic animal sound to the great discomfort of the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood or in such manner as to materially
disturb or annoy persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary
sensibilities.
(8) No amplified sound shall be allowed within a residential district
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. that can be heard
beyond the property boundaries. [Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No.
10-30]
A. Generally. No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a
manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that
warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity.
Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight
upon appearance of a police or peace officer, refuses to identify himself
or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight
by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a police or
peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this
subsection, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would otherwise be warranted by requesting him to identify himself and
explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an
offense under this subsection if the police or peace officer did not
comply with the preceding sentence or if it appears at trial that the
explanation given by the person was true and, if believed by the police
or peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
B. Obstruction of traffic by loitering. No person shall loaf or loiter in a
group or crowd upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street
crossings or bridges or in any other public place within the Village in
such manner as to prevent, interfere with or obstruct the ordinary free
use of such public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street crossings or bridges
or other public places by persons passing along and over the same.
C. Loitering after being requested to move.
(1) In groups or crowds. No person shall loaf or loiter in a group or a
crowd upon the public streets or sidewalks or in adjacent doorways
or entrances, on street crossings or bridges or in any other public
place or on any private premises without invitation from the owner
or occupant, after being requested to move by any police officer or
by any person in authority at such places.
§ 250-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 250-9
225:372
§ 250-10. Littering.
No person shall throw any glass, refuse, waste, filth or other litter upon the
streets, alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the Village or
upon any private property or upon the surface of any body of water within
the Village.
§ 250-11. Obedience to officers.
No person shall resist or interfere with any officer of the Village while such
officer is doing any act in his official capacity and with lawful authority, nor
shall any person refuse to assist an officer in carrying out his duties when
so requested by the officer.
§ 250-12. Open wells and other dangerous openings.
No person shall have or permit on any premises owned or occupied by him
any open cisterns, cesspools, wells, unused basements, excavations or other
dangerous openings. All such places shall be filled, securely covered or
fastened in such manner as to prevent injury to any person, and any cover
shall be of such design, size and weight that the same cannot be removed
by small children.
§ 250-13. Abandoned refrigerators and other containers.
No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building
or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building,
dwelling or other structure under his control, in a place accessible to
children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or
(2) In places of public assembly or use. No person shall loiter, lounge
or loaf in or about any depot, theater, dance hall, restaurant, store,
public sidewalk, public parking lot or other place of assembly or
public use after being requested to move by any police officer.
Upon being requested to move, a person shall immediately comply
with such request by leaving the premises or the area thereof.
(3) Obstructing highways. No person shall obstruct any street, bridge,
sidewalk or crossing by lounging or loitering in or upon the same
after being requested to move on by any police officer.
D. Prohibited activity. No person may stand, sit or stay upon any median in
a designated roadway or highway due to the safety concerns for both
pedestrians and the motoring public. A "median" is defined as a paved
or unpaved area dividing a street or highway that separates lanes of
traffic. This provision does not apply to: [Added 7-17-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-35]
(1) Persons using a crosswalk to cross a street or roadway.
(2) Law enforcement officers, fire rescue officers or any public
employee acting within the scope of their duties.
§ 250-9 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 250-13
225:373
other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking
device which may not be released from the inside unless such door or lid,
snap lock or other locking device has been removed from such icebox,
refrigerator or container or unless such container is displayed for sale on
the premises of the owner or his agent and is securely locked or fastened.
§ 250-14. Open burning. [Amended 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13;
7-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-26]
See § 180-13.
§ 250-15. Use of video imaging and photographic devices in certain
public places. [Added 4-19-2004 by Ord. No. 04-24]
§ 250-16. Smoking prohibited. [Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
10-5277]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated.
IMAGING DEVICE — Any device which can be used to capture, record
and store a digital video, analogue video or photographic image or
images, moving or not, including but not limited to digital and
photographic cameras, including those mounted on cellular telephones
and personal digital assistants or camcorders.
PRIVACY FACILITIES — Any facilities open to the public and intended
to provide privacy for the purpose of disrobing, showering, attending to
bodily functions, changing clothes or sleeping, including but not limited
to any rest room, locker room, shower facility, bathhouse, motel/hotel
room or retail store changing room.
B. Prohibition.
(1) No person shall use any video imaging or photographic device in
any privacy facility in the Village of Pleasant Prairie. A use of such
device will have occurred if the video portion of the device is
powered on, regardless of whether or not an image was captured or
stored.
(2) It shall not be a violation of this section to use the non-videoimaging
functions of any cellular phone or personal digital
assistant in a privacy facility.
C. Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4, of this Code.
A. State laws adopted. The provisions of § 101.123, Wis. Stats., and any
subsequent amendments or modifications are adopted as if more fully
77.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 250-16,
Violations and penalties, as § 250-17.
§ 250-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 250-16
225:374
§ 250-17. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 254
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 214.
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 246.
Rummage/garage sales — See Ch. 277.
set forth herein. Anyone violating this section shall be subject to the
forfeitures set forth in § 101.123, Wis. Stats.
B. Enforcement. The Police Chief, Fire Chief and inspectors or their
designees shall have the authority to enforce this section and may enter
premises subject to this section to conduct compliance inspections.
C. Violations and penalties. Penalties for violations of this section shall be
in accordance with those specified in § 101.123(8) of the Wisconsin
Statutes plus any statutorily allowed costs.
(1) Any person who violates the provisions of § 101.123(2) shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more than $250 for
each violation.
(2) Any person who violates the provisions of § 101.123(2m) shall be
subject to a forfeiture of $100 for each violation.
A. Generally. Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate
any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-4, of this Code.
B. Damage to property. In addition to any penalty imposed for violation of
§ 943.01(1), Wis. Stats., any person who shall cause physical damage to
or destroy any public property shall be liable for the costs of replacing
or repairing such damaged or destroyed property. The parent of any
unemancipated minor child who violates § 943.01(1), Wis. Stats., may
also be held liable for the cost of repairing such damaged or destroyed
property in accordance with § 895.035, Wis. Stats.
C. Confiscation of weapons. Any weapon involved in an offense under
§ 250-4 of this chapter may be seized by the Pleasant Prairie police for
examination and for use as evidence. If the weapon is owned by a
person convicted under this chapter, it shall be confiscated by the Police
Department and disposed of according to Department policy and state
law. If it is owned by a person other than the person convicted, the trial
judge may decide whether such weapon shall be returned to its rightful
owner or disposed of by the Police Department.
§ 250-16 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 250-17
225:375
§ 254-1. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, canvasser, solicitor or transient
merchant to engage in business within the Village of Pleasant Prairie
without being registered for that purpose as provided herein.
§ 254-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — A person who goes from place to place
within the Village soliciting orders for the future delivery of property or for
services to be performed in the future, including any person who occupies
any place within the Village for the purpose of exhibiting samples and
taking orders for future delivery.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Includes any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation,
or one purporting to be such.
CLERK — The Village Clerk.
MERCHANDISE — Includes personal property of any kind, and shall include
merchandise, goods, or materials provided incidental to services offered or
sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller for
the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customers.
PEDDLER — A person who goes from place to place within the Village
offering for sale property which he carries with him, including a vendor who
distributes his products to regular customers on an established route.
PERMANENT MERCHANT — Any person who, for at least one year prior
to the consideration of the application of this chapter to said merchant
has continuously operated an established place of business in the local
trade area among the communities bordering the place of sale; or has
continuously resided in the local trade area among the communities
bordering the place of sale and now does business from his/her residence.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any individual who engages in the retail sale
of merchandise at any place in this state temporarily, and who does not
intend to become and does not become a permanent merchant of such
place. For purposes of this definition, sale of merchandise includes a sale
in which the personal services rendered upon or in connection with the
merchandise constitutes the greatest part of value for the price received,
but does not include a farm auction sale conducted by or for a resident
farmer of personal property used on the farm, or the sale of produce or
other perishable products at retail or wholesale by a resident of this state.
§ 254-3. Exemptions.
A. The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter:
§ 250-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 254-3
225:376
(1) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery
goods to regular customers on established routes;
(2) Any person selling merchandise at wholesale to dealers in such
merchandise;
(3) Any person selling agricultural products which the person has
grown;
(4) Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders at
the home of the buyer for merchandise regularly offered for sale by
such merchant within this county and who delivers such
merchandise in the regular course of business;
(5) Any person who has an established place of business where the
merchandise being sold is offered for sale on a regular basis, and in
which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically
requested, a home visit by said person;
(6) Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which
has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer;
(7) Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with
the sale or offering for sale of merchandise;
(8) Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any
court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant
to law;
(9) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for or on behalf of said organization,
provided that there is submitted to the Clerk proof that such
charitable organization is registered under § 440.42, Wis. Stats.
Any charitable organization engaging in the sale of merchandise
and not registered under § 440.42, Wis. Stats., or which is exempt
from that statute's registration requirements, shall be required to
register under this chapter;
(10) Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against
whom complaint has been made to the Clerk that such person is a
transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the Clerk
for proof that such person has leased for at least one year, or
purchased, the premises from which he/she has conducted
business in the market area for at least one year prior to the date
the complaint was made;
(11) Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in
§ 15.01(7), Wis. Stats.;
B. This chapter does not apply to transient merchants while doing
business at special events authorized by the Village Board.
§ 254-3 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 254-4
225:377
§ 254-4. Registration information; fees.
A. Applicants for registration must complete and return to the Clerk a
registration form furnished by the Clerk which shall require the
following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if any;
(2) Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the transient merchant represents
or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold;
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will
be conducted, if any;
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
merchandise, and any services offered;
(6) Proposed methods of delivery of merchandise, if applicable;
(7) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the
applicant in the conduct of his/her business;
(8) Most recent cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where the
applicant conducted his/her business;
(9) Place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving this Village;
(10) Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient
merchant business within the last five years, and the nature of the
offense and the place of conviction.
B. Applicants shall present to the Clerk for examination:
(1) A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required;
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the Sealer of
Weights and Measures where the applicant's business requires use
of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities;
(3) A state health officer's certificate where the applicant's business
involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under state law; such certificate to state that the applicant
is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated
not more than 90 days prior to the date the application license is
made.
§ 254-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 254-4
225:378
§ 254-5. Investigation.
§ 254-6. Appeals.
Any person refused or denied registration may appeal the denial through
the appeal procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Village
Board, or if none has been adopted, under the provisions of §§ 68.07
through 68.16, Wis. Stats.
§ 254-7. Prohibited practices; disclosure requirements.
C. At the time the registration is returned, an application fee of $30, which
includes fee for police check, shall be paid to the Clerk to cover the cost
of processing said registration. [Amended 6-5-2006 by Ord. No.
06-25; 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-42]
(1) The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Clerk his/her
agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought
against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed
by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the
applicant, in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort,
be served personally.
(2) Upon payment of said fee and the signing of said statement, the
Clerk shall register the applicant as a peddler, canvasser, solicitor
or transient merchant and date the entry. Said registration shall be
valid for a period of three months from the date of entry, subject to
subsequent refusal as provided in § 254-5B below.
A. Upon receipt of each application, the Clerk may refer it immediately to
the Chief of Police who may make and complete an investigation of the
statements made in such registration.
B. The Clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined,
pursuant to the investigation above, that the application contains any
material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a
material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities
in the most recent cities, villages and towns, not exceeding three, in
which the applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was
convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within
the last five years, the nature of which is directly related to the
applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or the applicant failed to
comply with any applicable provision of § 254-4B above.
A. Prohibited practices.
(1) A peddler, canvasser, solicitor or transient merchant shall be
prohibited from calling at any dwelling or other place between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by appointment; calling at
any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the
words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of similar meaning;
§ 254-4 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 254-7
225:379
calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or remaining on any
premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other
person having authority over such premises.
(2) A transient merchant shall not misrepresent or make false,
deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality,
quantity, or characteristics of any visit, his/her identity or the
identity of the organization he/she represents. A charitable
organization transient merchant shall specifically disclose what
portion of the sale price of the merchandise being offered will
actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the
organization is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as a
percentage of the sale price of the merchandise.
(3) No transient merchant shall impede the free use of sidewalks and
streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from
vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
(4) No transient merchant shall make any loud noises or use any
sound-amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced
is capable of being plainly heard outside a one-hundred-foot radius
of the source.
(5) No transient merchant shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in
or around the area which he/she is conducting business.
B. Disclosure requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospective customer, a transient merchant shall display the
license issued by the Village, expressly disclose his/her name, the
name of the company or organization he/she is affiliated with, if
any, and the identity of merchandise or services he/she offers to
sell. [Amended 6-5-2006 by Ord. No. 06-25]
(2) If any sale of merchandise is made by a transient merchant, or any
offer for the later delivery of merchandise is taken by the seller, the
buyer shall have the right to cancel said transaction if it involves
the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25, in
accordance with the procedure as set forth in § 423.203, Wis.
Stats.; the seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or
printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the
requirements of § 423.203(1)(a)(b) and (c), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
(3) If the transient merchant takes a sales order for the later delivery
of merchandise, he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide
the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the
agreement; the amount paid in advance; whether full, partial, or no
advance payment is made; the name, address and telephone
number of the seller; the delivery or performance date; and
whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms
thereof.
§ 254-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 254-8
225:380
§ 254-8. Records.
The Chief of Police shall report to the Clerk all convictions for violations of
this chapter, and the Clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the
registrant convicted.
§ 254-9. Bond.
§ 254-10. Revocation of registration.
§ 254-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person adjudged in violation of any provision of this chapter shall forfeit
not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each violation per se, plus costs of
prosecution. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
A. When required. Every applicant who is not a resident of Kenosha
County or who represents a firm whose principal place of business is
located outside of the state shall file with the Clerk a surety bond in the
amount of $500, approved by the Village Administrator, conditioned
that the applicant will comply with all provisions of the Village
ordinances and the state laws regulating peddlers, canvassers,
solicitors and transient merchants, and guaranteeing to any person
doing business with the licensee that all money paid as a down payment
will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of
the licensee, and further guaranteeing that property purchased for
future delivery will be delivered according to the representations of the
licensee.
B. Action on bond. Action on such bond may be brought by any person
aggrieved.
A. Registration may be revoked by the Village Board after notice and
hearing if the registrant made any material omission or materially
inaccurate statements in the application for registration, made any
fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation
in the course of engaging in transient sales, violated any provision of
this chapter or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory
violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in
selling.
B. Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally or pursuant to
§ 254-4C above on the registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set
for the hearing; such notice shall contain the time and place of hearing
and a statement of the facts upon which the hearing will be based.
§ 254-8 MASSAGE THERAPISTS § 254-11
225:381
Chapter 260
POLICE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police and Fire Commission — See Ch. 18, Art.
IV.
Emergency management — See Ch. 165.
Fire and rescue protection — See Ch. 180.
§ 260-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the protection of
persons and property within the Village of Pleasant Prairie by establishing
certain policies of the Police Department, including staffing levels, duties
of the Chief of Police and the circumstances under which the Village may
contract for police services.
§ 260-2. Definitions.
In this chapter the following words shall have the following meanings:
AVERAGE RESPONSE TIME — The average amount of time that it takes for
an emergency services provider to arrive on the scene in response to a call
for service.
BASED WITHIN THE VILLAGE — Physically operating from a facility
located within the corporate boundaries of the Village of Pleasant Prairie,
which facility shall be open to the public for the purpose of reporting crimes
and conducting official business and shall include the office of the Chief
of Police and be the headquarters and deployment point for officers and
detectives assigned to the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
CONTRACTED LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES — Refers to an agreement
between the Village of Pleasant Prairie and another municipal or county
government whereby that government's law enforcement agency shall
supply primary law enforcement services to the Village of Pleasant Prairie
in exchange for payment agreed upon by the two parties.
CONTRACT PROVIDER — A law enforcement agency of another municipal
or county government which provides contracted law enforcement services
to the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
INVESTIGATIVE PERSONNEL — A police officer holding the rank of
detective or above and whose primary and permanent assignment is the
investigation of actual or suspected criminal activity and who has received
advanced training in the investigation of crimes against persons and
property, including but not limited to death investigation, fraud and white
collar crime investigation, arson, burglary and sensitive crimes
investigation.
§ 254-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 260-2
260:382
MINIMUM STAFFING LEVEL — The minimum number of full-time police
officers, including the Chief of Police, to be employed by the Village, deemed
necessary in order to adequately protect persons and property in the
Village, keep the peace and provide other services required by this chapter.
OFFICIAL RECORDS — Records routinely kept in the course of business
related to the agency operations and the conduct of official business.
PART - I CRIME CLEARANCE RATE — The percentage of Part - I crimes
reported to a law enforcement agency that have been cleared by arrest
or exceptional means based on statistics published by the Wisconsin
Department of Justice Office of Justice Assistance.
PRIMARY LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES — Those services that a
municipal police agency provides to a community for the purpose of
protecting the persons and property of its citizens from criminal activity
and to keep the peace. These services include the routine patrol of the
community, response to calls for service from the citizens, documentation
and investigation of crimes occurring in the community, enforcement of
state laws and local ordinances, arrest of offenders, control of traffic and
enforcement of traffic regulations and provision of certain ancillary services
intended to prevent or reduce the number of crimes.
§ 260-3. Organization of Police Department.
A. The Police Department of the Village shall be comprised of a Chief of
Police and such other full-time police officers, and such part-time police
officers, that the Village Board may from time to time authorize. The
Chief and officers of the Department shall be employees of the Village
and subject to all applicable laws of the State of Wisconsin and Village
ordinances. The Chief of Police and subordinates shall be appointed as
set forth in § 18-31 of the Village Code.
B. The Village Board may also, from time to time, authorize the
employment of nonsworn support personnel who are also subject to all
applicable laws of the State of Wisconsin and Village ordinances.
C. The minimum staffing level of the Village Police Department shall equal
the ratio of 1.5 full-time sworn members per 1,000 residents of the
Village, including the Chief of Police, based upon the most recent
population figures supplied by the Wisconsin Department of
Administration unless such staffing would cause a significant fiscal
hardship on the Village. The Village Board may increase this ratio as the
growth of the Village and other circumstances require, but may not
decrease the number below 1.5 full-time officers per 1,000 residents
except by a vote of majority of the Village Board because the staffing at
that level would cause a significant fiscal hardship on the Village.
D. Of the total number of officers, including the Chief, as established in
Subsection C, approximately 12% of such officers shall be investigative
personnel as defined in § 260-2 of this chapter, unless such staffing
would cause a significant fiscal hardship on the Village.
§ 260-2 POLICE SERVICES § 260-3
260:383
§ 260-4. Duties of Police Department personnel.
§ 260-5. Contracts for future police services; safeguards for public
safety.
The Village, having elected to create and maintain its own Police
Department pursuant to § 61.65(1)(a)1, Wis. Stats. shall not enter into
any contract for police services as provided for in §§ 61.65(1)(a)2 and
59.03(2)(e) Wis. Stats., unless all of the following conditions are met:
E. Primary law enforcement services shall be provided by the Village
Police Department. This does not preclude the Chief of Police from
entering into agreements with other agencies for the provision of
specialized services, nor does it in any way limit the authority of the
Chief of Police or his or her designee(s) from requesting or providing
mutual assistance.
F. It is the policy of the Village of Pleasant Prairie that the Village Police
Department shall collaborate and cooperate with other law
enforcement agencies insofar as it is practical to do so and does not
conflict with any applicable state law or Village ordinance, or the
operations of the Police Department.
A. All full-time police officers in the Village shall be subordinate to and
under the control and direction of the Chief of Police. It shall be the
duty of the Chief of Police to cause the public peace to be preserved,
and to see that all the laws and ordinances in the Village are enforced.
The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the efficiency and general
good conduct of the Department, and shall have the authority to
promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary to accomplish
the good government of the Police Department.
B. The Chief of Police shall obey all lawful written orders of the Village
Board and the Village Administrator, and the Chief of Police and any
Village police officer shall, within the exercise of the officer's
professional discretion, arrest, with or without process, every person
found in the Village engaged in any disturbance of the peace or
violating any law of the state or ordinance of the Village.
C. The Chief of Police shall periodically report to the Village Board and the
Village Administrator and the Police and Fire Commission on the
activities of the Department and shall assist the Village Administrator in
preparing the Department's proposed budget.
A. The Village Board shall adopt a resolution directing the Village
Administrator to prepare and issue a request for proposals from one or
more potential contract providers to provide contracted law
enforcement services to the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
B. Any law enforcement agency responding to the Village's request for a
proposal to contract to provide police services to the Village of Pleasant
§ 260-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 260-5
260:384
Prairie shall have achieved for a minimum of three years prior to the
date of the submission of the response, and shall maintain during the
consideration of the proposal and the life of the contract, a minimum
overall Part - I crime clearance rate of 50% as reported annually by the
Wisconsin Office of Justice Assistance, or, in the event such statistic is
no longer reported, a sufficiently similar indicia of reliability reported
by a state entity.
C. The successful respondent to a request for proposal to provide contract
police services shall have achieved for a minimum of three years prior
to the date of the submission of the response and shall maintain during
the consideration of the proposal and the life of the contract an average
response time of less than four minutes to calls for service of a serious
nature, including but not limited to in-progress crimes and motor
vehicle crashes. The proposed contract provider shall submit
documentation to the Village in order to fulfill this requirement initially
with its proposal to provide services and then monthly during the life of
the contract. Such documentation shall include the official records of
the contract provider, including computer-aided dispatch records.
D. Any proposed contract shall provide for a minimum of 1.5 full-time
officers per 1,000 residents, excluding the Chief of Police appointed by
the Village of Pleasant Prairie, based upon the most recent population
figures supplied by the Wisconsin Department of Administration. Such
officers shall be based in the Village and shall perform their duties
exclusively within the Village except when leaving the Village is
necessary to carry out those duties or to fulfill a request for mutual aid.
This contractual requirement shall not apply in the event that the
Village Police Department is not meeting this threshold, but in that case
the proposed contract shall provide for at least equivalent staffing to
that provided by the Village Police Department.
E. Of the total number of officers provided by the contract provider
pursuant to Subsection D above, a minimum of 12% of those officers
shall be trained and experienced investigative personnel with no less
than three years experience at the rank of detective or above and shall
also be based within the Village and shall be dedicated exclusively to
Village investigations. Nothing in this subsection precludes these
officers from leaving the Village when necessary to carry out their
duties. This contractual requirement shall not apply in the event that
the Village Police Department is not meeting this threshold, but in that
case the proposed contract shall provide for at least equivalent staffing
to that provided by the Village Police Department.
F. The officers assigned to the Village shall be under the direct supervision
of the contract provider. The offices of the Chief of Police shall continue
to be located within the corporate limits of the Village of Pleasant
Prairie. The Chief of Police shall not be assigned duties by the contract
provider, but the Chief of Police shall be responsible for the
administration of the contract for police services on behalf of the
Village, and such other duties as directed by the Village Board.
§ 260-5 POLICE SERVICES § 260-5
260:385
G. The successful respondent to a request for proposal to provide police
services shall specifically identify and nominate for consideration by the
Police and Fire Commission the contract provider's personnel who will
be assigned, based in and serve the Village. The Police and Fire
Commission shall have the right to review any and all personnel
records, including preemployment physical and psychological reports
held by the contract provider regarding the nominated officer and, if
deemed necessary by the Commission, shall have the authority to
require further or renewed testing at the contract provider's expense.
H. All selected officers approved by the Village Police and Fire Commission
shall be assigned by the contract provider to the Village and shall not be
reassigned outside the corporate limits of the Village of Pleasant Prairie
without the consent of the Village Board.
I. Selected officers shall serve during good behavior and may be
suspended or removed for cause by the Pleasant Prairie Police and Fire
Commission. If an officer is removed or a position becomes vacant, the
contract provider shall nominate alternative personnel to replace them.
The contract provider may assign personnel from within the provider's
agency to fill any temporary or permanent vacancy or to satisfy any
temporary assignment necessitated by illness, leave or absence,
vacation or other temporary situation, but in no case shall a temporary
assignment exceed 30 days without approval of the Police and Fire
Commission and the Village Board.
J. The contract shall not take effect until the expiration of any collective
bargaining agreement covering existing officers of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie Police Department and in any event shall not take
effect or be enforceable against the Village until at least one year after
it is approved by all parties in the manner set forth below in Subsection
M, and, if applicable, Subsection N.
K. The contract shall not be for a period of less than five years.
L. If the contract is terminated or not renewed for reasons by either a
contractor or its subcontractor, the contract provider shall indemnify
the Village of Pleasant Prairie for any and all costs associated with
reinstating a Village Police Department at the same staffing level that
existed at the time the contract terminated, including the cost of
personnel and equipment.
M. Any proposed contract for police services shall not be enforceable
unless approved by majority of the Village Board and shall not be
implemented or enforceable against the Village unless approved by a
majority of the electors at a binding referendum to be held at the next
regularly scheduled November election within the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
N. The Village Board may require additional contract provisions but shall
not modify any of the above conditions unless approved by a majority of
§ 260-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 260-5
260:386
Chapter 270
QUARRIES AND NONMETALLIC MINING OPERATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Blasting regulations — See Ch. 132.
Stormwater storage facilities — See Ch. 300.
Zoning Ordinance — See Ch. 420.
the electors at a binding referendum to be held at the next regularly
scheduled November election within the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
§ 260-5 QUARRIES AND NONMETALLIC MINING § 260-5
270:387

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 270-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes, including, without limitation, §§ 66.0415 and 61.34(1) Wis. Stats.
It is intended, in the event that any of these sources of authority is
abrogated or limited by future enactments of the State Legislature, that
this chapter shall be based upon and construed in light of all other then
available authorities.
§ 270-2. Findings.
The Village Board finds that while quarries and other nonmetallic mining
operations produce socially beneficial products, and add incrementally to
the economic well-being of the community, such operations, when
conducted in a rapidly developing and urbanizing community such as the
Village and its environs, constitute offensive industry, produce nuisance
conditions, adversely affect the public health, safety, prosperity and general
welfare, and otherwise result in a deterioration of the quality of life and
aesthetically pleasing surroundings that are important to the continued
growth, development and prosperity of the Village, unless such operations,
and the reclamation of the site of such operations, are rigorously regulated
and controlled. In addition to the potential direct impacts of noise, dust,
ground vibration, airblast, fly rock, heavy truck traffic, groundwater
drawdown, erosion, pollution of surface and groundwater and attractive
nuisance conditions that result from quarry and other nonmetallic mining
operations, such operations also result in serious indirect impacts on
neighboring properties and the community as a whole, such as diminution
of property values and resultant property tax loss, damage to infrastructure
such as streets and highways, the shifting of development patterns so as to
be at odds with long-range land use planning and the resultant inability to
recapture in a fair and equitable manner infrastructure investments made
in reliance upon such planning, and large areas of land left in unproductive,
aesthetically displeasing and dangerous condition and the attendant loss of
future property tax revenue. If not prevented or controlled, such adverse
effects can far outweigh the beneficial aspects of quarries and other
nonmetallic mining operations.
§ 270-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control all quarry and other
nonmetallic mining operations, and as a part of such regulation, to require,
regulate and control the reclamation of all quarry and other nonmetallic
mining sites.
§ 270-1 QUARRIES AND NONMETALLIC MINING § 270-4
270:389
§ 270-4. Greater restrictions to prevail.
It is not intended that this chapter will repeal any preexisting ordinance
provisions affecting quarries or other nonmetallic mining operations, but
whenever this chapter imposes greater or more stringent requirements
or restrictions on quarry or other nonmetallic mining operations than do
preexisting ordinances provisions, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
§ 270-5. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village.
Headings in this chapter are provided for convenience and ease of
reference. They are not intended to be referred to for the purpose of
interpreting the provisions of this chapter. Words or phrases that are
defined in this chapter shall have the meaning stated in the definitions.
Undefined words or phrases shall have their common, ordinary meaning
unless a particular meaning is clearly suggested by the context in which
a particular word or phrase is used. As used in this chapter, "shall" is
mandatory.
§ 270-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all quarries and all other nonmetallic mining
operations located within the corporate limits of the Village or within the
four-mile extraterritorial jurisdiction area outside of the Village limits
established by § 66.0223, Wis. Stats., including, without limitation,
unreclaimed portions of the sites of such quarries or other nonmetallic
mining operations that were mined prior to the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 270-7. Exempt activities.
This chapter does not apply to the following activities:
A. Excavations or grading by a person solely for domestic use at his or her
residence.
B. Excavations or grading conducted for highway construction purposes
within the highway right-of-way.
C. Grading conducted for farming, preparing a construction site or
restoring land following a flood or natural disaster.
D. Excavations for building construction purposes.
E. Any mining operation, the reclamation of which is required in a permit
obtained under Ch. 293, Wis. Stats.
F. Any activities conducted at a solid or hazardous waste disposal site
required to prepare, operate or close a solid waste disposal facility
§ 270-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 270-7
270:390
§ 270-8. Definitions.
The following words or phrases shall have the meaning specified below
when used in this chapter:
ABANDONMENT — The cessation of quarrying or other nonmetallic mining
operations for more than 240 consecutive days, except when the cessation
is specifically provided for in the operator's permit, or in an operations
plan approved and incorporated by reference in the permit, or by written
order issued by the Village Board upon good cause shown. Abandonment
does not include any period of cessation of operations due to labor strikes,
natural disasters or other similar extraordinary causes beyond the control
of the operator (but this exception does not include business reversals,
competitive forces, market conditions, shortage of cash, or other similar
reasons).
ENLARGEMENT — Any vertical or horizontal increase in the mined area or
the area occupied by or utilized in connection with any of the operations or
related activities.
MATERIAL MODIFICATION — Any change in the approved plan of
operations or the approved plan of reclamation which is significant in terms
of the concerns addressed in this chapter, including, without limitation, any
nonapproved enlargement.
OPERATION — See "quarry or other nonmetallic mining operation."
OPERATOR — Any person who is engaged in quarry or other nonmetallic
mining operations or in the reclamation of a quarry site or other nonmetallic
mining site, or who applies for or holds a quarry or other nonmetallic mining
permit issued under this chapter, whether individually, jointly, or through
subsidiaries, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — The owner and operator of a proposed or existing
quarry or other nonmetallic mining site and the owners of all real property
located within 500 feet of the boundaries of a proposed or existing quarry
or nonmetallic mining site.
PERMIT — Any permit which is required or issued under this chapter.
under Ch. 289, Wis. Stats., or a hazardous waste disposal facility under
Ch. 291, Wis. Stats.; provided, however, that this chapter does apply
to activities related to solid or hazardous waste disposal which are
conducted at a quarry or other nonmetallic mining site separate from
the solid or hazardous waste disposal facility, including, without
limitation, activities to obtain stone, sand, gravel or other nonmetallic
minerals to be used for lining, capping, covering or constructing berms,
dikes or roads.
G. Any quarry or other nonmetallic mining site or portion of a site which is
subject to permit and reclamation requirements of the Department of
Natural Resources under §§ 30.19, 30.195 or 30.20, Wis. Stats.
§ 270-7 QUARRIES AND NONMETALLIC MINING § 270-8
270:391
PERSON(S) — All individuals, partnerships, associations and bodies politic
or corporate, including, without limitation, the state and state agencies.
QUARRY OR OTHER NONMETALLIC MINING OPERATION(S) or
OPERATION(S) — All of the activities undertaken for the purpose of
extracting from the earth, for sale or use by the operator or any person
affiliated or related to the operator, or any person with whom the operator
has a contractual relationship, mineral aggregates such as stone, sand and
gravel and other nonmetallic minerals such as asbestos, beryl, clay, feldspar,
peat, talc and topsoil, and all related activities and processes on the site,
including, without limitation, stripping, drilling, shooting, excavating,
dredging, grading, scalping, dewatering, crushing, screening, washing,
blending, loading, hauling, stockpiling and selling.
QUARRY OR NONMETALLIC MINING REFUSE or REFUSE — Waste soil,
rock, mineral, liquid, vegetation and other waste material resulting from a
quarry or other nonmetallic mining operation. This term does not include
merchantable by-products resulting directly from or displaced by the quarry
or other nonmetallic mining operation, provided that the operator intends
to market such by-products and the operation is active.
QUARRY OR NONMETALLIC MINING SITE or SITE — The location where
a quarry or other nonmetallic mining operation is proposed to be conducted
or is conducted, including, without limitation, all areas where minerals
are proposed to be or are removed, processed or stored, and all areas
which are proposed to be or are disturbed or improved in connection with
the operations (but not including public streets, highways or other public
improvements), and all setback areas surrounding the operations.
RECLAMATION — The rehabilitation of a quarry or other nonmetallic
mining site, including, but not necessarily including, and not limited to,
removal of quarry or other nonmetallic mining refuse, grading of the site,
modification of sheer rock walls for purposes of safety and utility,
replacement of topsoil, stabilization of soil and rock conditions,
establishment of vegetative cover, landscaping, control of surface water
and groundwater, prevention and remediation of environmental pollution,
construction of fences, returning the site to a safe, useful and aesthetically
pleasing condition, and, if practical, restoration of plant, fish and wildlife
habitat.
REPLACEMENT OF TOPSOIL — The replacement of the topsoil which was
removed and disturbed by a quarry or other nonmetallic mining operation
or the provision and placement of soil which is at least as adequate, in the
opinion of the Village, as the topsoil which was removed or disturbed, for
the purposes of providing adequate vegetative cover and stabilization of soil
conditions.
SETBACK — The horizontal distance from the boundary of the site to the
nearest permitted mining excavation or blasting.
SITE — See "quarry or other nonmetallic mining site."
VILLAGE — The Village of Pleasant Prairie.
§ 270-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 270-8
270:392
ARTICLE II
Permits
§ 270-9. Permit required.
Except as is expressly provided in this chapter to the contrary, no person
shall commence or continue any quarry or other nonmetallic mining
operations, or engage in any related activities or processes (but not
including the taking of core samples or engaging in other exploration
activities that require no significant disturbance of the earth's surface)
without a valid and effective permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 270-10. Existing operations.
With respect to quarry or other nonmetallic mining operations that were
commenced prior to the effective date of this chapter, and which were active
on such date, the operator shall have 90 days from the effective date of
this chapter to submit an application for a permit. The Village Board may
extend this time for an additional 60 days upon good cause shown. A timely
application submitted by the operator of such a quarry or other nonmetallic
mining operation shall be treated as an interim permit, subject to all of the
mandatory requirements of this chapter, until such time as the Village Board
acts upon the application.
§ 270-11. Preapplication staff conference.
Prior to filing an application for a quarry or other nonmetallic mining
permit (or any renewal or amendment thereof) under this chapter, the
operator shall meet and confer with the Village staff. The purposes of
this conference are to inform the operator of the purposes, objectives and
requirements of this chapter, to discuss the proposed operations for the
purpose of identifying information or materials that should be included
in the application or which might be waived, to identify any problems or
concerns requiring special attention, and otherwise to facilitate a full and
efficient evaluation of the application.
§ 270-12. Application.
The application for a quarry or other nonmetallic mining permit shall be
submitted to the Village Clerk on forms provided by the Village. The
application for such a permit shall be signed by the applicant and shall
be accompanied by the following information and materials (which may be
combined, so long as the required information is presented in a clear and
understandable manner):
A. Name, address, telephone number. The name, address and telephone
number of the operator, and the name, address and telephone number
of the owner of the site, if the operator is not the owner.
B. Ownership interest. A copy of the operator's deed to the site, contract
to purchase the site or lease authorizing the operator to conduct quarry
§ 270-9 QUARRIES AND NONMETALLIC MINING § 270-12
270:393
or other nonmetallic mining operations on the site. The expiration date
of any lease shall be clearly indicated thereon.
C. Legal description; acreage. A legal description of the proposed quarry
or other nonmetallic mining site and the total number of acres involved.
D. Other permits or licenses. A list of all other quarry or nonmetallic
mining permits or licenses held by the operator, including the name,
address and telephone number of each permitting or licensing entity.
E. General location map. A map of the community showing the general
location of the site.
F. Survey. Five copies of a survey, drawn to a scale of no less than one inch
equals 200 feet, which shall include the following:
(1) The boundaries of the quarry or other nonmetallic mining site.
(2) Topography of the site and all lands within 200 feet thereof, at
intervals no larger than two feet.
(3) Location and names of all streams, lakes, ponds, roads, railroads,
utility lines and pipelines on or immediately adjacent to the site.
(4) Location of all structures.
(5) Boundaries and elevations of previous excavations on the site.
(6) Location and description of mining site boundary stakes and
permanent reference point.
G. Parties in interest. Names and addresses of all parties in interest.
H. Zoning. Zoning of the site and of all properties within 500 feet of the
boundaries of the site.
I. Photographs. Photographs (eight inches by 10 inches) of the site and its
surroundings, including photographs of all potentially sensitive or
important aspects of the site or neighboring properties, and, if
available, an aerial photograph of the site and its surroundings (usually
available from the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission).
J. Operations plan. An operations plan, in which all horizontal and vertical
measurements are referenced to a permanent reference point,
consisting of maps, diagrams, narrative documents and other materials
describing and explaining in detail the nature of the operations, the
methods and procedures to be used in mining the site and in processing
and otherwise dealing with the mined materials, the methods and
procedures to be used in eliminating or minimizing adverse impacts or
effects of the proposed operations, and a proposed timetable for
completion of the operations and of the various stages of the
operations, and which shall contain, without limitation, the following:
§ 270-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 270-12
270:394
(1) Type and total volume of desirable material to be extracted, and the
estimated annual volume to be extracted, identifying the
assumptions on which such estimate is based; and the type and
volume of waste material to be stripped or extracted.
(2) Type of mining, processing and transportation equipment to be
used.
(3) Timetable for the commencement, and to the extent practical,
duration and cessation of the mining operations and, if seasonal
operations are intended, the months during which operations will
be conducted.
(4) Anticipated hours and days of operation, specifying differences
between various aspects of the operations, if applicable.
(5) Market area to be served by the operation.
(6) Means of transporting mined materials from the site and the
primary travel routes to be used.
(7) Whether haul trucks will be owned by the operator or others.
(8) Boring descriptions to the total depth of the proposed operation,
describing each formation in terms of thickness and other relevant
characteristics. Sufficient borings shall be conducted to describe
the type and quality of material to be extracted, to calculate the
amount of desirable material to be mined and the amount of waste
material to be disposed of, and to demonstrate that an adequate
supply of desirable material is located at the site to justify the
adverse impacts of the operation. Borings shall be referenced to a
permanent reference point.
(9) A detailed description and explanation of all methods used to
control and monitor noise.
(10) A detailed description and explanation of all methods used to
control and monitor dust and mud tracking.
(11) A detailed description and explanation of all methods used to
control and monitor ground vibrations.
(12) A detailed description and explanation of all methods used to
control and monitor airblast.
(13) A detailed description and explanation of how the operator
proposes to screen the operations from surrounding properties,
streets and highways, including, without limitation, detailed plans
for any proposed berming or landscaping.
(14) A detailed description and explanation of how water will be
collected, treated and disposed of on the site, and of all methods
§ 270-12 QUARRIES AND NONMETALLIC MINING § 270-12
270:395
used to avoid or control water pollution or sedimentation and to
monitor the results of such controls.
(15) A detailed description and explanation of how overburden and
other waste materials will be stored, disposed of or used.
(16) Observed or estimated depth of groundwater, together with a
description of the location(s) and date(s) of any observations and
the basis for any estimates.
(17) A detailed description and explanation of how the operator will
avoid a drawdown of groundwater that will affect nearby wells and
of all methods used to monitor the effects of the operation on the
groundwater table.
(18) A detailed statement of the following:
(a) The beneficial aspects of the proposed operation.
(b) The potential adverse impacts of the operation on humans
residing or working in the vicinity of the operation which
cannot be totally eliminated by proposed control measures.
(c) The potential adverse environmental impacts of the operation
which cannot be totally avoided by proposed control measures.
(d) The potential adverse economic impacts of the operation on
neighboring property owners and the Village which cannot be
totally avoided by the proposed control measures.
(19) A detailed, step-by-step description and explanation of all aspects
of the operations.
(20) A detailed site plan, drawn to scale, showing the boundaries of the
site, the proposed boundary of the area to be mined, the proposed
location of permanent mining area markers, the final elevation of
the area to be mined, and the locations and dimensions of proposed
berms, haul roads, crushing, washing or other processing facilities,
conveyors, stockpiles, loading areas, scales or other sales facilities,
circulation routes and parking, offices, explosives storage facilities
and all other structures or specific operations areas.
(21)With respect to any proposed blasting operations, a detailed
description and explanation of the proposed blasting methodology,
including, without limitation, drilling procedure (and how burden
and depth of holes is measured), benching, the initiation system,
type and sequencing of delays, the explosives used and a full
description of a typical proposed production shot, including the
height of the face, number of holes, size of holes, burden, spacing
and maximum pounds of explosives per delay.
(22) If explosives are to be used in the operation, a detailed plan for the
storage, handling and use of such explosives. Any such proposed
§ 270-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 270-12
270:396
procedures shall comply with all federal, state and local
regulations.
(23)Map or diagram and narrative describing in detail the sequential
stages of mining (including any shifts in the location of activities or
facilities) or, if no stages are planned, a detailed description of how
the operator plans to proceed with the mining operation. The map
or diagram shall show the location of all phase boundary stakes.
(24) A detailed plan showing and describing in detail erosion control
measures to be used during and in connection with each aspect of
the operation. Such plan shall describe, without limitation, how
disturbed surfaces such as stripped areas, haul roads, berms,
waste piles, stored topsoil and stockpiles will be dealt with to
prevent erosion, sedimentation, fugitive dust and pollution of
surface and groundwater, and how the operator proposes to
minimize the area of erodible surfaces exposed at any one time. (In
addition to any permit requirements, temporary stabilization
measures may be ordered by the Village Board or its designees to
correct situations which are resulting in or are likely to result in
erosion, sedimentation, fugitive dust or water pollution that is
detrimental to adjoining properties or to the public health, safety
and welfare. Such temporary stabilization measures may include,
without limitation, silt fencing, bale check dams, sod strips, riprap,
hard surfacing with concrete or blacktop, slope reduction, seeding
or sodding, erosion mat placement, mulching and settling basin
construction.)
(25) A plan describing and explaining in detail the handling of all water
on the site, including, without limitation, the following:
(a) Existing and proposed drainage on the site, showing contours
at two-foot intervals.
(b) The location and dimensions of all settling, retention or
detention ponds, together with calculations demonstrating that
such ponds are of adequate design to eliminate downstream
sedimentation, erosion or water pollution.
(c) The estimated volume of water to be pumped out of the
operations area, together with the assumptions, observations
and calculations on which such estimate is based.
(26) A scale map or survey delineating all bodies of navigable water, all
floodplains, all shorelands or shorelands wetlands zoning areas, all
wetlands and all primary environmental corridor areas on the site.
(27) A detailed map or diagram and description of the location, type,
height and installation of proposed fencing.
§ 270-12 QUARRIES AND NONMETALLIC MINING § 270-12
270:397
(28) If customers of the operator will pick up product at the site, a
detailed description of how the operator will deal with haul trucks
that arrive at the site before the site is open in the morning.
(29) A detailed description of any highway modifications or
improvements that are required or desirable to accommodate the
anticipated truck traffic, including, for example, acceleration or
turning lanes, traffic signals or reinforced pavement, the estimated
cost of such improvements, and of any other required modifications
of public infrastructure, and whether the operator proposes to pay
for such modifications.
(30) A detailed traffic study demonstrating that the anticipated truck
traffic can be safely accommodated on the proposed routes of
travel.
(31) A detailed description and explanation of the methods by which the
operator proposes to determine whether the operation has
damaged or diminished the value of nearby properties, including,
for example, periodic evaluation of structures, wells and market
value, and whether the operator is willing to reimburse persons for
such losses.
(32) If there are active wells within 1,000 feet of the quarry site, a
hydrogeological study to determine whether and to what extent the
operation is likely to draw down the groundwater table to an extent
that wells will or may be impaired.
(33) A listing of all federal, state or local permits or approvals, which
are required in connection with any aspect of the proposed
operation.
(34) A detailed description of all structures or areas of archeological or
historic interest on the site, and a detailed explanation of how the
operation will affect such structures or areas.
(35) A detailed description of, explanation of the function of, and
architectural renderings of all proposed structures.
(36) Any other information or materials required to demonstrate that
the proposed operation will result in no significant loss, harm or
damage to neighboring property owners, to the Village or to the
public health, safety and welfare, nor any serious risk of any such
loss, harm or damage.
K. Reclamation plan. A reclamation plan, in which all horizontal and
vertical measurements shall be referenced to a permanent reference
point, consisting of maps, diagrams, narrative documents and other
materials describing and explaining in detail the proposed reclamation
of the site, the methods and procedures to be used for reclamation and
a timetable for completion of various stages of the reclamation, and
which shall contain, without limitation, the following:
§ 270-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 270-12
270:398
(1) A detailed description of the topsoil stripping and separating
process, the location of topsoil storage, and the methods of
stabilization and conservation that will be used during storage.
(2) A detailed reclamation site plan and description of the site when
fully reclaimed, showing topography at two-foot intervals, drainage
patterns, landscaping, structures, any water impoundments or
lakes and the proposed end use(s). To the extent that restoration
will take place in stages, or incrementally, such site plan and
description shall be provided for each appropriate stage.
(3) The estimated elevation of the water's surface in any lake or
impoundment, referenced to a permanent reference point, and a
detailed explanation for the basis of such estimate.
(4) Detailed landscaping plans, showing the location, species and size
of the trees, shrubs and other vegetation to be planted or seeded,
and the approximate time frame of such planting or seeding.
(5) Detailed cross-section diagrams, drawn to scale, showing at
appropriate illustrative locations [which should be indicated on the
reclamation site plan(s)] the reclaimed topographic features,
including, without limitation, elevations, slopes, high wall
reductions, benching, terracing and other stabilization and
utilitarian features.
(6) Detailed topsoil application, seeding and/or sodding plan,
describing the location, methods and thickness of topsoil
application, seed types, seeding rates, and mulching netting and/or
other techniques used to accomplish soil and slope stabilization.
(7) Detailed plan for the disposal of all structures, roads and other
facilities not incorporated into the final reclamation plan.
(8) Estimated cost of reclamation, by phase, with accompanying
supportive estimates and calculations, and the proposed form of
any security documents.
(9) A detailed description of how potentially dangerous conditions will
be rendered safe and useful, e.g., by reducing sheer high walls to
provide for access to the water, shallow areas suitable for
swimming and fish propagation, climb-out areas, etc.
(10) To the extent practicable, a timetable for the commencement,
duration, and cessation of reclamation activities, by stage.
(11) Any other information or materials required to demonstrate that
the proposed reclamation will result in a safe, useful and
aesthetically pleasing site.
L. Additional information. The Village Board and its designees may
require the submittal of such additional information or materials as may
be necessary or desirable to determine the nature and extent of the
§ 270-12 QUARRIES AND NONMETALLIC MINING § 270-12
270:399
§ 270-13. Public hearing.
Upon receipt of a complete permit application, the Village Clerk shall refer
the application to the Village Plan Commission for its recommendations and
schedule a public hearing on the application before the Village Board. The
hearing shall be scheduled not earlier than 60 days nor more than 90 days
after receipt of the application, but the Village Board, for good cause shown,
may order a modification of this requirement. Notice of the public hearing
shall be published as Class 2 notice in a newspaper of general circulation
within the Village. In addition, notice of the public hearing shall be mailed
to the operator, the owner of the site, and to the last known address of all
owners of real property located within 500 feet of the boundaries of the
site. This requirement of actual notice to persons other than the operator is
precatory, and the failure to mail or receive such notice shall not invalidate
any action taken by the Village Board. At the hearing, the Village Board
shall hear and receive information or recommendations presented by the
Village Plan Commission, staff, and consultants, information presented by
the applicant or the applicant's authorized agents and consultants, and
information presented by parties in interest and members of the public.
If the Village Board determines that additional time or information is
required, the public hearing may be adjourned or continued from time
to time at the direction of the Board. The applicant shall be given an
opportunity to respond to any adverse information or recommendations.
§ 270-14. Approval or denial of application.
After the hearing, the Village Board shall either grant or deny the permit
application on the basis of express findings and conclusions. The Village
operations, the potential adverse impacts of such operations on
neighboring property owners and the Village in general, the
appropriate methods to eliminate or mitigate potential adverse impacts
and the appropriateness and effectiveness of the proposed reclamation.
M. Waiver of application requirements. The Village Board may waive any
specified information required to be submitted with the application for
a permit, if it is satisfied that such information is not relevant or is
unnecessary to a full and effective evaluation of the proposed operation
and reclamation, or if the cost of producing certain information is
unreasonable in comparison to the usefulness of the information in the
evaluation process. The Village Board's designees may preliminarily
waive any application requirements on the same grounds, but such a
preliminary waiver may be reversed by the Village Board. In
determining whether to waive application requirements, the Village
Board and its designees shall take into account, without limitation, the
nature and extent of the proposed operations, the surrounding existing
and anticipated land uses, and whether and to what extent the
operation preexisted the effective date of this chapter. It shall be the
obligation of the applicant to request in writing any such waiver. Such
request shall set forth the justification for such waiver.
§ 270-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 270-14
270:400
Board shall condition any permit granted upon compliance with specified
operational and reclamation requirements, including the minimum
requirements of this chapter and the requirements of all other applicable
Village ordinances, except as such requirements may be appropriately
varied by the Board, and the requirements of all other applicable federal,
state, and local statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances and permits relating
to blasting, mining, land use, highway access, air pollution, water pollution,
contamination of the ground, solid waste disposal, navigable waters,
groundwater, wetlands, floodplains, shorelands and other environmental
matters. The Board may impose requirements which are in addition to or
more stringent than the minimum requirements of this chapter. In granting
a permit, the Board shall specify all aspects of the proposed plan of
operations and plan of reclamation which are not approved. No application
shall be granted unless the Board first finds that the approved operations,
as conditioned, will result in no significant loss, harm or damage to
neighboring property owners, to the Village, or to the public health, safety
or welfare, nor serious risk of any such loss, harm or damage, and that the
approved reclamation will result in a safe, useful and aesthetically pleasing
site. In deciding upon an application regarding an operation that preexisted
the effective date of this chapter, and was active on the effective date of
this chapter, the Village Board shall take into account the nature, extent,
circumstances and past performance of the operation and shall modify the
requirements of this chapter to the extent necessary to ensure that the
permit requirements are reasonable under the particular circumstances.
§ 270-15. Term.
Permits shall be granted for an initial term of two years. Thereafter, permits
may be renewed by the Village Board for terms of not more than five years.
In determining the term of a renewed permit, the Board shall take into
account the nature, extent, stage and prior performance of the operation
and the likelihood of future problems. Any permit issued pursuant to this
chapter shall automatically terminate upon the abandonment of the quarry
or other nonmetallic mining operations.
§ 270-16. Renewal.
Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed with the Village
Clerk not later than 90 days prior to the expiration date. Any information
or materials required for an initial permit application shall be supplied
with the application for renewal to the extent that such information or
materials were not supplied with the prior application or to the extent that
the previously supplied information or materials are out of date or no longer
accurate and complete. The applicant for a renewal permit shall certify that
any previously submitted information or materials that are not updated or
resubmitted continues to be accurate and complete. Such an application
shall be processed in the same manner as an initial permit application. In
the event that a timely renewal application is not decided by the expiration
date of the permit, the permit shall be deemed to be extended to the date of
the Board's decision.
§ 270-14 QUARRIES AND NONMETALLIC MINING § 270-17
270:401
§ 270-17. Amendment to permit.
In the event that the operator desires to make any material modification
in the permitted operation or reclamation, the operator shall file with
the Village Clerk an application for an amendment to the permit. Such
application shall describe in detail the proposed modification, explain the
effects of the proposed modification, supplement and update the
information and materials submitted with the prior application and make
the certification required for renewal applications. Such an application shall
be processed in the same manner as an initial permit application.
§ 270-18. Permit fees.
The applicant shall file with the application for an initial permit fee in the
amount of $3,000, or $50 per acre for each acre contained in the site,
whichever is greater. With any application for the renewal or amendment of
a permit, the applicant shall file a permit fee of $500, or $10 per acre for
each acre contained in the site, whichever is greater.
§ 270-19. Security.
As a condition of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the Village
Board shall require, and the operator shall promptly deposit with the
Village, an irrevocable letter of credit, cash, a bond or other security in
an amount adequate to secure the obligation of the operator to restore the
site to a safe, useful and aesthetically pleasing condition, in accordance
with the approved restoration plan, to the extent of the mining operations
if the operations were abandoned during the term of the permit. Any
security instrument shall be in a form satisfactory to the Board and shall
be issued by a person satisfactory to the Board, but the Board's approval
shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any cash deposited with the Village
shall be deposited in a segregated interest-bearing account and shall be
used only for the required restoration. Any security shall be promptly
released or returned to the operator, with any accrued interest, at the
completion of the approved reclamation to the satisfaction of the Village
Board. The termination, expiration, or modification of a security instrument,
in the absence of a renewal or replacement thereof or the making of
other arrangements satisfactory to the Village Board, shall be grounds for
suspension of the operator's permit.
§ 270-20. Transfer.
Permits issued under this chapter may be transferred only with the prior
written approval of the Village Board. Such approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld, but the Board shall not approve any transfer in the
absence of satisfactory arrangements regarding security and the prompt
correction of any prior failure to comply with permit requirements.
§ 270-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 270-21
270:402
§ 270-21. Suspension, denial of renewal, or revocation of permit.
The Village Board, after a public hearing assuring the operator of due
process, may suspend a permit if it finds that the operator is guilty of a
pattern of repeated violations after similar violations have been brought
to the attention of the operator, or of violations involving a serious risk
of personal injury, substantial property damage or substantial harm to the
public health, safety or welfare, or for the reasons set out in § 270-19 of this
chapter, and may deny renewal of a permit or revoke a permit if it finds that
the operator is guilty of a pattern of repeated violations involving a serious
risk of personal injury, substantial property damage or substantial harm to
the public health, safety or welfare.
§ 270-22. Variances.
The Village Board may grant variances from the literal requirements of
this chapter, when it is not otherwise expressly authorized to modify
requirements, after a public hearing, if it finds that:
A. Because of special conditions, a literal enforcement of the requirements
of this chapter will result in practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardship;
B. Granting a variance will not result in any significant loss, harm or
damage to neighboring property owners or to the Village;
C. Granting the variance will not result in a site that is unsafe, unusable or
aesthetically displeasing; and
D. That the spirit of the chapter will be observed by the variance, the
public health, safety and welfare will be secured and substantial justice
will be done.
§ 270-21 QUARRIES AND NONMETALLIC MINING § 270-22
270:403

ARTICLE III
Minimum Standards
§ 270-23. Applicability.
The following are minimum standards for all operations commenced after
the effective date of this chapter, and to the extent reasonable, for all
preexisting operations contained thereafter.
§ 270-24. Setbacks.
The minimum setback shall be 500 feet. Particularly when the operations
adjoin residentially developed land or residentially zoned land, the Board
shall carefully consider whether greater setbacks are required.
§ 270-25. Slopes.
No slope shall exceed a three-to-one ratio of horizontal distance to vertical
distance; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to rock
faces, and further provided that the Village Board, for good cause shown,
may modify this requirement.
§ 270-26. No significant harm.
No operation shall be conducted in such a manner as to cause any
significant loss, harm or damage to neighboring property owners, or to the
Village, or to the public health, safety or welfare, or create a serious risk of
such loss, harm or damage.
§ 270-27. Conditions for approval of reclamation plan.
No plan of reclamation shall be approved unless it will result in a safe,
useful and aesthetically pleasing site.
§ 270-23 QUARRIES AND NONMETALLIC MINING § 270-27
270:405

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 270-28. Records.
All records of the operator regarding the conduct of the operations and
restoration reasonably needed by the Village for monitoring and evaluation
of permit compliance are subject to inspection by Village officials at all
reasonable times.
§ 270-29. Access to site for inspections.
Village officials shall have a right of access to the site for the purpose of
inspecting the operations and restoration at all reasonable times.
§ 270-30. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful to commence or continue any quarry or other
nonmetallic mining operation without a valid and effective permit issued
pursuant to this chapter, or to expand or materially modify a quarry or other
nonmetallic mining operation in a manner or to an extent not approved
in such a permit, or to fail to obtain a required renewal or amendment
of such a permit, or otherwise to violate or fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter or any of the requirements of any permit,
decision or order issued pursuant to this chapter.
A. Enforcement. The Village Board and its designees may enforce the
provisions of this chapter, and the provisions of all permits, decisions
and orders issued pursuant to this chapter, by means of compliance,
suspension and termination orders, the denial, suspension or
revocation of permits, proceedings to impose forfeitures, actions
seeking injunctive relief, draws upon cash deposits, bonds or letters of
credit, or any other lawful means, either individually or in combination.
B. Forfeitures. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any
requirement of this chapter, or any requirement of any permit, decision
or order issued pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit with respect to each such violation or failure to comply not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000, plus the costs of prosecution and the
Village's reasonable attorneys' fees, and in default of payment of such
amounts, such person shall be imprisoned in the county jail until
payment thereof, but not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation or
failure to comply exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 270-28 QUARRIES AND NONMETALLIC MINING § 270-30
270:407
Chapter 277
RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES
§ 277-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes any property, other than real estate,
which is acquired in the course of living in or maintaining a dwelling unit.
RUMMAGE\GARAGE SALE — Any sale of personal property conducted
on any residentially zoned property, as defined by Chapter 420, Zoning
Ordinance, within the Village, irrespective of what the sale is designated as
by the seller.
§ 277-2. Allowable merchandise; duration of sale; hours.
§ 277-3. Signs.
§ 277-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any regulation,
rule or order made hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-4, of the Code of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
Chapter 285
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or party to sell other than personal
property at a rummage/garage sale.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or party to hold or permit to be held a
rummage/garage sale on more than six calendar days, whether or not
consecutive, within any calendar year.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person or party to hold or permit to be held a
rummage/garage sale during the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. on any
day.
A. Signs are allowed on the parcel having the sale in accordance with
§ 420-75H of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance.78
B. Off-premises temporary rummage/garage sale signs are permitted only
if in compliance with any local, county or state regulations pertaining to
signage.
C. All signs shall be removed within 24 hours of the close of the rummage/
garage sale.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 270-30 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 277-4
277:408
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater storage facilities — See Ch. 300.
Water — See Ch. 355.
Land division and development control — See
Ch. 395.
Public improvement projects — See Ch. 405.
§ 277-4 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 277-4
277:409

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)79
§ 285-1. through § 285-14. (Reserved)
79.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, General Regulations, adopted 5-2-1988, as amended, was
further amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-20 to repeal §§ 285-1 through 285-11 and
renumber former §§ 285-12 through 285-14 as §§ 285-27 through 285-29, respectively.
§ 285-1 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-1
277:411

ARTICLE II
Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility and Lake Michigan Sewer Utility
District
[Adopted 8-17-1998 (Ch. 20 of the 1988 Code)]
§ 285-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APARTMENT COMPLEXES — Buildings with five or more residential living
units on one parcel.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Village Administrator of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, Lake Michigan Sewer Utility District and Sewer Utility
District D or a duly authorized deputy, agent or representative of the Utility
Districts.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20° C.,
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). Quantitative determination of BOD
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — A sanitary sewer which begins immediately outside of
the foundation wall of any building or structure being served and ends at its
connection to the public sewer.
CATEGORY A — Those sanitary sewer users who discharge normal domestic
strength wastewater with concentrations of BOD no greater than 180 mg/l,
suspended solids no greater than 200 mg/l, phosphorus no greater than six
mg/l, and oil and grease no greater than 100 mg/l.
CATEGORY B — Those sanitary sewer users who discharge wastewater with
BOD concentration in excess of 180 mg/l of BOD, 200 mg/l of suspended
solids, six mg/l of phosphorus, or 100 mg/l of oil and grease. Users whose
wastewater exceeds the concentrations for any one of these parameters
shall be in Category B and subject to a sanitary sewer surcharge unless and
until the concentrations are below the thresholds listed for 24 consecutive
months.[Amended 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 12-23]
CHLORINE REQUIREMENT — The amount of chlorine, in mg/l, which must
be added to sewage to produce a residual chlorine as specified in the
Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and
storm- or surface water.
COMMERCIAL — Those users that operate an enterprise that sells, rents
or provides services to customers or tenants, whether it operates as a forprofit
or no-profit enterprise.[Added 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 12-23]
§ 285-15 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-15
277:413
CONNECTION — The physical connection of a private sewer or lateral to
the public sewer shall be deemed to have been made, irrespective of when
sewage flows through the line.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specified use of land owned
by others.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
GROUND GARBAGE — The residue from preparation, cooking, dispensing,
handling, storage, or sale of food products and produce that has been
shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in
suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers
with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — Wastewater with pollutants that will
adversely affect the wastewater collection and treatment facilities or
disrupt the quality of wastewater treatment if discharged to the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance discharged
or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, or commercial
establishment. Such term includes any wastewater which is not sanitary
sewage.
LAKE MICHIGAN SEWER UTILITY DISTRICT — Town of Somers residents
currently receiving sanitary sewer service from the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.[Added 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
MAY — Permissible.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Pleasant Prairie is Pleasant Prairie Sewer
Utility or Lake Michigan Sewer Utility District.[Amended 5-2-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-11]
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of
surface water or groundwaters.
NONRESIDENTIAL — Customers category which includes all sewer users
other than residential users. Nonresidential customers include but are not
limited to public buildings, commercial establishments, industrial
establishments, recreation halls, municipal buildings, clubhouses, mobile
home parks, apartment complexes and funeral homes.[Amended 8-6-2012
by Ord. No. 12-23; 9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 13-43]
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER — Wastewater with
concentrations of BOD no greater than 180 mg/l, suspended solids no
greater than 200 mg/l, phosphorus no greater than six mg/l, and oil and
grease no greater than 100 mg/l.
§ 285-15 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-15
277:414
PERSON — Any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of
solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion
concentration of 10-7.
PHOSPHORUS — Total phosphorus and is expressed in mg/l of P
(phosphorus).
PLEASANT PRAIRIE SEWER UTILITY — All residents within the corporate
limits of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.[Added 5-2-2011 by Ord. No.
11-11]
PRIVATE SEWER — Any privately owned sewer, storm drain, sanitary sewer,
or combined sewer with discharges into a public sewer. Private sewers are
required to discharge normal domestic-strength wastewater. Any private
sewer that discharges wastewater above the listed thresholds will be listed
as a Category B user.[Added 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 12-23]
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any government chartered by the statutes of the
State of Wisconsin as a corporation that has the ability to levy taxes or user
charges that is governed by an elected body.[Added 8-6-2012 by Ord. No.
12-23]
PUBLIC SEWER — Any publicly owned sewer, storm drain, sanitary sewer,
or combined sewer.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the
useful life of the wastewater treatment facility to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such facilities were designed and constructed.
RESIDENTIAL — Customer category which includes family dwellings and
multifamily dwellings with less than five residential living units.
SANITARY SEWAGE — A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries sewage or wastewater.
SANITARY SEWER SURCHARGE — A charge levied on users of the
wastewater and treatment facilities to Category B users.[Added 8-6-2012
by Ord. No. 12-23]
SATELLITE SYSTEM — Satellite sewage collection system means a
municipally owned or a privately owned sewage collection system that
conveys wastewater to the Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility system.[Added
9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 13-43]
SEWAGE — The spent water of a person or community. The preferred term
is "wastewater."
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
§ 285-15 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-15
277:415
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — A charge levied on users of the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities for payment of operation and
maintenance expenses, depreciation, return-on-investment, and other
expenses or obligations of said facilities.
SHALL — Mandatory.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation, and/or
adversely affects the wastewater collection system and/or performance of
the wastewater treatment facility.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures set
forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
STORM SEWER OR DRAIN — A drain or sewer for conveying water,
groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface, or is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that
is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as "nonfilterable
residue."
TREATMENT AUTHORITY — The Kenosha Water Utility.[Amended
5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water(s) which may lawfully be deposited,
without prior treatment, directly into the receiving stream. The term shall
include, but not be limited to, potable water, stormwater, uncontaminated
groundwater and surface runoff water.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community or person. From the
standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants,
and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and
stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION FACILITIES (or WASTEWATER COLLECTION
SYSTEM) — The structures and equipment required to collect and carry
wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY — The wastewater treatment facility
of the City of Kenosha.[Amended 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (WPDES)
PERMIT — A document issued by the Wisconsin State Department of
Natural Resources which establishes effluent limitations and monitoring
requirements for the municipal wastewater treatment facility or wastewater
collection system.
§ 285-15 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-16
277:416
§ 285-16. Compliance with City of Kenosha regulations required.
All residential and nonresidential customers discharging to sewers tributary
to the City of Kenosha shall comply with the applicable requirements set
forth in Section 32.08 of the City of Kenosha Code of Ordinances.
§ 285-17. Use of public sewers.
A. Sanitary sewers. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
B. Storm sewers. Stormwater and all other unpolluted water shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority and
other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or
process waters may be discharged, on approval of the approving
authority and other regulatory agencies, to a storm sewer or natural
outlet.
C. Prohibitions and limitations. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following, measured at the point of discharge,
into the wastewater collection facilities unless and until specifically
authorized to do so under the terms of a wastewater discharge permit,
and then subject to any limitations imposed thereon by such permit:
(1) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquids, solids or gases, which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the wastewater treatment facility or to the
operation of the wastewater treatment facility. At no time shall two
successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of
discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more
than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive
limit (LEL) of the meter.
(2) Wastewater containing nonconventional pollutants or solids,
liquids, or gases of any property, which, in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, may injure the
system or contaminate the sludge.
(3) Wastewater having a pH lower than 5.5.
(4) Wastewater having a pH in excess of 9.
(5) Solids which cannot penetrate a Tyler designation 20-mesh screen
or viscous substances in quantities which may injure the system or
contaminate the sludge.
(6) Wastewater, which either alone or in combination with other
wastewater, has the effect of raising the temperature of the
§ 285-16 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-17
277:417
wastewater being treated at the wastewater treatment facility to a
temperature higher than 104° F. (40° C.).
(7) Wastewater containing more than 100 mg/l of petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin.
(8) Garbage that has not been shredded so as to comply with
Subsection C(5). [Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary
sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals,
catering establishments, or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food.]
(9) Wastewater containing chromium, copper, zinc, and other
nonconventional and priority pollutants to such degree that they
are in concentrations exceeding levels specified within this rule or
within applicable federal and state regulations. Categorically
regulated waste streams shall be measured at the point of
discharge from the regulated process, a discharge from a
pretreatment process or at the point of discharge to the
wastewater collection facilities but only when the use of the
combined waste stream formula has been approved.
(10) The following substances in excess of the limit below provided:
Average Consecutive Four-
Day
(mg/l)
One-Day Maximum
(mg/l)
Cadmium 0.7 1.2
Chromium
(total)*
4.0 7.0
Copper 2.7 4.5
Mercury 0.05 0.10
Nickel 2.6 4.1
Lead 0.44 0.69
Zinc 2.6 4.2
Cyanide 2.08 3.96
Notes:
NOTES:
*Hexavalent chrome shall be reduced to trivalent chrome before
discharge to the wastewater collection facilities or be eliminated
from the wastewater stream. Should National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards (NCPS) provide for more stringent
limitations, the NCPS shall prevail. Removal credits, if granted,
will affect the NCPS and the limits provided herein, and the most
stringent limit of the two shall prevail where applicable.
§ 285-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-17
277:418
(11)Wastewater containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed by the wastewater treatment facility, or which are
amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the wastewater
treatment facility effluent cannot meet the requirements of law and
of agencies of the federal and state governments having
jurisdiction over the discharge thereof.
(12)Wastewater which, by interaction with other wastewater, forms and
releases obnoxious gases or forms suspended solids which may
injure the system, is hazardous to human or animal health or which
may contaminate the sludge.
(13) Substances which exert or cause:
(a) BOD, suspended solids, oil, grease or phosphorus in quantities
above the quantities thereof contained in normal domestic
strength wastewater.
(b) A volume or concentration of wastewater constituting slugs in
such quantities as to injure the system or contaminate the
sludge.
(c) Concentration of inert suspended solids, or inert dissolved
solids, as to injure the system or contaminate the sludge.
(14)WPDES permit. No person shall cause or permit a discharge into
the sanitary sewers that would cause a violation of the WPDES
permit of the municipality or the Wastewater Treatment Authority.
D. Dilution of discharge prohibited. No person discharging into the
wastewater collection facilities shall increase the use of potable or
process water or mix separate wastewaters for the purpose of diluting
prohibited wastewater as a partial or complete substitute for
pretreatment or to otherwise avoid compliance with or circumvent this
rule.
E. Special arrangements. No statement contained in this article shall be
construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the approving
authority and any person whereby a waste of unusual strength or
character may be admitted to the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities, either before or after pretreatment, provided that there is no
impairment of the functioning of the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities by reason of the admission of such wastes, and no
extra costs are incurred by the municipality without recompense by the
person; and further provided that all rates and provisions set forth in
this article are recognized and adhered to.
F. New connections. New connections to the municipality's sanitary sewer
system will be allowed only if there is available capacity in all of the
downstream wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
§ 285-17 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-17
277:419
§ 285-18. Control of industrial and nonresidential wastes directed
to public sewers. [Amended 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 12-23; 9-16-2013
by Ord. No. 13-43]
G. Mandatory connection. Connection to the public sewer is mandatory
when a public sewer has been extended to a property. A request for
public sewer can be made in writing to the approving authority.
A. Submission of basic data.
(1) The approving authority may require each person who discharges
or seeks to discharge industrial wastes to the public sewer to
prepare and file with the approving authority, at such times as it
determines, a report that shall include pertinent data relating to
the quantity and characteristics of the wastes discharged to the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities. In the case of a new
connection, the approving authority may require that this report be
prepared prior to making the connection to the public sewers.
(2) Industrial dischargers are further subject to the applicable rules
and regulations set forth in Section 32.08 of the Kenosha Code of
Ordinances regarding submittal of applications, operational data
and reports, baseline monitoring reports, compliance reports,
chemical analysis, etc.
B. Industrial discharges. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes
contain substances or possess the characteristics which, in the
judgment of the approving authority or the City of Kenosha wastewater
treatment facility, have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life, health, or constitute
a public nuisance, the approving authority may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of this article.
C. Control manholes. Each industrial or nonresidential discharger shall, at
the discretion of the approving authority, construct and maintain one or
more control manholes or access points together with measuring and
sampling devices to facilitate observation, measurement, and sampling
of wastes, including sanitary sewage.
§ 285-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-18
277:420
(1) Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a
manner acceptable to the approving authority. All measuring and/
or sampling devices shall be of a type acceptable to the approving
authority.
(2) Control manholes, access facilities, and related equipment shall be
installed by the industrial or nonresidential discharger, at the
discharger's expense, and shall be maintained by the discharger so
as to be in safe condition, accessible, and in proper operating
condition at all times. Plans for installation of the control manholes
or access facilities and related equipment shall be approved by the
approving authority prior to the beginning of construction.
D. Measurement of flow. The volume of flow when used for computing
sewer service charges shall be the metered water consumption of the
person as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the
municipality except as noted in Subsection E.
E. Metering of waste. Devices for measuring the volume of waste
discharge may be required by the approving authority if this volume
cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption
records. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed and owned by the industrial or nonresidential discharger,
subject to the approval of the approving authority. The approving
authority may require or undertake at the discharger's expense
necessary metering calibration and maintenance of metering devices.
Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed
without the consent of the approving authority. The approving authority
may require reporting in accordance with Subsection K.
F. Waste sampling. Industrial and nonresidential wastes discharged into
the public sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a
determination of character and concentration of said wastes. The
determination shall be made for the industry and nonresidential user as
often as may be deemed necessary by the approving authority.
(1) Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative
of the composition of the wastes. The sampling may be
accomplished either manually or by the use of mechanical
equipment acceptable to the approving authority. Every care shall
be exercised in the collection of samples to ensure their
preservation in a state comparable to that at the time the sample
was taken.
(2) Installation, operation, and maintenance of the sampling facilities
shall be the responsibility of the industrial or nonresidential
discharger and shall be subject to the approval of the approving
authority. The approving authority may require the discharger to
use a contractor from a list of prequalified contractors.
(3) Access to sampling locations shall be granted to the approving
authority or its duly authorized representative at all times.
§ 285-18 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-18
277:421
(4) The approving authority shall collect and analyze the samples. If
the sample is significantly different from prior samples or out of
sample range, the approving authority may choose to resample for
that month.
(5) An industry or nonresidential discharger may split samples with the
approving authority upon request. Samples must be tested at a lab
certified by the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources using the same testing methods as the lab contracted by
the Village of Pleasant Prairie. If there is a significant difference
between the split samples, the discharger can request a resample
at its cost. [Amended 1-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-05]
(6) In the event of a resample, the approving authority may choose the
most appropriate sample or average the two samples.
(7) Industrial or nonresidential discharger shall pay for all costs
incurred by the approving authority or its contracted
representative for the metering, monitoring and sampling required
under this section, whether taken by the discharger or the
approving authority. These charges are separate from and in
addition to the sewer service charges in § 285-19.
(8) Any waste sampling results over the listed thresholds for a
Category B user under § 285-15 will subject the discharger to a
sanitary sewer surcharge under § 281-19, until the sampling result
concentrations are below the Category B thresholds for 24
consecutive months.
(9) In addition to the foregoing, for satellite systems the following
requirements shall be required unless waived by the approving
authority upon application of the satellite system:
(a) Sampling of the volume of the discharge from the satellite
system shall be monitored by a continuous flow monitor (not
less than five-minute increments) maintained by the approving
authority. The approving authority shall download the data
monthly and provide the data to the satellite system within 18
days.
(b) Sampling of the waste characteristics of the discharge shall be
performed by the approving authority on no less than a
monthly basis.
(c) Samples may be tested for fats, oils and grease (FOG),
biological oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS),
phosphorus (P) and any other test deemed necessary based on
the nature of the discharge. Certified lab results from any
sample shall be sent to the satellite system 18 working days
after the sample is taken in the field.
§ 285-18 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-18
277:422
(d) If the satellite system wants to request a resample of any test
result, it must do so within three days of receiving the sample
result.
G. Pretreatment. Persons discharging industrial wastes into any public
sewer may be required to pretreat such wastes:
(1) If the approving authority determines pretreatment is necessary to
protect the wastewater collection and treatment facilities or
prevent the discharge of incompatible pollutants.
(2) In the event such person shall provide at his expense such
pretreatment or processing facilities as may be determined
necessary to render wastes acceptable for admission to the
sanitary sewers.
H. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards (NCPS), as promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, shall be met by all dischargers of the
regulated industrial categories.
I. State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
to the publicly owned treatment works shall be met by all dischargers
which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are
more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in
this article or any other applicable ordinance.
J. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
shall be provided when, in the opinion of the approving authority, they
are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
floatable grease in amounts in excess of those specified in this article,
or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except
that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters
or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the approving authority and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In maintaining
these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for proper removal
and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall
maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject
to review by the approving authority. Disposal of the collected materials
performed by owner's personnel or currently licensed waste disposal
firms must be in accordance with currently acceptable Department of
Natural Resources rules and regulations.
K. Analyses.
(1) All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall
be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard
Methods and with the Federal Regulations, 40 CFR 136, Guidelines
Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants, as amended
from time to time.
§ 285-18 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-18
277:423
(2) Unless otherwise set forth in this section, sampling methods,
location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on
an individual basis subject to approval by the approving authority.
(3) The industrial or nonresidential discharger shall report any and all
sampling data which it undertakes to the approving authority in a
time and format specified by the approving authority.
L. Accidental discharges. Each industrial discharger shall provide
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated
materials or substances established by this article. Where necessary,
facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall
be provided and maintained at the discharger's cost and expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
this protection shall be submitted to the approving authority for review
and shall be approved by the approving authority before construction of
the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures by the approving authority shall not relieve the discharger
from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this article.
(1) Dischargers shall notify the approving authority immediately upon
the occurrence of a slug load, or accidental discharge of substances
prohibited by this article. The notification shall include location of
discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and
volume, and corrective actions. Any discharger who discharges a
slug load of prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense,
loss or damage to the wastewater facilities or wastewater
treatment works, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on
the Authority on account thereof under state or federal law.
(2) Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the
discharger's premises, advising employees whom to call in the
event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all
employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with
respect to the emergency notification procedure.
M. Submission of facility information. Plans, specifications, and any other
pertinent information relating to proposed flow equalization,
pretreatment, or grease and/or sand interceptor facilities shall be
submitted for review and approval of the approving authority prior to
the start of their construction if the effluent from such facilities is to be
discharged into the public sewers. No construction of such facilities
shall commence until said approval has been granted.
N. Discharges from satellite systems. Each satellite system discharger
shall adopt and implement a capacity, management, operation and
maintenance (CMOM) program, in substantial conformance with the
provisions of § NR 210.23(4), Wis. Admin. Code, subject to the review
and approval of the approving authority.
§ 285-18 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-18
277:424
§ 285-19. Basis for sewer service charge.
O. Reports. Industrial and nonresidential dischargers shall keep records of
the sampling results and maintenance performed for seven years and
submit an annual report to the approving authority containing a
summary of this information by February 10 each year unless the
approving authority agrees to an alternative schedule for reporting.
A. Basis. It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary and
conducive to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and
convenience of the Village of Pleasant Prairie to levy and collect
charges, rentals, or rates of service upon all the lands, lots, and
premises served by and having connections with the sewerage system
of Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility and Lake Michigan Sewer Utility
District. [Amended 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
B. Classification of sewer users. Sewer users shall be classified as
residential, commercial, industrial, or public authority as defined in
§ 285-15. A totally unit-based charge shall be used for customers
without municipal water; a flow-based charge shall be used for all
customers that are connected to municipal water. [Amended
9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 13-43]
C. Category B users. Category B users shall be charged a surcharge, in
addition to monthly customer charge plus volume charge, based on the
prevailing Category B service charges for BOD, suspended solids and
phosphorus. Any wastewater test results found over the Category B
thresholds will place the customer as a Category B user for 24 months.
[Amended 9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 13-43]
D. Residential user equivalents (RUEs). Each nonresidential customer
shall be assigned an RUE value to be used as the basis of computing the
user and connection charges. The RUE totals will be assigned by the
approving authority and shall be based on estimated water use,
considering a use of 210 gallons per day as equal to one RUE. RUE
assignments will be reviewed annually.
E. Sewer users served by private wells. If any industrial customer
discharging wastewater into the sanitary sewers procures any part or
all of his water from sources other than the Water Utility, all or part of
which is discharged into the sanitary sewers, the customer shall have
water meters installed by the Water Utility at the customer's expense
for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these
sources. Where sewer meters are installed, water meters will not be
required. The water meters shall be furnished by the Water Utility and
installed under its supervision, all costs (including meter cost) being at
the expense of the person requiring the meter.
F. Deduct meters. [Amended 5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 05-16; 4-16-2007
by Ord. No. 07-15; 12-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08-56]
§ 285-18 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-19
277:425
(1) If an industrial or nonresidential user feels that a significant
amount of metered water does not reach the sanitary sewer, he
can, at his own expense, with approval of the approving authority,
install such additional meters or metered services as are necessary
to calculate the volume of water not discharged to the sanitary
sewer. Metered water not discharged to the sanitary sewer shall
not be subject to sewer service charges. [Amended 8-6-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-23]
(2) Requests to install additional meters must be made in writing to the
approving authority.
(3) The monthly charge for deduct meters are as follows: [Amended
5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11]
Meter Size
(inches) Monthly Charge
5/8 to 1 $15.98
1 1/2 $18.20
2 $25.05
3 $25.05
4 $31.91
6 $44.41
G. Winter base volume. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-40;
6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-25]
(1) The winter base volume shall be that volume of water that can be
verified through the use of municipal water meter readings for a
four-month period closest to December 1 through March 31. This
volume shall serve as the basis for determining the sewer volume
charge for residential customers for five billing periods closest to
May 1 through September 30. To establish a winter-based average
volume, two months of readings in the four-month evaluation
period (December 1 through March 31) is necessary. Zero usage is
considered a nonreading. Volume is based on a customer, not a
location. Any customer that does not have two readings in the fourmonth
evaluation period will be charged actual volume during the
summer months.
(2) Those sewer customers that are not connected to the Village's or
Kenosha Water Utility's (KWU) municipal water system shall have
the same monthly volume year around that was established during
the last sewer rate study.
(3) Kenosha Water Utility (KWU) should provide annually water usage
for the previous year to the Village of Pleasant Prairie for those
Pleasant Prairie sanitary sewer customers that are served by
§ 285-19 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-19
277:426
municipal water from the KWU. The information provided by KWU
will be used to determine a new monthly volume starting May 1.
(4) If the KWU does not provide winter water usage, the KWU
municipal water customer with Pleasant Prairie sanitary sewer will
be responsible for providing the appropriate information. They may
bring in two KWU utility bill stubs by May 1 each year from the
KWU representing usage closest to December 1 through March 31,
and that average consumption shall be used to calculate a winter
base volume. If KWU municipal water customers do not provide two
utility billing stubs each year, those customers will be billed based
on the volume established in Subsection G(2) of this section.
H. Groundwater surcharge.
(1) The groundwater surcharge is the volumetric charge that shall be
determined by the approving authority for application to those
customers that either have their perimeter, down spout, or footing
drainage tiles connected into the public sewer or have connected or
discharge their sump pumps into the public sewer.
(2) Customers that have had the Village inspect and approve their
sanitary sewage drainage system will be exempt from the charge.
(3) Customers that are subject to this charge are those that are in
metered service areas of the Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility that are
served by the Kenosha Water Utility. [Amended 5-2-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-11]
(4) The charge shall be computed by establishing an actual gross
volume flow from a sanitary sewage metering station. From that
volume, the actual volume of water meter readings, RUE's from
nonwater customers, and the allowable infiltration rate established
in the Wisconsin State Standard Specifications for Sanitary Sewer
and Water Construction, Section 3.7.2, shall be subtracted. The net
result of that calculation will be divided equally among all
customers that have not complied with Subsection H(2) of this
section and are located in the metered areas as shown on Map
20-2.
I. When charges begin. Charges for sanitary sewer service begin at the
time the rough plumbing permit is issued. Charges shall be based upon
average winter base rate for residential customers for residential
construction. Multifamily dwelling units charges shall be based upon
the number of dwelling units multiplied by the average residential
winter base rate. All other classifications of customers shall be charged
based upon waste stream analysis to be supplied at the time of their site
and operation plan review.
J. Control of industrial wastes directed to public sewers; waste sampling.
Industrial wastes discharged into the public sewers shall be subject to
periodic inspection and a determination of character and concentration
§ 285-19 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-19
277:427
§ 285-20. Amount of sewer service charges.
of said wastes. The determination shall be made for the industry as
often as may be deemed necessary by the approving authority. [Added
6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 12-20]
(1) Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative
of the composition of the wastes. The sampling may be
accomplished either manually or by the use of mechanical
equipment acceptable to the approving authority.
(2) Installation, operation, and maintenance of the sampling facilities
shall be the responsibility of the person discharging the waste and
shall be subject to the approval of the approving authority. Access
to sampling locations shall be granted to the approving authority or
its duly authorized representative at all times. Every care shall be
exercised in the collection of samples to ensure their preservation
in a state comparable to that at the time the sample was taken.
(3) The approving authority shall determine whether sampling by
district employees and/or contractor's findings shall be used when
presented with contrary sampling information. An industry may
split samples with the districts upon request by the industry.
(4) Sanitary sewer surcharge testing shall measure the biological
oxygen demand (BOD), which is the strength of effluent, the total
suspended solids (TSS), and phosphorous (P). The Village
discharges all sewer flow to the City of Kenosha, Kenosha Water
Utility, which in turn places a sanitary sewer surcharge for all flow
received. Pleasant Prairie monitors the discharge flow from
manufacturing, commercial, private sewer systems, restaurants,
and other users with a history of discharging sewer flows above the
allowable limits. The following limits have been established: BOD,
180 mg/L; TSS, 200 mg/L; and P, 6 mg/L. Each of the test limits has
an established fee as established by ordinance.
(5) Fats, oil and grease (FOG) testing shall be used as an indicator to
assist sanitary sewer surcharge test users that discharge effluent
with high BODs. Users that operate kitchens, restaurants,
industrial companies who handle meat, and private sewer system
owners are examples of sewer users who would receive this test.
A. The user charges for Category A customers in the Pleasant Prairie
Sewer Utility and Lake Michigan Sewer Utility District are as follows:
[Amended 5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 05-16; 4-16-2007 by Ord. No.
07-15; 12-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08-56; 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11;
5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-19]
§ 285-19 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-20
277:428
Meter Size
(inches)
Pleasant
Prairie
Sewer
Utility
Lake
Michigan
Sewer Utility
District
Volume charge (per 1,000
gallons)
$5.76 $7.21
plus
Monthly customer charge 5/8 $13.26 $16.57
3/4 $13.26 $16.57
1 $18.29
1 1/2 $21.87
2 $36.74
3 $60.23
4 $93.79
6 $130.84
Groundwater surcharge
(per 1,000)
$5.76 $7.21
B. The user charge rates for Category B customers are as follows:
[Amended 5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 05-16; 4-16-2007 by Ord. No.
07-15; 12-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08-56; 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11;
5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-19]
Meter Size
(inches)
Pleasant
Prairie
Sewer
Utility
Lake
Michigan
Sewer
Utility
District
Volume charge (per 1,000
gallons)
$5.76 $7.21
plus
Monthly customer charge 5/8 $13.26 $16.57
3/4 $13.26 $16.57
1 $18.29
1 1/2 $21.87
2 $36.74
3 $60.23
4 $93.79
6 $130.84
Surcharges (per pound)
§ 285-20 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-20
277:429
§ 285-21. Billing practice.
Meter Size
(inches)
Pleasant
Prairie
Sewer
Utility
Lake
Michigan
Sewer
Utility
District
Volume charge (per 1,000
gallons)
$5.76 $7.21
BOD above 180 mg/l $0.80 $0.99
Suspended solids above
200 mg/l
$0.56 $0.70
Phosphorous above 6 mg/l $10.87 $13.59
C. Replacement fund account. All sewer service charge revenues collected
for replacement costs shall be deposited in a separate and distinct fund
to be used solely for replacement costs as defined in § 285-15. All
revenues for the replacement fund must be used solely for the
replacement of equipment.
D. Septic tank sludge and holding tank sewage prohibited. No person shall
dispose of septic tank sludge or holding tank sewage or transfer such
material into the public sewer.
E. Charge for toxic pollutants. Any person discharging toxic pollutants
which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge
from the Treatment Authority's wastewater treatment facility shall pay
for such increased costs, as may be determined by the approving
authority.
F. Laboratory testing fees. [Added 6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 12-20]
(1) Sanitary sewer surcharge fee: $115.
(2) Fats, oil, and grease test fee: $50.
(3) Administrative fee: $10.
A. Calculations of sewer service charges. Sewer service charges shall be
computed by the municipality according to the rates and formula
presented in this article.
B. Sewer service charge billing period. Sewer service charges shall be
billed by the municipality to the sewer users on a monthly basis.
C. Payment of sewer service charges. Those persons billed by the
municipality for sewer service charges shall pay such charges within 20
days after the billing date.
§ 285-20 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-21
277:430
§ 285-22. Right of entry, safety, and identification.
§ 285-23. Sewer construction and connections.
D. Penalties. Such sewer service charges levied by the municipality
against the sewer users in accordance with this article shall be a debt
due to the municipality and shall be a lien upon the property. If this debt
is not paid within 20 days after it shall be due, it shall be deemed
delinquent with penalty of 1% on the unpaid balance. It may be placed
on the next year's tax roll, with an additional penalty of 10% added and
be collected as other taxes are collected. [Amended 5-2-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-11]
A. Right of entry. The approving authority or other duly authorized
employees of the municipality, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose
of inspection, observation, or testing, all in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
B. Safety. While performing the necessary work on private premises
referred to in Subsection A, the duly authorized municipal employees
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the person.
C. Identification and right to enter easements. The approving authority or
other duly authorized employees of the municipality, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the municipality holds an easement for the
purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works
lying within said easement, all subject to the terms, if any, of such
easement.
A. Work authorized. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb the public
sewers or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the approving authority.
B. Cost of sewer connection. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation, connection, and maintenance of the building sewer shall be
borne by the person making the connection.
C. Connection charges.
(1) A connection charge will be levied by the municipality upon all
residential and nonresidential customers prior to connection or
issuance of a plumbing permit for any new or expanded use of the
sanitary sewer system.
(a) Residential:
[1] Single family: $1,600 per dwelling unit.
§ 285-21 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-23
277:431
[2] Multifamily: $1,600 per dwelling unit.
(2) The connection fee for multifamily dwelling units shall be collected
at the time the plumbing permit is obtained. If the multifamily
dwelling unit is connected to municipal water, the owner of the
property shall have the option from the 13th month of full
occupancy of the multifamily dwelling to the 18th month to have an
adjustment made in the connection fee. The adjustment would be
based upon the following steps:
(a) Verification of the number of units occupied in a building.
(b) Calculation of the actual water to the building from the water
meter readings.
(c) Dividing the actual volume by 365 or 366 in a leap year to
create a daily volume.
(d) Dividing the daily by 210 [the average residential user
equivalent (RUE)].
(e) Multiplying the number of RUE's by $1,600.
(f) Refund the difference between the two numbers if the initial
payment was higher.
(g) Invoice to the property owner for the amount that represents
an increase between the two numbers if the initial payment
received from the property owner was lower.
(3) Connection fees in the Westwood Relief Sewer System as reflected
on Map 20-1 shall be $565 per RUE.
(4) Nonresidential: commercial and industrial $1,600/meter
equivalent. Meter equivalents are determined according to AWWA
C-700 schedule of meter operating capacity as follows:
Water Meter Size
(inches) Capacity Meter Equivalent
5/8 20 1
5/8 x 3/4 20 1
1 50 2.5
1 1/2 100 5
2 160 8
3 300 15
4 500 25
6 1,000 50
§ 285-23 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-23
277:432
(5) For commercial customers utilizing unmetered water supply or
private wells, the meter equivalent shall be determined based on
the total water supply fixture units of the building to be connected,
converted to gallons per minute, in accordance with the State of
Wisconsin Plumbing Code, Ch. COMM 82, Wis. Adm. Code.
(6) The initial connection charge as set forth in this section for a new
building shall be paid at the time that a building or plumbing
permit is applied for. The initial connection charge for an existing
structure shall be paid before the actual connection is made to the
system.
D. Use of old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the approving authority, to meet all
requirements for this article.
E. Materials and methods of construction. [Amended 9-16-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-72]
(1) The size, scope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall conform to
the requirements of the municipality's Building and Plumbing
Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the municipality.
In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of
the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
(2) Sanitary sewer service laterals shall be located outside of any
paved, hard-surface driveway approaches or driveway areas where
a new sanitary sewer service is installed for all existing one- and
two-family dwellings. In all new subdivisions, sanitary sewer
service laterals must be utilized in their designed and approved
locations. If the sanitary sewer service lateral falls within the
driveway approach or driveway surface, the property owner shall
sign a letter of indemnification with the Village holding the Village
harmless for any and all future liability, loss, or damage associated
with any work as may be required by the Village within the
property owner's paved portion of the driveway which is located in
the Village road right-of-way. This letter of indemnification shall be
recorded with the Register of Deeds with the recording fee paid by
the property owner. [Amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-19]
(3) Each individual single-family dwelling unit shall require its own
sanitary sewer service lateral. If a single-family dwelling exists with
a commercial/business on the same property, each dwelling shall
have its own sanitary service lateral.
F. Building sewer grade. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all
§ 285-23 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-23
277:433
§ 285-24. Notice of violations; abatement of nuisances; penalty for
accidental discharge; liability for losses.
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to
the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall
be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
G. Storm- and groundwater drains. No persons shall make connection of
roof down spouts, exterior foundation drains, sump pumps, areaway
drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building
sewer or building drain which is connected directly or indirectly to a
sanitary sewer. All existing down spouts or groundwater drains, etc.,
connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer must be
disconnected within 30 days of the date of an official written notice
from the approving authority.
H. Conformance to Plumbing Codes. The connection of the building sewer
into the sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of the
Building and Plumbing Codes, or other applicable rules and regulations
of the municipality or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All
such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
approving authority before installation.
I. Inspection of connection. The utility contractor or master plumber
making a connection to a public sewer shall notify the Village during
the normal working hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. as to when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be inspected and approved by the Village.
Before the Village approves the sanitary sewer lateral connection for an
existing property that is also abandoning a private on-site sewage
disposal system, the contractor shall schedule two separate inspections
with the Village. An inspection of the lateral installation to verify that
the existing plumbing connection in the dwelling shall meet the State
Plumbing Code. This inspection shall require the Village inspectors to
enter the dwelling to complete the inspection. A second inspection shall
be scheduled prior to any filling of an existing tank with slurry. At the
time of the tank inspection, a pumping ticket from a licensed solid
waste contractor shall be provided to the Village inspector to verify that
the solid waste has been properly removed from the tank. [Amended
9-16-2002 by Ord. No. 02-72]
J. Barricades; restoration. All excavations for the building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the approving authority.
A. Written notice of violations. Any person found to be violating any
provision of this article shall be declared a public nuisance and shall be
§ 285-23 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-24
277:434
§ 285-25. Appeals.
served by the municipality with a written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated
in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Abatement of nuisance without notice. If the approving authority
determines that a public nuisance exists within the municipality and
that there is great and immediate danger to the wastewater collection
and treatment facilities or the public health, safety, peace, morals, or
decency, the approving authority may cause the same to be abated and
charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant, or person causing,
permitting, or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
C. Accidental discharge. Any person found to be responsible for
accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewer system
which causes damage to the wastewater collection and treatment
facility and/or receiving body of water shall, in addition to a fine, pay an
amount to cover any damages, both values to be established by the
municipality.
D. Continued violations. Any person, partnership, or corporation, or any
officer, agent, or employee thereof, who shall continue any violation
beyond the aforesaid noticed time limit provided, shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not more than $500, together with the costs of
prosecution. In default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, said
violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed
30 days. Each day in which any violation is continued beyond the
aforesaid noticed time limit shall be deemed a separate offense.
E. Liability to municipality for losses. Any person violating any provisions
of this article shall become liable to the municipality for any expense,
loss, or damage occasioned by reason of such violation which the
municipality may suffer as result thereof.
A. Procedures. Any user, permit applicant, or permit holder affected by
any decision, action, or determination, including cease-and-desist
orders, made by the approving authority interpreting or implementing
the provisions of this article or in any permit issued herein, may file
with the approving authority a written request for reconsideration
within 10 days of the date of such decision, action, or determination,
setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for
reconsideration. The approving authority shall render a decision on the
request for reconsideration to the user, permit applicant, or permit
holder in writing within 15 days of receipt of request. If the ruling on
the request for reconsideration made by the approving authority is
unsatisfactory, the person requesting reconsideration may, within 10
days after notification of the action, file a written appeal with the
Village Board.
§ 285-24 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-25
277:435
§ 285-26. Audit; notification of users; records.
§ 285-27. Wastewater discharge permits.80
B. A fee of $50 shall accompany any appeal to the Village Board for its
ruling. This fee may be refunded if the appeal is sustained in favor of
the appellant. The written appeal shall be heard by the Village Board
within 45 days from the date of filing. The Village Board shall make a
final ruling on the appeal within 60 days from the date of filing.
A. Biennial audit. The Commission shall review at least every two years
the wastewater contribution of its sewer users, the operation and
maintenance expenses of the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities and the sewer service charge system, if necessary, to
accomplish the following:
(1) Maintain a proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance expenses among sewer users based on the
wastewater volume and pollutant loadings discharged by the users.
(2) Generate sufficient revenues to pay the operation and maintenance
expenses of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
(3) Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the
operation and maintenance expenses attributable to the class of
users for the next year and adjust the sewer service charge rates
accordingly.
B. Annual notifications. The Commission shall notify its sewer users
annually as to the sewer service charge rates. The notification shall
show what portion of the rates is attributable to the operation and
maintenance expenses, any debt service costs of the wastewater
collection system and wastewater treatment by the City of Kenosha.
The notification shall occur in conjunction with the adoption of a budget
for the ensuing year in accordance with § 65.90, Wis. Stats.
C. Records. The Commission shall maintain records regarding wastewater
flows, costs of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities,
sampling programs and other information which is necessary to
document compliance with 40 CFR 35, Subpart E, of the Clean Water
Act.
A. Application.
(1) Within 60 days after the effective date of this article, the following
must apply for a wastewater discharge permit from the
Administrator of the Wastewater Utility:
80.Editor's Note: Sections 285-27 through 285-29 were formerly part of Art. I, General
Regulations, as § § 285-12 through 285-14 and were renumbered as § § 285-27 through
285-29 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-20.
§ 285-25 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-27
277:436
(a) Industrial dischargers discharging into the wastewater
collection facilities.
(b) Municipalities discharging into the wastewater collection
facilities.
(2) The Village of Pleasant Prairie shall follow all provisions relating to
the regulation of wastewater discharge into the Kenosha Water
Utility wastewater collection system as defined in Chapter 32 of the
City of Kenosha Code of General Ordinances. [Added 4-18-1994]
B. Required information. Applications for wastewater discharge permits
shall be made on Wastewater Utility forms. The application for a
wastewater discharge permit must be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial discharger or municipality and must
contain the following information prior to being processed. It shall be
unlawful for any person to intentionally file an incomplete or inaccurate
application. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be issued until a
complete and accurate application is filed.
(1) The name, address and location of the industrial discharger or
municipality.
(2) The Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) number according to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the
Budget, 1972, amended.
(3) Disclosure of the constituents and characteristics of prohibited
wastewater, as determined by a bona fide chemical and biological
analyses.
(4) Disclosure of the time and duration of discharges.
(5) Disclosure of average daily wastewater flow rates in gallons per
day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(6) Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans, and details which show all sanitary sewers, sanitary sewer
connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and
appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
(7) General description of activities, facilities and plant processes on
the premises, including all materials that are or may be discharged.
(8) Disclosure of whether or not compliance with this article is being
achieved on a consistent basis.
(9) Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes, and rate of production.
(10) Disclosure of the type and amount of material utilized, which is or
may be discharged into the wastewater collection facilities, stating
the average and maximum per day.
§ 285-27 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-27
277:437
C. Amendments to application.
(1) An industrial discharger or municipality must submit an amended
application for wastewater discharge permit within 30 days
following any material change in the information required and
previously submitted on an application form, and 30 days prior to
the following:
(a) Commencement of discharge of prohibited wastewater.
(b) Change in the characteristics and constituents of wastewater.
(c) Change in volume of wastewater discharged by 20% or more.
(d) Change in the operations or processes utilized by the
discharger.
(2) An amended application will be processed the same as if it were an
original application. This subsection does not apply to temporary
variations in production schedules.
D. Insufficient information. Where an application for a wastewater
discharge permit contains insufficient or inaccurate information, the
Wastewater Utility may require more complete and accurate
information. Applicants shall be provided 30 days from the date of
receipt of written notice of an incomplete or inaccurate application in
which to furnish more complete or accurate information.
E. New discharges. Industrial dischargers and municipalities who were
not discharging into the wastewater collection facilities on the effective
date of this article must apply for a wastewater discharge permit prior
to their connecting to or discharging to the wastewater collection
facilities.
F. Permit approval. Thirty days after a fully completed, accurate and
sufficient application for a wastewater permit has been submitted to the
Wastewater Utility, the Administrator of the Wastewater Utility shall
grant a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with the provisions
of this article, which will specify wastewater which is totally prohibited,
place limits on the constituents and characteristics of wastewater, and
provide for the pretreatment of certain wastewater prior to its
discharge to the wastewater collection facilities.
G. Permit terms, conditions and limitations. Wastewater discharge permits
shall specify the following:
(1) Fees and charges to be paid as a condition of permit issuance.
(2) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics of discharge.
(3) Limits on average and maximum rate, time of discharge and
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
§ 285-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-27
277:438
(4) Requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities.
(5) Special conditions imposed by the Administrator of the Wastewater
Utility required under particular circumstances of a given
discharger, including sampling locations, frequency of sampling,
number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules, and
special technical reports or discharge reports in addition to those
specifically prescribed by this article. The special conditions
imposed by this section shall be reasonable and shall be necessary
to carry out the objectives of this article. In each case, if the
discharger so desires, the Administrator shall provide to the
discharger a full and complete explanation of the reason for the
special conditions.
(6) Dischargers which have a potential for an accidental discharge of
prohibited wastewater shall be required to develop a written plan
designed to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited
wastewater, and in the event of such accidental discharge, to
mitigate potential damages which could be caused thereby. Such
plan shall include a provision that dischargers place signs in
conspicuous places on their premises advising officers, employees
and agents thereof of the procedure to be utilized to report a
discharge of prohibited wastewater to the Wastewater Utility.
(7) Where pretreatment is required, the discharger shall be required
to submit a plan therefor to the Administrator of the Wastewater
Utility by a certain date. Such plan may not be implemented until
approved by the Administrator. Such plan shall include a schedule,
known as "milestone dates," for hiring an engineer, preliminary
plans, final plans, letting contract, commencement of and
completion of construction, hiring of appropriate personnel and
date of initial operation. Such schedule must be strictly complied
with unless such schedule is modified by the Administrator.
Dischargers shall have the obligation of filing for extensions of time
to meet such milestone date with the Wastewater Utility prior to
the expiration of any milestone date. A hearing will be held by the
Administrator on timely extension requests. No discharger shall fail
to timely obey an order for pretreatment, fail to submit a schedule
of milestone dates to implement pretreatment or fail to meet
scheduled milestone dates or authorized extensions thereof, for any
phase of the implementation of pretreatment. Pretreatment shall
be at the sole cost and expense of the discharger. No later than 14
days following each milestone date, the discharger shall submit a
progress report to the Administrator. If a specific milestone date is
not met, the report shall state the reason for the delay, the expected
time for complying with said milestone date and the steps being
taken to achieve said milestone by the date proposed. In the event
more than nine months elapse between milestone dates, a progress
report shall be submitted not less than every nine months. Should a
§ 285-27 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-27
277:439
milestone date not be met and should a timely extension request
not have been made and granted, an after-the-fact extension
request shall be applied for following the same procedure as should
have been utilized by the discharger for a timely request for
additional time to meet a milestone date. However, the approval
of an after-the-fact time extension shall not relieve the discharger
of liability for a forfeiture or other sanction for having missed a
milestone date without first having requested and been granted an
appropriate extension of time.
(8) A provision which states that samples shall be collected in such a
manner as to be representative of the composition of the
wastewater and as provided for in the permit. The sampling may be
accomplished either manually or by the use of mechanical
equipment acceptable to the Administrator. Installation, operation
and maintenance of the sampling facilities shall be at the cost and
expense of the discharger and shall be subject to the approval of
the Administrator. Access to sampling locations, industrial
processes that pertain to wastewater discharge and pretreatment
facilities, and records of wastewater self-monitoring shall be
granted to the Administrator or duly authorized representative
thereof, at all reasonable hours. Care shall be exercised in the
collection of samples to ensure their preservation in a state
comparable to that which existed at the time the sample was taken.
(9) A statement that dischargers discharging on the effective date of
this article shall comply with this article where it is stricter than
federal or state laws, rules or regulations, within 18 months after
the effective date of this article. The Administrator may provide
additional time for compliance with this article where such
additional time is mandated by technical considerations.
H. Permit duration. All wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for
four years, subject to amendment, suspension or revocation as provided
for in this article.
I. Limitations on permit assignment and transfer. A wastewater discharge
permit is issued to a specific industrial discharger or municipality for a
specific operation and is not valid for operations not described in the
application, is not assignable to another discharger or transferable to
any other location without the prior written approval of the
Administrator.
J. Permit amendments by issuer. The Wastewater Utility may amend any
wastewater discharge permit issued, subject to notice of its intent to do
so, and subject to the discharger being given an opportunity to be heard
for the purpose of correcting any errors or omissions made by the
Wastewater Utility and to incorporate revised limitations on prohibited
wastewater required by law. A reasonable time schedule shall be set to
meet any new or modified requirements. A minimum of 30 days will be
provided to the discharger to meet any new or modified requirements.
§ 285-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-27
277:440
§ 285-28. Effective date.
This article shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 1985.
§ 285-29. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who shall violate any
provision of this article, or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as provided by
Chapter 1, § 1-4, of the Code of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
K. Extensions of permit time schedules. Whenever any industrial
discharger, municipality or hauler believes that any time schedule
contained in a wastewater discharge permit is unreasonable under the
circumstances, such discharger may request, in writing, an extension of
time to meet such schedule prior to the expiration of any such time
limit. Time extensions may be given after the fact, but the discharger is
subject to the penalties herein provided for failure to meet such time
schedule.
L. Opportunity for hearing relative to any permit conditions and limits.
Any discharger, within 30 days of the granting of a wastewater
discharge permit, may file with the Wastewater Utility a request to be
heard relative to the correct application of any permit conditions and
limitations. An opportunity to be heard will be provided before the
Administrator within 10 days of the receipt thereby of a request for
hearing.
§ 285-27 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 285-29
277:441
Chapter 287
SEX OFFENDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented uses and
establishments — See Ch. 108.
§ 285-29 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 285-29
277:442
ARTICLE I
Residency and Activity Restrictions
§ 287-1. Purpose.
§ 287-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
CHILD — A person under the age of 16 years, for purposes of this chapter.
DESIGNATED OFFENDER — Any person who is required to register under
§ 301.45, Wis. Stats., for any sexual offense against a child, or any person
who is required to register under § 301.45, Wis. Stats., and who has been
designated a special bulletin (SBX) sex offender pursuant to § 301.46(2) and
(2m), Wis. Stats.
MINOR — A person under the age of 18 years.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE — A place where the designated offender lodges
or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
PROHIBITED ACTIVITY — Participation in a holiday event involving minors.
Holiday events in which the designated offender is the parent or guardian
of the minors involved, and no nonfamilial minors are present, are exempt
from the definition of "prohibited activity." A designated offender
participates in a prohibited activity by taking part in the event which shall
include, without limitation, distributing candy or other items to children on
Halloween, wearing a Santa Clause costume on or preceding Christmas, or
wearing an Easter Bunny costume on or preceding Easter.
PROHIBITED LOCATION — Any school, licensed day-care center, park,
trail, playground, or place of worship. The Village Administrator shall
maintain an official map showing the prohibited locations and safety zones
within the Village. The Village Administrator shall update the map at least
annually to reflect any changes in the prohibited locations and safety zones.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter not to impose a criminal penalty but
rather to service the Village of Pleasant Prairie's compelling interest to
promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Village of Pleasant Prairie by creating areas around
locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated number
wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited
from establishing temporary or permanent residency.
B. Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence
and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who
present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are
extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses,
and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more
victims that are never reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction
of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to
society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant.
§ 287-1 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 287-2
277:443
The map shall be available in the office of the Village Clerk and posted on
the Village website.
SAFETY ZONE — A safety zone is any real property that supports or
upon which there exists any facility used for or that supports a school for
minors, a public park, a park facility, a trail or any other prohibited location,
including any sidewalks or lawn adjacent to such prohibited location.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE — Either:
VILLAGE — The Village of Pleasant Prairie, Wisconsin.
§ 287-3. Sexual offender and sexual predator residence
prohibitions; exceptions.
A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or
more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not
the person's permanent address; or
A.
A place where the person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a
period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month
and which is not the person's permanent residence.
B.
A. Prohibited location of residence. It shall be unlawful for any designated
offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence
within 1,500 feet of a prohibited location.
B. (Reserved)81
C. Determination of minimum distance separation. For purposes of
determining the minimum distance separation under this chapter, the
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the
closest point of the outer property line of the permanent residence or
temporary residence of a designated offender to the nearest outer
property line of a prohibited location. If any portion of a tax parcel
contains a prohibited location, the entire tax parcel shall be considered
a prohibited location. If any portion of a tax parcel would constitute a
prohibited location of residence under § 287-3A, the entire tax parcel
shall be considered a prohibited location of residence.
D. Exceptions. A designated offender residing within a prohibited location
of a Residence as described in § 287-3A and B shall not be in violation of
this chapter if any of the following apply:
(1) Subject to § 287-5A below, the designated offender established the
permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and
registered the residence pursuant to § 301.45, Wis. Stats., before
the initial effective date of the relevant provision of this chapter,
and the designated offender has resided in such permanent
residence or temporary residence continuously since the effective
81.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, Original domicile restriction, was repealed 9-18-2017
by Ord. No. 17-40.
§ 287-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 287-3
277:444
§ 287-4. Sexual offender and sexual predator prohibited activity
restrictions.
date of this chapter, except for temporary absences of no more than
30 consecutive days.
(2) The designated offender is a minor and is not required to register
under §§ 301.45 and 301.46, Wis. Stats.
(3) The prohibited location situated within 1,500 feet of the person's
permanent residence was opened or established after the
designated offender established the permanent residence and
reported and registered the residence pursuant to § 301.45, Wis.
Stats.
(4) The residence is also the primary residence of the designated
offender's parents, grandparents, siblings, spouse or children,
provided that such parent, grandparent, sibling, spouse or child
established the residence at least two years before the designated
offender established residence at that location, subject to the
following: The designated offender is prohibited from residing in
such location if a victim of an offense giving rise to the designated
offender's designation also resides in the residence and is a minor,
unless the designated offender is on probation or parole and
residing with the victim is approved in writing by the probation or
parole officer; and if not on probation or parole, such location is
prohibited unless approved in writing by the Pleasant Prairie Chief
of Police, based upon a finding that the circumstances of the
offense, the designated offender, the victim, and all relevant
information in the matter substantially eliminates the risk of reoffense
against the victim.
(5) The Sex Offender Residence Board has granted an exemption for
the designated offender. [Added 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-40]
A. Safety zone prohibition. A designated offender shall not enter upon or
be present upon or within a safety zone, except as set forth below in
§ 287-4B.
B. Exceptions. A designated offender who enters upon or who is present
upon or within a safety zone does not commit a violation of this § 287-4
if any of the following apply:
(1) The property also supports a church, synagogue, mosque, temple,
or other house of religious worship, subject to all of the following
conditions:
(a) The designated offender's entrance and presence upon the
property occurs only during hours of worship or other religious
programs/services as posted to the public; and
§ 287-3 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 287-4
277:445
§ 287-5. Property owners prohibited from renting real property to
certain offenders and sexual predators; notification requirements.
(b) The designated offender shall not participate in any religious
education programs that include minors.
(2) The property also supports a use lawfully attended by a designated
offender's natural or adopted child, for which a child's use
reasonably requires the attendance of the designated offender as
the child's parent upon the property, subject to the following
condition:
(a) The designated offender's entrance and presence upon the
property occurs only during hours of activity related to the use,
as posted to the public, and only as reasonably necessary in
connection with such activity.
(3) The property also supports a polling location in a local, state or
federal election, subject to all of the following conditions:
(a) The designated offender is eligible to vote;
(b) The property is the designated polling place for the designated
offender; and
(c) The designated offender enters the polling place property,
proceeds to cast a ballot with whatever usual and customary
assistance is available to any member of the electorate, and
vacates the property immediately after the voting.
(4) The property also supports a school lawfully attended by a
designated offender as a student under which circumstances the
designated offender may enter upon the property supporting the
school at which the designated offender is enrolled for such
purposes, and at such times, as are reasonably required for the
educational purposes of the school.
(5) The property also supports a court, government office or room for
public governmental meetings, subject to all of the following
conditions:
(a) The designated offender is on the property only to transact
business at the government office or place of business, other
than a public library, or to attend an official meeting of a
governmental body; and
(b) The designated offender leaves the property immediately upon
completion of the business or meeting.
C. Prohibited activity. It is unlawful for a designated offender to
participate in a prohibited activity.
§ 287-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 287-5
277:446
§ 287-6. Exception for placements under Chapter 980 of Wisconsin
Statutes.
To the extent required by § 980.135 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and
notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, the Village of
Pleasant Prairie hereby exempts and may not enforce any portion thereof
that restricts or prohibits a sex offender from residing at a certain location
or that restricts or prohibits a person from providing housing to a sex
offender against an individual who is released under Wisconsin Statutes
§ 980.08, or against a person who provides housing to such individual, so
long as the individual is subject to supervised release under Chapter 980 of
the Wisconsin Statutes, the individual is residing where he or she is ordered
to reside under § 980.08 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and the individual is in
A. Property owner restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any property owner
to lease or rent any place, structure, mobile home, trailer or any part
thereof with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent
residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from
establishing a permanent residence or temporary residence therein
pursuant to this chapter, if such place, structure, mobile home, trailer
or any part thereof is located within a prohibited location of a
Residence as defined in § 287-3A.
B. Notice to Chief of Police. A designated offender and any property owner
who leases or rents any place, structure, mobile home, trailer or any
part thereof, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent
residence or temporary residence by any person who is a designated
offender, must each notify the Village Police Chief in writing a minimum
of 28 days prior to establishing either a permanent residence or
temporary residence within the Village. In addition, any property owner
who has leased or rented any place, structure, mobile home, trailer or
any part thereof as a permanent residence or temporary residence by
any person who is a designated offender, at any time during a calendar
year, shall report in writing to the Village Police Chief as to the status of
the leasing or renting by the designated offender, including, without
limitation, the names of all designated offenders who lease or rent any
portion of such place, structure, mobile home, trailer or any part
thereof as of December 1 of such calendar year, the remaining lease
term under the current lease for each designated offender, and, if a
designated offender no longer leases or rents such place, structure,
mobile home, trailer or any part thereof, the date said designated
offender no longer leased or rented such place. All such information
shall be provided in writing to the Village Police Chief on or before
December 31 of each calendar year.
C. Notice to property owner. A designated offender shall tell any property
owner from whom the designated offender intends to lease or rent any
place, structure, mobile home, trailer or any part thereof that the
designated offender is a designated offender as defined in § 287-2, prior
to entering into any lease or rental arrangement.
§ 287-5 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 287-6
277:447
compliance with all court orders issued under Chapter 980 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
§ 287-6.1. Petition for exemption; Sex Offender Residence Board.
[Added 9-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-40]
A. A designated offender may seek an exemption from this chapter by
petitioning to the Sex Offender Residence Board ("Residence Board").
B. The Residence Board shall consist of three citizens residing in the
Village. Members shall be selected by the President subject to the
approval by the Village of Pleasant Prairie Board of Trustees. Members
shall serve for a term of five years and shall serve no more than two
consecutive terms. The terms for the initial members of the Residence
Board shall be staggered with one member serving one year, a second
member serving three years and the third member serving five years.
C. The Residence Board shall approve an official petition form. The
designated offender seeking an exemption must complete the petition
and submit it to the Village Clerk, who shall forward it to the Residence
Board. The Residence Board shall hold a hearing on each petition,
during which the Residence Board may review any pertinent
information and accept oral or written statements from any person. The
Residence Board shall base its decision on factors related to the
Village's interest in promoting, protecting and improving the health,
safety and welfare of the community. Applicable factors for the
Residence Board's consideration shall include, but are not limited to:
(1) Nature of the offense that resulted in designated offender status.
(2) Date of offense.
(3) Age at time of offense.
(4) Recommendation of probation or parole officer.
(5) Recommendation of Police Department.
(6) Recommendation of any treating practitioner.
(7) Counseling, treatment and rehabilitation status of designated
offender.
(8) Remorse of designated offender.
(9) Duration of time since designated offender's incarceration.
(10) Support network of designated offender.
(11) Relationship of designated offender and victim(s).
(12) Presence or use of force in offense(s).
(13) Adherence to terms of probation or parole.
§ 287-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 287-6.1
277:448
§ 287-7. Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be
declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason or be repealed, it shall
not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole, or any part thereof, other
than the part so declared to be invalid or repealed.
§ 287-8. Injunction.
If a designated offender or property owner violates any provision of this
chapter, the Village may, in addition to all other rights and remedies allowed
by law or this chapter, refer the matter to an attorney chosen by the Village
Administrator to bring an action in the name of the Village in circuit court
to seek a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction or permanent
injunction against such designated offender or property owner to prevent
them from violating the terms of this chapter or to take any action, or
prevent any action, necessary for compliance with the terms of this chapter.
§ 287-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or entity who violates any provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed
$1,000, together with the costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be committed to jail for a period not to exceed 90 days.
Each violation and each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. Neither the issuance of a citation nor the imposition of a
forfeiture hereunder shall preclude the Village from seeking or obtaining
any and all legal and equitable remedies available by law or this chapter.
§ 287-10. Continuation.
The provisions of this Chapter 287, insofar as they are substantively the
same as those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment
of the chapter or amendments hereto, are intended and hereby declared
as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall be from the date of the first adoption
of such provisions.
(14) Proposals for safety assurances of designated offender.
(15) Conditions to be placed on any exception from the requirements of
this chapter.
D. The Residence Board shall decide by majority vote whether to grant or
deny an exemption. An exemption may be unconditional or limited to a
certain address or time, or subject to other reasonable conditions. The
Residence Board's decision shall be final for purposes of any appeal. A
written copy of the decision shall be provided to the designated
offender and the Village of Pleasant Prairie Police Department.
§ 287-6.1 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 287-11
277:449
§ 287-11. Effective date.
This chapter, as amended and restated above, shall take effect upon its
passage on this seventh day of September 2016.
§ 287-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 287-11
277:450
Chapter 290
SOCIAL HOST
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages — See Ch. 194.
§ 290-1. Purpose and findings.
The Village Board of the Village of Pleasant Prairie intends to discourage
underage possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the
confines of a private residence, and intends to hold persons civilly
responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under 21 years of
age possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting
the event or gathering supplied the alcohol. The Village Board of the Village
of Pleasant Prairie finds:
§ 290-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:
ALCOHOL — Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin or any other distilled spirits, including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process
produced.
A. Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol
is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of 21 are harmful to
those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health
requiring prevention or abatement.
B. Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as
well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption,
such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic collisions.
C. Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could have
drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are affected by
the actions of an irresponsible user.
D. Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and
consumption occur outside the presence of parents. However, there are
times when the parent(s) is/are present and condone the activity and, in
some circumstances, provide the alcohol.
E. A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person responsible for
hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or
consumption occurs.
§ 287-11 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 290-2
277:451
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every
liquid or solid contained alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains 1/
2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes
either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
EVENT or GATHERING — Any group of three or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST or ALLOW — To aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control
or permit a gathering or event.
IN CONTROL — The power to direct, manage, oversee and/or restrict the
affairs, business or assets of a person or entity.
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
PRESENT — Being at hand or in attendance.
RESIDENCE, PREMISES or PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any home,
yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room or
other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park or any other place of
assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether
occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function,
and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without permission or
compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON — Is any individual under 21 years of age.
§ 290-3. Prohibited acts.
It is unlawful for any person(s) to host or allow an event or gathering at
any residence, premises or on any other private or public property where
alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present when the person knows that an
underage person will or does consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage,
or possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume
it, and the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or
consumption by the underage person(s).
§ 290-4. Exceptions.
A. As natural, adoptive parent or stepparent;
B. As a legal guardian; or
C. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
A. A person is responsible for violating this section if the person
intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels or conspires with or
otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
B. A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at
the event or gathering to be responsible.
§ 290-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 290-4
277:452
§ 290-5. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to a forfeiture
of not less than $1,000 or more than $5,000, together with the costs
of prosecution. A person who is in default of payment is subject to
imprisonment in the county jail until the forfeiture and costs are paid.
Chapter 292
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 234.
§ 292-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by §§ 61.34, 61.345
and 287.09, Wis. Stats.
§ 292-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the Village of Pleasant Prairie
is in compliance with the mandates established by the statutes of the State
of Wisconsin and that the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie are maintained.
§ 292-3. Title.
This chapter shall be known, referred to and cited as the "Residential Solid
Waste and Recycling Collection Ordinance of the Village of Pleasant Prairie"
or as "Chapter 292 of the Code of the Village of Pleasant Prairie."
§ 292-4. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village.
Headings provided in this chapter are for convenience and ease of
reference; they shall not be interpreted to limit the applicability, purpose,
effect or meaning of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any word or
A. This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an underage
person and his or her parents while the parent is present and in control
of the underage person.
B. This chapter does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
C. This chapter does not apply to situations where underage persons are
lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the
course and scope of employment.
§ 290-4 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 292-4
277:453
phrase defined in § 292-5 of this chapter shall have the meaning stated
therein. Undefined words or phrases shall have their common, ordinary
meaning unless some other meaning is clearly suggested by the context in
which a particular word or phrase appears. As used in this chapter, "shall"
is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
§ 292-5. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meaning set out below:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Administrator and/or such other Village
staff members or officials as may be designated as the administrators of this
chapter by resolutions adopted from time to time by the Village Board, in
its discretion, to perform, in the first instance, any function delegated to the
Administrator by this chapter.
APARTMENT — The Village will provide solid waste and recycling collection
for complexes consisting of 15 or less units. Complexes consisting of 16
units or more shall contract to have their solid waste, garbage and refuse
collected on a weekly basis and recyclables collected not less than biweekly.
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS — Construction lumber,
drywall, shingles, electrical, HVAC and plumbing materials used during
residential new construction or large remodeling projects.
BULK ITEMS — Items such as furniture, mattresses, and swing sets or
items that are longer than four feet and weigh more than 50 pounds which
cannot fit into a Village-issued collection cart and/or garbage container,
when permitted.[Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-33]
COLLECTION CART — A Village-issued sixty-five- or ninety-five-gallon
collection cart which shall be used for the primary disposal of residential
solid waste and a separate cart for the primary disposal of recycling
materials.
COLLECTION OPTION - UNLIMITED COLLECTION — A Village-owned
sixty-five- or ninety-five-gallon solid waste collection cart will be collected
weekly. An unlimited volume of solid waste in addition to the ninety-fivegallon
solid waste collection cart can be collected each week.82[Amended
9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-31]
COLLECTION OPTION - AUTOMATED COLLECTION — A Village-owned
sixty-five- or ninety-five-gallon solid waste collection cart will be collected
weekly. An additional unlimited collection of solid waste can be scheduled
for $10. Residents must contact the Public Works Department 48 hours
in advance to schedule an unlimited solid waste collection day.[Amended
9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-31]
82.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “collection option #2 automated collection plus,”
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-31.
§ 292-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 292-5
277:454
COMPOST — Compost items shall include bundled branches, garden waste,
grass clippings, leaves, stumps 50 pounds or less, tree trimmings and other
yard waste.83
CURBSIDE — The location where solid waste and recycling materials are to
be deposited for collection. The curbside location is to be at the point where
the driveway intersects with the roadway. There need not be an actual curb
to set the solid waste or recycling upon. Collection containers shall be kept
off the roadway.
GARBAGE CONTAINER — If the primary collection cart for solid waste
is not sufficient, additional containers for solid waste collection may be
used only with Collection Option - Unlimited Collection. The containers
shall not exceed 32 gallons in size nor weigh more than 50 pounds gross
weight, and if plastic bags are used they shall be tightly tied. Garbage
containers must have two handles secured to the container. The Village of
Pleasant Prairie is not responsible for lost or damaged garbage containers.
Cardboard boxes or containers are not acceptable garbage containers and
must be recycled.[Amended 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-31]
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Includes aerosol cans which are not empty,
insecticides and pesticides, floor care products, metal polish, furniture
polish, oven cleaners, drain cleaners, bathroom cleaners, tile cleaners,
disinfectants, batteries, old gasoline, gasoline/oil mixed, brake fluid,
antifreeze, auto repair products, transmission fluids, other oils/cleaners,
oil paints (no latex paints), paint thinner, paint stripper, varnish, chemical
fertilizers, fungicides, rat poison, artists' paints, fiberglass epoxy, gun
cleaning solvents, mothballs, pool chemicals, photographic chemicals and
fluorescent bulbs.
LEAF COLLECTION — Curbside or roadside collection of loose unbagged
leaves from residential properties.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, trust,
body politic or corporate or any other legal entity.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclables shall include all corrugated
cardboard, except used pizza boxes, chipboard (cereal boxes), office paper,
white paper, newspaper, magazines, shrink/stretch wrap, all plastic bottles,
cans and containers, all glass containers, all aluminum cans and containers,
all steel cans and containers, paper store bags, cardboard egg cartons,
any products that have the recycling logo and empty aerosol containers.
All recyclable materials need to be cleaned of all food debris and must be
disposed of inside the Village-issued collection cart.[Amended 5-17-2010
by Ord. No. 10-33; 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-31]
RESIDENTIAL — Single-family, duplex, three- to four-family apartments,
condominiums, and trailer parks. The Village shall not collect any solid
waste or recycling for any commercial, industrial or retail properties
located in the Village.
83.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “compost dropoff site,” which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-31.
§ 292-5 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 292-5
277:455
RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING CENTER — The Residential Recycling Center,
8000 128th Street, where compost items and certain authorized waste are
collected.[Added 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-31]
SOLID WASTE — Shall include refuse and accumulations of animal, fruit
and vegetable matter that attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing
in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits and vegetables, dried or solid
latex paint, styrofoam, old rags, furniture, metal, except metal containers
which are classified as recyclable materials, wood, except wood which is
classified as yard waste, and other combustible refuse, clean lumber, carpet
and padding, plywood, drywall, windows and scrap. Solid waste items must
fit into a Village-issued collection cart and/or garbage container, when
permitted, and must weigh 50 pounds or less. (Building and construction
materials for new construction or large remodeling projects are not
included in the definition of “solid waste.”)[Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-33]
VILLAGE — The Village of Pleasant Prairie.
WHITE GOODS — White goods items shall include major appliances such as
televisions, air conditioners, clothes washers, clothes dryers, dishwashers,
freezers, ovens, microwave ovens, refrigerators, stoves, water heaters,
humidifiers, dehumidifiers, trash compactors, furnaces, automobiles parts,
radiators, fuel oil tanks, boilers, lawn tractors and computers.
§ 292-6. Compost dropoff collection. [Amended 12-4-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-5784]
A. The Village of Pleasant Prairie will accept the following items at the
Residential Recycling Center located at 8000 128th Street on the dates
and time set forth by the Department of Public Works at no additional
charge: [Amended 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-31]
(1) Bundled branches.
(a) (Reserved)
(b) (Reserved)
(c) Bundles bound in wire will not be accepted.
(d) Stumps will be accepted if they are 50 pounds or less.
(2) Garden waste.
(3) Grass clippings.
(4) Leaves.
(5) Stumps 50 pounds or less.
(6) Tree trimmings.
84.Editor's Note: Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 1-1-2009.
§ 292-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 292-6
277:456
(7) Other yard waste.
(8) Car batteries.
(9) Antifreeze.
(10)Waste oil (not mixed with other elements).
(11) One cubic yard of dirt.
(12) One cubic yard of broken concrete.
(13) One cubic yard of gravel.
(14) One cubic yard of broken asphalt.
(15) One cubic yard of steel/metal.
(16) Residential recycling and solid waste for Village residents that
have garbage Collection Option - Unlimited Collection.
B. Garden waste, grass clippings, leaves, tree trimmings and other yard
waste will be accepted in cans, in bags or from vehicles trunks/beds.
C. The Village of Pleasant Prairie will accept the following items at the
Residential Recycling Center located at 8000 128th Street on the dates
and time set forth by the Department of Public Works at the following
rates: [Amended 1-18-2010 by Ord. No. 10-01; 1-16-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-02; 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-31]
(1) White goods: $20 each.
(2) Bulk items: $10 each.
(3) Tires: $5 each.
(4) Computer systems: $10.
(5) Televisions.
(a) Tube.
Size
(inches) Fee
13 or less $5
14 to 21 $10
22 to 27 $20
28 or larger $25
(b) Flat panel plasma.
§ 292-6 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 292-6
277:457
§ 292-7. Hazardous waste collection. [Amended 5-6-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-14]
Size
(inches) Fee
32 or less $10
33 to 49 $15
50 to 59 $20
60 to 64 $30
65 or larger $35
(c) Flat panel LCD.
Size
(inches) Fee
22 or less $5
23 to 32 $10
33 to 46 $15
47 to 52 $20
53 to 55 $25
56 or larger $30
(d) Projection, all sizes: $15.
(e) Console TV: $35.
(6) Miscellaneous electronics: facsimile machine, DVD player and/or
VCR, each $5.
A. The Village of Pleasant Prairie collects household hazardous waste at
the Village’s Residential Recycling Center on the first Saturday of every
month, April through December. [Amended 9-19-2016 by Ord. No.
16-31]
B. One day each year, the Village of Pleasant Prairie, in conjunction with
Kenosha County and Waste Management/Pheasant Run, provides a
Household Hazardous Waste Collection Program. Hazardous waste
collection takes place at the Kenosha County Municipal Center.
(1) The following will be accepted:
Kitchen/
Bathroom
Garage/
Workshop Garden/Miscellaneous
Aerosol cans Old gasoline Chemical fertilizer
Bug sprays Gasoline/oil mixed Fungicides
§ 292-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 292-7
277:458
§ 292-8. Leaf collection.
The Village shall collect loose unbagged leaves from the curbside or
roadside of each residential unit in the Village in the spring and fall.
Bagged leaves, grass, yard waste or branches will not be collected curbside/
roadside.
§ 292-9. Recycling collection.
The Village shall collect from each residential unit in the Village all
allowable commingled recyclables which shall be placed in a recycling cart
provided by the Village. All of the Village residential units, single-family,
duplex, three- to four-family apartments, condominiums, and trailer parks
Kitchen/
Bathroom
Garage/
Workshop Garden/Miscellaneous
Floor care
products Antifreeze Herbicides
Metal polish Brake fluid Rat poison
Furniture polish Auto repair
products Artists' paints
Oven cleaners Transmission fluid Fiberglass epoxy
Drain cleaners Other oils/cleaners Gun cleaning solvents
Bathroom cleaners Oil paints Mothballs
Tile cleaners Paint thinner Pool chemicals
Disinfectant Paint stripper Photographic chemicals
Batteries Varnish Fluorescent bulbs
Hazardous waste includes products labeled "Caution,"
"Combustible," "Corrosive," "Danger," "Flammable," "Pesticide,"
"Poison," "Reactive," "Toxic" or "Warning."
C. The following will not be accepted:
Biological material
Commercial wastes
Cylinders (propane)
Explosives
Medical wastes
Radioactive materials
Latex paint*
*Latex paint is not accepted because it is not considered a hazardous
material. Solidified latex paint, after the paint is dry, can be disposed
of in solid waste collection.
§ 292-7 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 292-9
277:459
shall have their recycling collected on a biweekly basis or as prescribed by
the Village or a contractor selected by the Village. There shall be no other
methods of collection.
§ 292-10. Solid waste collection.
The Village shall collect from each residential unit in the Village all
allowable solid waste which shall be placed in a collection cart provided by
the Village. All of the Village residential units, single-family, duplex, threeto
four-family apartments, condominiums, and trailer parks shall have their
solid waste collected on a weekly basis or as prescribed by the Village or
a contractor selected by the Village. There shall be no other methods of
collection.
A. Refer to § 292-5 for the definition of "recyclable materials."
B. The collection cart provided by the Village shall be the primary
collection container for recycling materials. If the collection cart is not
used, the Village will not collect recycling materials.
C. The Village will not collect building and construction materials from a
new home construction or remodeling project as part of the residential
recycling collection program. The property owner is responsible for
securing a dumpster from a private company to dispose of said
materials.
D. Items that are not subject to collection will be tagged by employees of
the Village or Village's contractor and left at the residence.
A. It shall be illegal to dispose into a receptacle, bag, or any container left
for solid waste collection, or dispose of in any landfill, the following
items.
(1) Lead acid batteries.
(2) White goods.
(3) Waste oil.
(4) Recyclable materials defined in § 292-5.
(5) Tires.
(6) Compost.
(7) Antifreeze.
(8) Cell phones.
(9) Concrete.
(10) Stone.
(11) Dirt/clay.
§ 292-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 292-10
277:460
§ 292-11. Special collection (curbside). [Amended 12-4-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-5786]
A special collection includes a scheduled pickup of white goods and/or bulk
items. There is a fee of $25 for each white good or bulk item picked up. The
fee will be added to a utility bill.
(12) Hazardous or toxic materials as defined in the State of Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources Regulation NR 181.85
B. The collection cart provided by the Village shall be the primary
collection container for solid waste. If the collection cart is not used, the
Village will not collect solid waste.
C. The Village will not collect building and construction materials from a
new home construction or remodeling project as part of the residential
solid waste collection program. The property owner is responsible for
securing a dumpster from a private company to dispose of said
materials.
D. Items that are not subject to collection will be tagged by employees of
the Village or Village's contractor and left at the residence.
A. White goods:
(1) White goods will be picked up on Fridays only. To schedule a pickup
of a white good item(s), call the Sanitation Department at (262)
925-6700 by noon on Thursday. White goods must be placed
curbside for collection.
(2) White goods include the following items:
Air conditioners
Automobile parts
Boilers
Dishwashers
Dryers
Freezers
Fuel oil tanks
Furnaces
Humidifiers
Lawn tractors
Microwave ovens
Radiators
85.Editor's Note: For the definition of "hazardous waste," see now § NR 661.03, Wis. Adm.
Code.
86.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 1-1-2009.
§ 292-10 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 292-11
277:461
Refrigerators
Stoves and ovens
Trash compactors
Washers
Water heater
B. Bulk items.
(1) Bulk items are classified as any item weighing more than 50 pounds
which cannot fit into a collection cart and/or garbage container,
when permitted. Examples of bulk items are furniture, mattresses,
swing sets. [Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-33]
(2) Bulk items will be picked up on Wednesdays only. To schedule a
pickup of a bulk item(s), call the Sanitation Department at (262)
925-6700 by noon on Tuesday.
C. Televisions, computers and miscellaneous electronics. Televisions,
computers and miscellaneous electronics (facsimile machine, DVD
player and/or VCR) will be picked up on Fridays only. To schedule a
pickup, call the Sanitation Department at (262) 925-6700 by 12:00 noon
on Thursday. The fees are as follows: [Amended 1-18-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-01; 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-15]
(1) Televisions.
(a) Tube.
Size
(inches) Fee
13 or less $15
14 to 21 $20
22 to 27 $30
28 or larger $35
(b) Flat panel plasma.
Size
(inches) Fee
32 or less $20
33 to 49 $25
50 to 59 $30
60 to 64 $40
65 or larger $45
(c) Flat panel LCD.
§ 292-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 292-11
277:462
§ 292-12. Solid waste and recycling containers.
Size
(inches) Fee
22 or less $15
23 to 32 $20
33 to 46 $25
47 to 52 $30
53 to 55 $35
56 or larger $40
(d) Projection, all sizes: $25.
(e) Console TV: $45.
(2) Computer systems: monitor, PC and accessories: $20.
(3) Miscellaneous electronics (facsimile machine, DVD player and/or
VCR): $15 each.
D. Cancellation of scheduled pickup for special collection. The Public
Works Department must be notified of a pickup cancellation by 4:00
p.m. on the date prior to a scheduled pickup or a cancellation fee of $25
will be charged.
E. Nonscheduled special collection. If a special collection item is disposed
of at the curbside without a scheduled pickup, the item will be collected
by the Public Works Department and a charge of $40 per item will be
added to a utility bill.
A. The Village shall provide each dwelling one solid waste collection cart
and one recycling collection cart. Each container must be used as the
primary collection container.
B. All new residential dwellings after June 1, 2008, will be charged $50 for
each a sixty-five-gallon solid waste collection cart and recycling
collection cart and $55 for each a ninety-five-gallon solid waste
collection cart and recycling collection cart, which will be collected at
the time a building permit is issued and which containers will be
delivered by the Public Works Department once occupancy has been
approved by the Inspection Department.
C. Any subsequent additional solid waste collection cart may be purchased
from the Village for $50 for the sixty-five-gallon collection cart and $55
for the ninety-five-gallon collection cart. There will not be a charge for
one additional recycling collection cart. Upsizing or downsizing of a
solid waste and/or recycling collection cart from/to a sixty-five-gallon
cart to/from a ninety-five-gallon cart will be delivered to the resident at
an additional charge of $10. The Village will repair any solid waste or
§ 292-11 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 292-12
277:463
§ 292-13. Collection location.
§ 292-14. Hours of collection.
Solid waste and recycling collection shall commence at 6:30 a.m. on the day
of a regularly scheduled collection and shall be collected by 6:00 p.m. All
solid waste not out for collection by 6:30 a.m. shall not be collected until the
next week. Collection containers and materials shall not be placed at the
curb before 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the regularly scheduled collection
day and shall be removed from the curb within 12 hours after collection.
recycling collection cart that has broken lids or wheels per the
manufacturer's warranty.
D. Additional garbage containers shall not exceed 32 gallons in size nor
weigh more than 50 pounds gross weight, and if plastic bags are used
they shall be tightly tied. Garbage containers must have two handles
secured to the container. Additional containers are only allowed with
Collection Option - Unlimited Collection. The Village of Pleasant Prairie
is not responsible for lost or damaged garbage containers. Cardboard
boxes or containers are not acceptable garbage containers and must be
recycled. [Amended 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-31]
E. All garbage solid waste/recycling collection carts are the property of
the Village of Pleasant Prairie, other than those purchased in addition
to the one owned by the Village.
F. Lost or stolen solid waste/recycling collection carts are to be replaced
at the expense of the resident.
A. Collection of both solid waste and recyclables shall be curbside. Each
resident shall provide sufficient access for the Village collection
vehicles to reach the containers.
B. The Village shall collect the solid waste and recyclables from the "back
door" of those residents who complete an application for residential
disabled roll-out service. The application, which includes a disability
statement to be completed by a licensed physician or optometrist, must
be submitted to the Public Works Department annually.
C. Recycling collection carts shall be placed on the opposite side of the
driveway from the solid waste collection cart.
D. Solid waste and recycling carts shall be at least three feet away from all
other containers and objects.
E. Residents are responsible to clear snow from the curbside container
locations.
F. Containers shall be stored along the side or rear of a house or garage or
inside a garage or shed. [Added 8-5-2013 by Ord. No. 13-32]
§ 292-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 292-15
277:464
§ 292-15. Cost of service; change of collection option (effective June
1, 2008). [Amended 12-4-2008 by Ord. No. 08-5787]
§ 292-16. Interference with authorized collection.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person other than an
authorized collector shall collect or interfere with any solid waste or
recycling materials after they shall have been put into a solid waste or
recycling receptacle and deposited at the curb for the collector, nor shall
any unauthorized person hinder or delay or in any manner interfere with the
authorized collector in the discharge of his duties. No person shall hoard
solid waste and recycling for periods longer than a normal collection period.
§ 292-17. Scavenging.
From the time any solid waste, recycling or other items are placed at the
curb for collection, they shall become and are the property of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie. No one other than the designated collector is allowed to
collect, pick up or scavenge items placed for collection.
§ 292-18. Compliance with state laws.
The collection, removal and disposal of solid waste and recyclables shall be
in full compliance with the rules and regulations governing said collection
and in accordance with the statutes of the State of Wisconsin.
§ 292-19. Violations and penalties.
A. Solid waste/recycling collection. [Amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No.
09-64; 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-15; 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
14-35; 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-49]
(1) Residents who chose unlimited collection: $17.50 per month.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Residents who chose automated collection: $16.50 per month.
B. Dumpster rental: $6 per cubic yard per month.
C. Change of collection option. Existing residents will be allowed to
change their collection option once per year. The Public Works
Department must receive an option change notification by September
15 of each year for a billing change date effective October 1.
D. Unoccupied dwelling. All residents must pay a monthly collection fee
even if the residential dwelling is unoccupied.
A. The Village or its designated agents may inspect any or all solid waste
and recyclables for violations of this chapter.
87.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2010.
§ 292-15 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 292-19
277:465
§ 292-20. Recycling compliance assurance plan.
B. The Village may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings
to enforce the provisions of this chapter by means of injunction,
forfeitures or otherwise as provided by law. Any person who violates the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than
$10 or more than $600 for each violation, plus the costs of prosecution.
The penalty for default of any such forfeiture and costs shall be
imprisonment in the Kenosha County Jail until payment thereof, but not
exceeding six months. Each day a violation exists or continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
C. Penalties may be placed upon violators as provided in § 287.09, Wis.
Stats.
D. No parking is allowed within 15 feet of a Village solid waste or recycling
cart. The Village of Pleasant Prairie Police Department shall only
enforce this subsection upon a complaint from the Public Works
Department. This subsection shall not apply for private roads in a
mobile home community wherein driveways do not exist. In this
instance, solid waste and recycling carts must be located three feet
away from vehicles towards the center line of the road and in such a
manner to allow access for collection vehicles.
E. Residents will be charged $25 for each nonapproved white good, bulk
item, hazardous waste item, compost or items which can be disposed of
at the Residential Recycling Center site found in their solid waste or
recycling collection cart or garbage container. [Amended 12-4-2008
by Ord. No. 08-5788; 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-31]
A. Purpose and intent. This policy will establish standard guidelines that
will lead to compliance with the Village of Pleasant Prairie's recycling
ordinance. The Public Works Director is responsible for enforcing the
Village of Pleasant Prairie's recycling ordinance. The Public Works
Director, and Department of Public Works staff, shall follow the
guidelines identified in this section in response to issues associated
with recycling and solid waste. This plan is intended to meet the
requirements of § NR 544.04(9g), Wis. Adm. Code, as well as the Village
of Pleasant Prairie's recycling ordinance. [Amended 9-19-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-31]
B. Residential recycling program compliance procedure for solid waste
found mixed with recyclables, recyclables found in solid waste, or if a
resident is not recycling within a twelve-month period:
(1) First offense: resident's container will be tagged with a
noncompliance sticker, and the resident will be given educational
materials about recycling.
88.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 1-1-2009.
§ 292-19 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 292-20
277:466
Chapter 297
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Clean Water Utility — See Ch. 148.
Sewers — See Ch. 285.
Stormwater storage facilities — See Ch. 305.
Construction site maintenance and erosion
control — See Ch. 381.
(2) Second offense: resident's container will be tagged with a
noncompliance sticker, and a noncompliance letter will be mailed
to the offending parcel.
(3) Third offense: resident's container will be tagged with a
noncompliance sticker, and a noncompliance letter will be mailed
to the offending address. A citation will be issued to the offending
parcel.
C. Multifamily apartments and business recycling program compliance
procedure for not providing recycling receptacles, high levels of
contamination in dumpsters, not all required materials are being
recycled, solid waste found mixed with recyclables within a twelvemonth
period:
(1) First offense: resident's/operator's container will be tagged with a
noncompliance sticker, and the resident/operator given educational
materials about recycling. A site visit will be scheduled if required.
(2) Second offense: resident's/operator's container will be tagged with
a noncompliance sticker, and a noncompliance letter will be mailed
to the offending parcel.
(3) Third offense: resident's/operator's container will be tagged with a
noncompliance sticker, and a noncompliance letter will be mailed
to the offending address. A citation will be issued to the offending
parcel.
§ 292-20 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 292-20
277:467

ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges and Connections
[Adopted 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-2889; amended in its entirety
3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-01]
§ 297-1. Illicit discharges and unauthorized connections.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable to this article:
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the
storm drain system, including but not limited to any conveyances which
allow any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the storm drain system and
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been allowed,
permitted, or approved by a governmental agency, prior to adoption of
this article.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any discharge to a municipal separate storm
sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except
discharges authorized by a WPDES permit or other discharge not
requiring a WPDES permit, such as landscape irrigation, individual
residential car washing, firefighting, diverted stream flows,
uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped
groundwater, discharges from potable water sources, foundation
drains, air-conditioning condensation, irrigation water, lawn watering,
flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and similar discharges.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the
owner or as the owner's agent.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to
any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs,
inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention
basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels,
reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A
document which describes the best management practices and
activities to be implemented by a person to identify sources of pollution
or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce
pollutant discharges to storm drainage systems and/or receiving waters
to the maximum extent practicable.
WPDES PERMIT — A permit issued under Ch. 283, Wis. Stats.
B. Prohibitions.
89.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Chapter 299 but was renumbered
to maintain the organizational structure of the Code.
§ 297-1 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 297-1
277:469
§ 297-2. Inspection authority.
§ 297-3. Notification of and response to spills.
(1) Prohibition of illicit connections. The construction, use,
maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the
storm drainage system is prohibited.
(2) Prohibition of illicit discharges.
(a) The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit
discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited.
(b) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
storm drainage system or watercourses any nonstormwater
materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards.
(3) Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the
prohibition provisions of this article unless otherwise found to have
an adverse impact on the stormwater:
(a) Discharges authorized by a permit issued by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
(b) Discharges resulting from firefighting or controlled burn
activities.
(c) Discharges in compliance with the Village's construction site
erosion controls or stormwater management regulations.
(d) Facility maintenance activities undertaken by any federal,
state, county, or municipal agency, such activities, however,
being subject to construction site erosion control and/or
adopted facility stormwater pollution prevention plan(s).
(e) Dye testing if it has been authorized by the Village or DNR.
A. The Village shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to
regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this article.
B. Facility operators shall allow the Village ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of a WPDES
permit to discharge stormwater and the performance of any duties
defined by state and federal law.
C. The Village has the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices
as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge or to require the discharger to install monitoring
equipment as necessary.
§ 297-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 297-3
277:470
§ 297-4. Enforcement.
A. Notwithstanding any other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in an
illicit discharge or pollutants discharging into stormwater or the storm
drainage system or water of the state, such person shall immediately
report the release to the Village. In the event of a release of hazardous
substances, such person shall also notify the DNR in accordance with
§ 292.11, Wis. Stats.
B. In the event of a release under Subsection A, such person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of
such release and shall remediate any residual contamination in
accordance with applicable state surface water, groundwater or soil
standards.
A. Whenever the Village finds a person has violated a prohibition or failed
to meet the requirements of this article, the Village may order
compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person.
Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The elimination of illicit discharge connections or illicit discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist; and/or
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
B. In the event the person fails to eliminate the illicit connections or illicit
discharge, fails to cease and desist discharges, practices or operations
in violation of this article or fails to abate or remediate the stormwater
pollution or contamination hazards, the person may be subject to a
penalty as provided by Chapter 1, § 1-4, of this Code. Each day that the
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
C. In the event that an illicit discharge is identified and emergency
cleanup action is undertaken by the Village, DNR, or other authority
having jurisdiction, the person may be subject to all associated cleanup
costs incurred.
D. If the person responsible fails to cease, desist, and abate the illicit
discharge, the Village may take such action itself and seek
reimbursement in Village Municipal Court or Kenosha County Circuit
Court or via special assessment or special charges under § 66.0627,
Wis. Stats., as may be amended from time to time.
E. Compliance with the provisions of this article may also be enforced by
injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to
injunction proceedings, as authorized pursuant to § 61.35, Wis. Stats.
§ 297-3 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 297-4
277:471
Chapter 298
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND STORMWATER
DRAINAGE SYSTEM FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Clean Water Utility — See Ch. 148.
Quarries and nonmetallic mining
operations — See Ch. 270.
Sewers — See Ch. 285.
Illicit discharges and unauthorized
connections to storm sewer system — See Ch.
297, Art. I.
Stormwater storage facilities — See Ch. 300.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 305.
Land disturbance, construction site
maintenance and erosion control — See Ch.
381.
Land division and development control — See
Ch. 395.
Design standards and construction
specifications — See Ch. 405.
Zoning Ordinance — See Ch. 420.
§ 298-1. Authority.
§ 298-2. Intent and purpose.
A. This chapter is adopted by the Village of Pleasant Prairie under the
authority granted by § 61.354, Wis. Stats. Except as otherwise specified
in § 61.354, Wis. Stats., § 61.35, Wis. Stats., applies to this chapter and
to any amendments to this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the Village.
C. The requirements of this chapter do not preempt more stringent
stormwater management requirements that may be imposed by any of
the following:
(1) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) administrative
rules, permits or approvals, including those authorized under
§§ 281.16 and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
(2) Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated in
rules by the DNR under § NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
(3) Village-approved or -adopted stormwater management plans for
specific areas or watersheds or as otherwise authorized in this
chapter.
A. Intent. The Village Board finds that uncontrolled post-construction
runoff has a significant impact upon and use of natural resources.
Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can:
§ 297-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-2
277:472
§ 298-3. Jurisdiction; applicability.
(1) Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank
erosion, increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater
recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream
temperature.
(2) Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic
life, and recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant
loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals,
bacteria, pathogens and other urban pollutants.
(3) Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by
increasing pollutant loads.
(4) Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading.
(5) Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
increasing major flood peaks and volumes.
(6) Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
overtaxing stormwater drainage system(s), storm sewers,
drainageways, and other minor drainage facilities.
(7) Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the
incidence and levels of flooding.
B. Purpose. The general purpose of this chapter is to establish long-term,
post-construction runoff management requirements that will diminish
the threats to public health, safety, welfare and aquatic environment.
Specific purposes are to:
(1) Maintain safe and healthful conditions.
(2) Prevent and control the adverse effects of stormwater; prevent and
control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect
spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites,
placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and
scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth.
(3) Maintain the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and
receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; control
increases in the scouring and transportation of particulate matter;
and prevent conditions that endanger downstream property.
(4) Regulate post-construction stormwater discharges to waters of the
state or other waterways in the Village.
A. Jurisdiction. This chapter applies to all lands and waters within the
boundaries of the Village of Pleasant Prairie as well as all lands located
within the supervised drainage basin area within the Village of Bristol
pursuant to the 1997 Settlement and Cooperation Agreement.
§ 298-2 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 298-3
277:473
§ 298-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
1997 SETTLEMENT AND COOPERATION AGREEMENT — The Settlement
and Cooperative Agreement entered into by and between the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, the Pleasant Prairie Water Utility, the Pleasant Prairie
Sewer Utility District D, the Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility District 1 and the
Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility District F and the Town of Bristol, the Town
of Bristol Utility District No. 3, the Town of Bristol Utility District No. 5 and
the Town of Bristol Water Utility District.
ADEQUATE SOD or SELF-SUSTAINING VEGETATIVE COVER —
Maintenance of sufficient vegetation types and densities such that the
physical integrity of the streambank or lakeshore is preserved. Selfsustaining
vegetative cover includes grasses, forbs, sedges and duff layers
of fallen leaves and woody debris.
B. Applicability. This chapter applies to all land divisions and development
pursuant to Chapter 395, Land Division and Development Control; all
developments pursuant to Article IX, Site and Operational Plan Review,
Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance; and all other development and land
disturbance activities that require an erosion control permit pursuant
to Chapter 381, Construction Site Maintenance and Erosion Control,
that meet applicability criteria specified in this chapter.
(1) A post-development construction site that has one or more acres of
land disturbance construction activity.
(2) Land development activity that involves an increase of 1/2 acre or
more of impervious surface but less than 1.0 acre of land
development activity.
(3) Post-construction sites of any size that, as determined by the
Village, are likely to result in stormwater runoff which exceeds the
safe capacity of existing drainage facilities, storage facilities or
receiving body of water; contributes to a known downstream
stormwater problem; causes undue channel erosion; increases
water pollution by scouring or transportation of particulate matter;
or endangers property or public health.
(4) A site that meets any of the following is exempt from the
requirements of this chapter, unless determined otherwise per
Subsection B(3) above in this section.
(a) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices;
and
(b) Underground utility construction, but not including the
construction of any aboveground structures associated with
utility construction.
§ 298-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-4
277:474
AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — Defined pursuant to
§ 281.16, Wis. Stats.
ATLAS 14 — The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Atlas 14 Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States. Volume 8
(Midwestern States), published for the location closest to the municipality.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A typical calendar year of precipitation
as determined by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for users
of models such as WinSLAMM, P8 or equivalent methodology. The average
annual rainfall is chosen from a department publication for the location
closest to the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize
sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state or other
waterways in the Village.
BUSINESS DAY — A day the office of the Village is routinely and
customarily open for business.
COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM — A system for conveying both sanitary
sewage and stormwater runoff.
CONNECTED IMPERVIOUSNESS — An impervious surface that is directly
connected to a stormwater drainage system or water of the state via an
impervious flow path.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a
specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency,
and total depth of rainfall.
DEVELOPMENT — Residential, commercial, industrial or institutional land
uses and associated public and private roadways.
DIRECT CONDUITS TO GROUNDWATER — Wells, sinkholes, swallets,
fractured bedrock at the surface, mine shafts, nonmetallic mines, tile inlets
discharging to groundwater, quarries, or depressional groundwater
recharge areas over shallow fractured bedrock.
DNR TECHNICAL STANDARD — The DNR, in accordance with § NR 151.31,
Wis. Adm. Code, approved Stormwater Construction and Post-Construction
Technical Standards. These standards are documents that specify the
minimum requirements needed to plan, design, install and maintain a wide
array of conservation practices aimed at preserving the land and water
resources of Wisconsin. They are based on current research, field
experience, the best available technology.
EFFECTIVE INFILTRATION AREA — The area of the infiltration system that
is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for site access,
berms or pretreatment.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
§ 298-4 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 298-4
277:475
EXCEPTIONAL RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.11, Wis.
Adm. Code.
FINAL STABILIZATION — All land disturbance construction activities at the
construction site have been completed and a uniform, perennial, vegetative
cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of the cover,
for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or
employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff all or a large
portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops,
sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and streets are examples of areas that
typically are impervious.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT — An undeveloped area of land located within
an existing urban sewer service area, surrounded by development or
development and natural or man-made features where development cannot
occur.
INFILTRATION — The entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the
soil.
INFILTRATION SYSTEM — A device or practice such as a basin, trench,
rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but
does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns, the
redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from
practices, such as swales or roadside channels, designed for conveyance
and pollutant removal only.
KARST FEATURE — An area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock
dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater and may
include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces,
sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
LAND DISTURBANCE CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover that may result in runoff and
lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into waters of
the state or other waterways in the Village. Land disturbance construction
activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench
dewatering, filling and grading activities.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legal document that provides for longterm
maintenance of stormwater management practices.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — A level of implementing best
management practices (BMPs) in order to achieve a performance standard
specified in this chapter which takes into account the best available
technology, cost effectiveness and other competing issues, such as human
safety and welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic
properties and geographic features. This provides flexibility to the Village
Engineer in evaluating ways to meet the performance standards and which
may vary on a case-by-case basis depending on the performance standard
and site conditions.
§ 298-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-4
277:476
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Development resulting from the conversion of
previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses.
NRCS MSE3 OR MSE4 DISTRIBUTION — A specific precipitation
distribution developed by the United States Department of Agriculture,
Natural Resources Conservation Service, using precipitation data from
Atlas 14.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the property boundary described in the permit
application.
ON-SITE — Located within the property boundary described in the permit
application.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — Defined pursuant to § NR 115.03(6),
Wis. Adm. Code.
OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in § NR 102.10, Wis.
Adm. Code.
OWNER or LANDOWNER — Any person holding title to or having interest
in land.
PERCENT FINES — The percentage of a given sample of soil, which passes
through a No. 200 sieve.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff a small portion of
the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests or other
similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious.
POLLUTANT — Defined pursuant to § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
POLLUTION — Defined pursuant to § 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE — A construction site following the completion
of land disturbance construction activity and final site stabilization
inspected and approved by the Village.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT CONDITION — The extent and distribution of land
cover types present before the initiation of land disturbance construction
activity, provided that all land uses prior to development activity are
managed in an environmentally sound manner.
PREVENTATIVE ACTION LIMIT — Defined pursuant to § NR 140.05(17),
Wis. Adm. Code.
PROTECTIVE AREA — An area of land that commences at the top of the
channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of
wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured
horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to
the closest impervious surface. However, in this chapter, "protective area"
does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a
pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location.
§ 298-4 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 298-4
277:477
REDEVELOPMENT — Areas where development is replacing older
development.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation, including rain, snow or ice melt,
or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized
flow.
SILVICULTURE ACTIVITY — Activities including tree nursery operations,
tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burning,
and pest and fire control. Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction
site or other development activity is not a silviculture activity.
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land disturbance construction activity occurred.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the Village which requires that
all construction activity on the site be stopped.
STORM SEWER — A part of the stormwater drainage system which consists
of a pipe or conduit for collecting and or conveying stormwater runoff or
unpolluted water.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins,
curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets
all of the following criteria: is designed or used for collecting water or
conveying runoff; is not part of a combined sewer system; and discharges
directly or indirectly to waters of the state or other waterways in the
Village.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan designed to
address stormwater management and performance standards of a specific
site or overall development area.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A comprehensive plan
designed to address stormwater management and performance standards
and goals on a regional or municipal scale.
SUPERVISED DRAINAGE BASIN AREA — Pursuant to the 1997 Settlement
and Cooperation Agreement, those portions of the Village of Bristol within
the drainage basins tributary to the Village of Pleasant Prairie, as defined
on Attachment G of the 1997 Settlement and Cooperation Agreement on file
with the Village Clerk.
TOP OF THE CHANNEL — An edge, or point on the landscape, landward
from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of the state, where
the slope of the land begins to be less than 12% continually for at least 50
feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less continually for the initial 50 feet,
landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of the channel is the
ordinary high-water mark.
TR-55 — The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55,
June 1986.
§ 298-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-4
277:478
TYPE II DISTRIBUTION — A rainfall type curve as established in the
"United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Technical Paper 149, published 1973."
WATERS OF THE STATE — Defined pursuant to § 281.01(18), Wis. Stats.
§ 298-5. Applicability of maximum extent practicable.
Maximum extent practicable applies when a person who is subject to a
performance standard of this chapter demonstrates, in writing, with
engineering rationale and data, to the Village Engineer's satisfaction, that
a performance standard is not achievable and that a lower level of
performance is appropriate. In demonstrating that a performance standard
is not achievable and that a level of performance different from the
performance standard is the maximum extent practicable, the best available
technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing
interests such as protection of public safety and welfare, protection of
endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic
properties shall be taken into account.
§ 298-6. Technical standards.
The following methods shall be used in designing and meeting the
performance standards for the stormwater management plan:
§ 298-7. Performance standards.
A. Department of Natural Resources (DNR) technical standards identified,
developed, or disseminated by the DNR under Subchapter V of Ch. NR
151, Wis. Adm. Code.
B. Where DNR technical standards have not been identified or developed
by the DNR, other technical standards may be used, provided that the
methods have been approved by the Village.
C. Technical engineering standards administered and/or approved by the
Village.
D. For the purposes of this chapter, the following year and location have
been selected as average annual rainfall: Milwaukee 1969 (March 28 to
December 6).
A. Peak runoff discharge standards.
(1) By design, the peak flow discharge rates of stormwater runoff
under the post-development conditions shall be controlled and
reduced as follows:
(a) One-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour, post-development peak
runoff discharge shall not exceed the lesser of:
[1] Three tenths cubic feet per second (cfs) per acre; or
§ 298-4 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 298-7
277:479
[2] Ten-year, twenty-four-hour, pre-development peak runoff
discharge; or
[3] Maximum hydraulic capacity of existing downstream
conveyance facilities as determined by the Village or peak
discharge requirements of Village-adopted stormwater
management plans for specific areas or watersheds where
applicable.
(b) Two-year, twenty-four-hour, post-development peak runoff
discharges shall not exceed the lesser of:
[1] Four hundredths cubic feet per second (cfs) per acre; or
[2] Two-year, twenty-four-hour, pre-developed peak runoff
discharge; or
[3] Peak discharge requirements of Village-adopted
stormwater management plans for specific areas or
watersheds where applicable.
(c) One-year, twenty-four-hour, post-development peak runoff
discharge shall not exceed:
[1] One-year, twenty-four-hour, pre-developed peak runoff
discharge, or to the maximum extent practicable.
(d) The runoff curve numbers in Table 1 shall be used to represent
pre-developed conditions. Other land covers shall assume
"good hydrologic conditions" as identified in TR-55 or an
equivalent methodology.
Table 1. Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve
Numbers
Cover
Type Curve numbers for hydrologic soil group
A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Grassland 39 61 71 78
Cropland 55 69 77 80
(e) Peak discharge shall be calculated using Atlas 14 precipitation
depths and NRCS MSE3 precipitation distribution.
(2) Peak runoff discharge standards do not apply to any of the
following:
(a) Development activities located in sites riparian to Lake
Michigan where site runoff is directly discharged into Lake
Michigan and where the Village Engineer, or designee, has
§ 298-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-7
277:480
determined that bluff erosion protection has been
appropriately provided.
(b) Construction of recreational trails, if the trail width is 10 feet
or less, and the trail has continuous buffer at least five feet
wide on each side, disregarding interruption by streets,
driveways, or other impervious surfaces crossing the trail.
(c) Residential infill where the lot or development area is less than
five acres, the development is exclusively residential, the net
increase in the area of impervious surface is less than 20% of
the area of the site, each boundary of the site is contiguous to
sites that contain earlier development at the time the Village
receives the plans for the new development and it is
determined by the Village Engineer, or designee, that meeting
the peak discharge performance standard would be
impracticable or a hardship and said development would not
adversely affect downstream drainage conditions.
(d) A redeveloped post-construction site except as provided in
§ 298-7F, if the impervious area of the redevelopment is not
increased from existing conditions and it is determined by the
Village Engineer that meeting the peak discharge performance
standards would be impracticable or a hardship. Otherwise, it
is the intent that redevelopment sites incorporate peak runoff
discharge performance standards whenever possible.
B. Runoff quality performance standards.
(1) BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to control total
suspended solids carried in runoff from the post-construction site
in accordance with Table 2 or to the maximum extent practicable.
The design shall be based on an average annual rainfall, as
compared to no runoff management controls.
Table 2. TSS Reduction Standards
Development Type TSS Reduction
New development 80%
Infill development 80%
Redevelopment 40% of load from parking areas
and roads
(2) Exemption for TSS reduction: A post-development site with less
than ten-percent connected imperviousness based on complete
development of the post-construction site, provided that the
cumulative area of all impervious surfaces is less than one acre.
This does not include an exemption from protective area standards.
(3) Maximum extent practicable. If the design cannot meet a total
suspended solids reduction performance standard of Table 2, the
§ 298-7 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 298-7
277:481
stormwater management plan shall include a written, site-specific
explanation of why the total suspended solids reduction
performance standard cannot be met and why the total suspended
solids load will only be reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
(4) Off-site drainage. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the
BMP from off site shall be taken into account in determining the
treatment efficiency of the practice. Any impact on the efficiency
shall be compensated for by increasing the size of the BMP
accordingly.
(5) Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas (of any size) shall, to the maximum extent
practicable, have BMPs designed, installed and maintained to
reduce petroleum within runoff, such that the runoff that enters
waters of the state or other waterways in the Village contains no
visible petroleum sheen.
(6) Sites shall meet protective areas pursuant to § 298-8 of this
chapter.
C. Infiltration standards.
(1) Best management practices. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and
maintained to infiltrate runoff in accordance with the following or
to the maximum extent practicable:
(a) Low imperviousness. For development up to forty-percent
connected imperviousness, such as, but not limited to, parks,
cemeteries, and low-density residential development, infiltrate
sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at least 90% of the predevelopment
infiltration volume, based on an average annual
rainfall. However, when designing infiltration systems to meet
this requirement, no more than 1% of the post-construction
site is required as an effective infiltration area.
(b) Moderate imperviousness. For development with more than
forty-percent and up to eighty-percent connected
imperviousness, such as, but not limited to, medium- and highdensity
residential, multifamily development, industrial and
institutional development, and office parks, infiltrate sufficient
runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume
shall be at least 75% of the pre-development infiltration
volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However, when
designing infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no
more than 2% of the post-construction site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
(c) High imperviousness. For development with more than eightypercent
connected imperviousness, such as, but not limited to,
commercial strip malls, shopping centers, and commercial
§ 298-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-7
277:482
downtowns, infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at least 60% of the
pre-development infiltration volume, based on an average
annual rainfall. However, when designing infiltration systems
to meet this requirement, no more than 2% of the postconstruction
site is required as an effective infiltration area.
(2) Pre-development conditions. Runoff curve numbers specified in
Table 1 of the peak discharge section90 shall be used for the predevelopment
condition.
(3) Source areas.
(a) Prohibitions. Runoff from the following areas may not be
infiltrated and may not qualify as contributing to meeting the
requirements of this section unless demonstrated to meet
groundwater standards:
[1] Areas associated with Tier 1 industrial facility identified in
§ NR 216.21(2)(a), including storage, loading and parking.
Rooftops may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the
Village and WDNR.
[2] Storage and loading areas of a Tier 2 industrial facility
identified in § NR 216.21(2)(b).
[3] Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Runoff from
rooftops of fueling and vehicle maintenance areas may be
infiltrated with the concurrence of the Village and DNR.
(b) Exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may be credited
toward meeting the requirement when infiltrated, but the
decision to infiltrate these source areas is optional:
[1] Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet
for commercial development.
[2] Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet
for industrial development not subject to the prohibitions
under Subsection C(3)(a) above.
[3] Except as provided under § 298-7F, redevelopment postconstruction
sites.
[4] Infill development areas less than five acres.
[5] Roads on commercial, industrial and institutional land
uses and arterial residential roads.
(4) Location of practices.
90.Editor's Note: See Subsection A(1)(d) of this section.
§ 298-7 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 298-7
277:483
(a) Prohibitions. Infiltration practices may not be located in the
following areas:
[1] Areas within 1,000 feet up gradient or within 100 feet
down gradient of direct conduits of groundwater.
[2] Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as
specified in § NR 811.16(4) or within separation distances
listed in § NR 812.08 for any private wells or non
community well for runoff infiltrated from commercial,
including multifamily residential, industrial and
institutional land uses or regional devices for one- and
two-family residential development.
[3] Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in § NR
720.03(2), are present in the soil through which infiltration
will occur.
(b) Separation distances.
[1] Infiltration practices shall be located so that the
characteristics of the soil and the separation distance
between the bottom of the infiltration system and the
elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of
bedrock are in accordance with Table 3.
Table 3. Separation Distances and Soil
Characteristics
Source Areas
Separation
Distance
(feet)
Soil
Characteristics
Industrial,
commercial,
institutional
parking lots and
roads
5 or more Filtering layer
Residential
arterial roads
5 or more Filtering layer
Roof draining to
subsurface
infiltration
practices
1 or more Native or
engineered soil
with particles finer
than coarse sand
Roof draining to
subsurface
infiltration
practices
Not applicable Not applicable
§ 298-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-7
277:484
Table 3. Separation Distances and Soil
Characteristics
Source Areas
Separation
Distance
(feet)
Soil
Characteristics
All other
impervious source
areas
3 or more Filtering layer
[2] Applicable requirements for injection wells classified
under Ch. NR 815 shall be followed.
(c) Infiltration rate exemptions. Infiltration practices located in
the following areas may be credited toward meeting the
requirements under the following conditions, but the decision
to infiltrate under these conditions is optional:
[1] Where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at the
proposed bottom of the infiltration system is less than 0.6
inch per hour using a scientific credible field test method.
[2] Where the least permeable soil horizon to five feet below
the proposed bottom of the infiltration system using the
United States Department of Agriculture method of soils
analysis is one of the following: sandy clay loam, clay loam,
silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay.
(5) Alternate use. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as
toilet flushing, laundry, irrigation, or storage on green roofs where
an equivalent portion of the runoff is captured permanently by
rooftop vegetation, such alternate use shall be given equal credit
toward the infiltration volume required by this section.
(6) Groundwater standards.
(a) Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this
subsection shall, to the extent technically and economically
feasible, minimize the level of pollutants infiltrating to
groundwater and shall maintain compliance with the
preventative action limit at a point of standards application in
accordance with Ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm. Code. However, if sitespecific
information indicates that compliance with a
preventative action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP
may not be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration
to the maximum extent practicable.
(b) The discharge from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement
standard at the point of standards application.
§ 298-7 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 298-7
277:485
(7) Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be
required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road
construction in commercial, industrial and institutional areas that
will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be
designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to
scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality.
Pretreatment options may include, but are not limited to, oil/grease
separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter
strips.
D. Swale treatment for transportation facilities.
(1) "Transportation facilities" in this section means a highway, a
railroad, a public mass transit facility, a public-use airport, public
trail, or harbor improvements. "Transportation facilities" does not
include building or development sites.
(2) Transportation facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance and
pollutant removal are exempt from the requirements for total
suspended solids control, and infiltration, if the swales are
designed to do all of the following or to the maximum extent
practicable:
(a) Swales shall be vegetated; however, where appropriate,
nonvegetative measures may be employed to prevent erosion
or provide runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or
check dams.
(b) Swales shall comply with the listed sections of the WDNR
Technical Standard 1005, "Vegetated Infiltration Swales,"
current edition.
[1] Section V(F), Velocity and Depth; Section V(G), Swale
Geometry Criteria; Section V(C), Pre-treatment.
(3) Other requirements.
(a) The Village may, consistent with water quality standards,
require other requirements, in addition to the swale treatment,
be met on a transportation facility with an average daily traffic
rate greater than 2,500 and where the initial surface water of
state that the runoff directly enters is one of the following:
[1] An outstanding resource water.
[2] An exceptional resource water.
[3] Waters listed in Section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water
Act91 that are identified as impaired in whole or in part,
due to nonpoint source impacts.
91.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1313(d).
§ 298-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-7
277:486
[4] Water where targeted performance standards are
developed pursuant to § NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) The transportation facility authority shall contact the Village to
determine if additional BMPs beyond a water quality swale are
needed under this subsection.
E. Stormwater management plan. A written stormwater management plan
in accordance with Chapter 405 of the Village Ordinances shall be
developed and implemented for each post-construction site.
F. Redevelopment (maintenance of effort).
(1) For redevelopment sites where the redevelopment will be replacing
older development that was subject to post-construction
performance standards of Ch. NR 151 in effect on or after October
1, 2004, the site shall meet the total suspended solids reduction,
peak flow control, infiltration, and protective area standards
applicable to the older development or meet the redevelopment
standards of this chapter, whichever is more stringent.
G. BMP locations.
(1) BMPs may be located on site or off site as part of a regional
stormwater device, practice, or system but shall be installed in
accordance with § NR 151.003, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) The Village may approve off-site management measures, provided
that all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The Village determines that the post-construction runoff is
covered by a stormwater system plan that is approved by the
Village and that contains management requirements
consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter.
(b) The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
[1] The facility is in place.
[2] The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a
level of stormwater control equal to or greater than that
which would be afforded by on-site practices meeting the
performance standards of this chapter.
[3] The facility is covered by a valid post-development
stormwater discharge permit per the requirements of this
chapter and has a legally obligated entity responsible for
its long-term operation and maintenance.
[4] The on-site property is either part of an association or
legal entity responsible for the long-term operation and
maintenance of the off-site facility or has a Villageapproved
recorded agreement with the off-site facility
§ 298-7 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 298-7
277:487
§ 298-8. Protective areas.
owner regarding the use of the off-site facility to meet
post-construction runoff performance standards.
H. Additional requirements. The Village may establish stormwater
requirements more stringent than those set forth in this chapter,
provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
(1) The Village Engineer, or designee, determines that a higher level of
protection from flooding is required to protect public health and
safety.
(2) The Village Engineer, or designee, determines that a higher level of
protection is needed to protect sensitive natural resources.
(3) The Village Engineer, or designee, determines that more restrictive
discharge controls are needed due to limiting capacities of
downstream conveyance or storage facilities.
A. Definition. "Protective area" has the definition per § 298-4; however, in
this section, "protective area" does not include any area of land
adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, so that runoff
cannot enter the enclosure at this location.
B. Protective areas. The following are minimum standards for protective
areas for water quality; however, the Village may impose greater limits
based on site-specific information:
(1) For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters:
75 feet.
(2) For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a United
States Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic map or a
county soil survey map, whichever is more current: 50 feet.
(3) For lakes: 50 feet.
(4) For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than
130 acres: 10 feet.
(5) For highly susceptible wetlands: 75 feet. Highly susceptible
wetlands include calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open and
coniferous bogs, low prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland
hardwood swamps, and ephemeral ponds.
(6) For less susceptible wetlands: 10% of the average wetland width,
but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible
wetlands include degraded wetlands dominated by invasive species
such as reed canary grass, cultivated hydric soils, and any gravel
pits, dredged material, or fill material disposal sites that take on
the attributes of a wetland.
§ 298-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-8
277:488
(7) For wetlands not subject to Subsection B(5) and (6) above: 50 feet.
(8) The determinations of the extent of the protective area adjacent to
wetlands shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff
susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the standards and
criteria in § NR 103.03.
(9) Wetland boundary delineation shall be made in accordance with
§ NR 103.08(1m). This subsection does not apply to wetlands that
have been completely filled in compliance with all applicable state
and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have
been partially filled in compliance with all applicable state and
federal regulations shall be measured from the wetland boundary
delineation after a fill has been placed. Where there is a legally
authorized fill, the protective area standard need not be met in that
location.
(10) The greatest protective area width shall apply where rivers,
streams, lakes, and wetlands are contiguous.
C. Requirements. The following requirements shall be met:
(1) Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area or to
the maximum extent practicable. The stormwater management
plan shall contain a written site-specific explanation for any parts
of the protective area that are disturbed during construction.
(2) Where land disturbance construction activity occurs within a
protective area and where no impervious surface is present,
adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70% or greater
shall be established and maintained. The adequate sod or selfsustaining
vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank
stability, maintenance of fish habitat and the filtering of pollutants
from upslope overland flow areas under sheet flow conditions.
Nonvegetative materials, such as rock riprap, may be employed on
the bank as necessary to prevent erosion, such as on steep slopes
or where high-velocity flows occur.
(3) BMPs, such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention basins, which
are designed to control pollutants from nonpoint sources, may be
located in the protective area.
D. Exemptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
(1) Except as provided under § 298-7F, redevelopment postconstruction
sites.
(2) Infill development areas less than five acres.
(3) Structures that cross or access surface waters, such as boat
landings, bridges, and culverts.
(4) Structures constructed in accordance with § 59.692(1v), Wis. Stats.
§ 298-8 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 298-8
277:489
§ 298-9. Approvals; agreements; and easements.
(5) Post-construction sites from which runoff does not enter the
protective area's surface water, including wetlands, without first
being treated by a BMP to meet requirements for total suspended
solids and peak flow reduction, except to the extent that vegetative
ground cover is necessary to maintain bank stability.
A. Approval. All stormwater management and stormwater drainage
system facilities plans shall be reviewed for compliance with this
chapter, all other applicable federal, state and Village laws and
regulations. If said plans comply with all specified requirements, the
Village Engineer, or designee, shall approve said plans in writing.
B. Development agreement. If the proposed stormwater management and
stormwater drainage system facilities plans are part of a project subject
to Chapter 395, Land Division and Development Control Ordinance, a
development agreement and related requirements and regulations of
Chapter 395 shall apply.
C. Maintenance agreement and access and maintenance easement.
(1) Maintenance agreement. A maintenance agreement is required for
the maintenance of all stormwater management and stormwater
drainage system facilities consistent with the stormwater
management plan which is approved and constructed in
accordance with this chapter. The maintenance agreement shall be
approved by the Village and be based on the maintenance plan
developed for the life of each stormwater management practice,
including the required maintenance activities and maintenance
activity schedule as required by this chapter.
(2) Access and maintenance easement. The owner is required to
dedicate an access and maintenance easement to the Village for all
stormwater management and stormwater drainage system
facilities approved and constructed in accordance with this
chapter. This easement shall be in the form of a dedicated
stormwater drainage access and maintenance easement provided
on a certified survey map, final plat or other recordable document.
(a) Access and maintenance easements shall be prepared by the
Village, executed by the owner and recorded at the Kenosha
County Register of Deeds office, at the owner's expense, prior
to issuance of the required erosion control permit. Said access
and maintenance easement shall be binding upon all
subsequent landowners.
(b) Access and maintenance easement provisions. The easement
shall, at a minimum, include the following information and
provisions:
§ 298-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-9
277:490
§ 298-10. Permits and conditions.
[1] Legal description and identification of the stormwater
facilities.
[2] Identification of the owner responsible for ongoing
maintenance of the stormwater facilities.
[3] Maintenance agreement plan and provisions.
[4] Authorization for the Village to access the property to
conduct inspections of stormwater practices as necessary
to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and
operated in accordance with the agreement.
[5] Authorization of the Village to perform corrected actions if
the owner does not maintain or operate the system in
accordance with the agreement and Village-approved
plans.
[6] Agreement that the owner shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the construction and maintenance of the
stormwater facilities as required by this chapter and all
other applicable federal, state and Village requirements.
A. Erosion control permit.
(1) Only upon written approval of a stormwater management and
stormwater drainage facilities plan from the Village Engineer, or
designee, an erosion control permit application can be filed and
issued by the Village pursuant to Chapter 381, Construction Site
Maintenance and Erosion Control,92 and this section. All applicable
permit fees and deposits pursuant to Chapter 381 shall be paid by
the owner prior to commencing work.
(a) It shall be the duty of the owner to review and accept the terms
and conditions of any erosion control permit before
commencement of the work pursuant to such permit.
Commencement pursuant to an erosion control permit
automatically constitutes acceptance of the permit and waives
any right to appeal or challenge the permit decision, the permit
or any condition thereof. Any erosion control permit not
accepted prior to commencement may be suspended by the
Village Engineer, or designee, or revoked or voided by the
Village Engineer, or designee.
(b) The Village Engineer, or designee, may place reasonable
conditions on said permit to ensure compliance with this
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 381, Land Disturbances, Construction Site Maintenance and
Erosion Control.
§ 298-9 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 298-10
277:491
chapter and all other applicable federal, state and Village laws
and regulations as listed below.
[1] The owner is responsible to comply with all other
applicable federal, state, and Village laws and regulations.
[2] The owner shall install all structural and nonstructural
stormwater management measures in accordance with the
approved stormwater management plan and/or drainage
plans.
[3] If a stormwater management and drainage plan involves
changes in direction, increases in peak rate and/or total
volume of runoff from a site, the Village may require the
owner to make appropriate legal arrangements with
adjacent property owner(s) concerning the prevention of
endangerment to property or public safety.
[4] Upon completion of the project, "as-built" drawings and
documents shall be submitted in accordance with Chapter
405 of the Village ordinances.
[5] Additional conditions as specified in Chapter 381,
Construction Site Maintenance and Erosion Control.93
[6] Any other conditions deemed appropriate by the Village
Engineer, or designee, to conform with this chapter.
(c) Modifications. Any modifications to an approved stormwater
management and/or drainage plan or an erosion control permit
shall be approved by the Village Engineer, or designee, in
writing. Upon review of any modifications, the Village
Engineer, or designee, may require additional conditions be
added to the erosion control permit to comply with this
chapter.
(d) Inspections. The owner shall permit Village employees and its
consultants access to the property during the construction of
the stormwater facilities for inspecting the property for
compliance with the approved stormwater management and
drainage plan and the erosion control permit. At a minimum,
the Village shall conduct a final inspection to ensure
compliance with the approved stormwater management and
drainage plan and all provisions of this chapter.
(e) Enforcement; violations and penalties. The Village shall notify
the owner in writing of any violations of the erosion control
permit and a reasonable time frame to remedy any such
violations. If the owner does not comply with the requested
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 381, Land Disturbances, Construction Site Maintenance and
Erosion Control.
§ 298-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-10
277:492
corrected actions, the Village shall follow § 381-12 related to
enforcement and violations and penalties.
B. Post-construction stormwater discharge permit: Class 1.
(1) Class 1 permit. Pertains to stormwater facilities meeting the
following:
(a) Stormwater facility design has been reviewed and approved by
the Village; and
(b) A maintenance agreement and an access and maintenance
easement is on file with the Village per § 298-9 of this chapter.
(2) All stormwater facilities designed to convey stormwater runoff and
meet the performance standards of this chapter or other
stormwater management criteria required by the Village for the
development of the property shall have a valid post-construction
stormwater discharge permit on file with the Village to ensure that
the owner is maintaining the stormwater facilities in accordance
with this chapter and any other applicable federal, state or Village
laws or requirements.
(3) Discharge permits shall have valid coverage periods with an
expiration date of September 1 of years multiple by five (i.e., 2020,
2025, 2030, etc.), the first coverage period ending September 1,
2020. On or before June 1 of the expiration year, the property
owner shall provide a discharge permit application to the Village
for the subsequent coverage period.
(4) The discharge permit shall include, at a minimum, the following
information:
(a) Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of
the drainage area served by the facilities.
(b) Owner's name, address, telephone number, facsimile number
and e-mail address.
(c) Name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and email
address of the owner's representative, if applicable.
(d) A maintenance schedule being performed by the owner of the
stormwater facilities.
(e) A report of the facility condition(s) based on the maintenance
schedule and inspections completed during the permit
coverage period.
(f) Any additional information necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter and any other applicable federal, state or
Village requirements.
§ 298-10 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 298-10
277:493
(5) For a Class I permit, the Village will perform one inspection of
permitted stormwater management pond(s) per permit coverage
period and report findings to the facility owner. The inspection is at
no cost to the owner, and the inspection may be used as partial
fulfillment of facility inspection requirements by the owner.
(6) Review and approval of discharge permit. The Village shall review
the application and notify the owner of any deficiencies or other
information needed to ensure compliance with this chapter and any
other applicable federal, state or Village laws or requirements.
C. Post-construction stormwater discharge permit: Class 2.
(1) Class 2 permit. Pertains to existing stormwater facilities that were
designed for post-development stormwater management but do not
have a maintenance agreement nor an access and maintenance
easement per § 298-9 of this chapter.
(2) All stormwater facilities designed to convey stormwater runoff and
meet the performance standards of this chapter or other
stormwater management criteria required by the Village for the
development of the property shall have a valid post-construction
stormwater discharge permit on file with the Village to ensure that
the owner is maintaining the stormwater facilities in accordance
with this chapter and any other applicable federal, state or Village
laws or requirements.
(3) Discharge permits shall have valid coverage period with an
expiration date of September 1 of years multiple by five (i.e., 2020,
2025, 2030, etc.), the first coverage period ending September 1,
2020. On or before June 1 of the expiration year, the property
owner shall provide a discharge permit application to the Village
for the subsequent coverage period.
(4) The discharge permit shall include, at a minimum, the following
information:
(a) Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation of
the drainage area served by the facilities.
(b) Owner's name, address, telephone number, facsimile number
and e-mail address.
(c) Name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and email
address of the owner's representative, if applicable.
(d) A maintenance schedule being performed by the owner of the
stormwater facilities.
(e) A report of the facility condition(s) based on the maintenance
schedule and inspections completed during the permit
coverage period.
§ 298-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-10
277:494
§ 298-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The following methods of enforcement in any combination thereof are
authorized against any landowner or responsible party that is found to be in
violation of any provision of this chapter:
(f) Any additional information necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter and any other applicable federal, state or
Village requirements.
(5) For a Class 2 permit, the owner shall provide a certified copy of a
stormwater facility inspection report prepared by a Wisconsinregistered
licensed professional engineer for each permit coverage
period. The inspection report shall include an evaluation of the
stormwater drainage system performance, conditions, structural
integrity, and measures needed and/or taken to maintain the
drainage system and management practices as necessary and to
verify that the stormwater facilities are compliant with this chapter,
Village-approved plans, and all applicable federal, state, or Village
laws or requirements.
(6) Option to transfer from Class 2 to Class 1 permit.
(a) The owner will have the option to apply for a Class 2 permit
upon providing the Village with the following:
[1] A maintenance agreement and access and maintenance
easement, acceptable to the Village, per § 298-9 of this
chapter.
[2] An as-built survey is provided for the stormwater
management facilities.
(7) Review and approval of discharge permit. The Village shall review
the application and notify the owner of any deficiencies or other
information needed to ensure compliance with this chapter and any
other applicable federal, state or Village laws or requirements.
(8) Permit fee. Post-construction discharge permit, Class 2: $50.
D. Inspections of Stormwater Management and Drainage Facilities. The
Village is authorized to access the property and shall conduct
inspections, surveillance, and monitor the stormwater drainage system
and discharge outfalls to assess system performance and water quality
of stormwater facilities and management practices as necessary to
verify that the stormwater facilities are compliant with this chapter and
all applicable federal, state or Village laws or requirements.
A. Stop-work order. The Village may issue a stop-work order if the work
being done does not comply with Village standards, is not being done
correctly, does not have required approvals or permits from the Village
or other agencies having jurisdiction, or is deemed unsafe to the public.
§ 298-10 RUMMAGE/GARAGE SALES § 298-11
277:495
§ 298-12. Public nuisance.
The following shall constitute a public nuisance and may be prosecuted as a
violation by the Village or by any aggrieved property owners:
B. Compliance order. The Village shall notify the owner in writing of any
noncomplying activity. The compliance order shall describe the nature
of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule of remedial action,
and additional enforcement action that may be taken.
C. Forfeiture. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $500 and the
costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
D. If the violations are likely to result in damage to private properties,
public facilities, waters of the state or other waterways in the Village,
the Village may take emergency actions necessary to prevent such
damage.
E. The owner or responsible party is responsible for any costs incurred by
the Village to bring the violation into compliance with any compliance
order. The Village shall mail an invoice for any such work to the owner
or responsible party. All invoices shall be paid within 30 days. For
invoices not paid within 30 days, there is a penalty of 1.5% per month
due on the unpaid invoice balance, along with an additional 10%
penalty if the outstanding invoice, interest, and penalty are placed on
the tax roll (a lien against the property). The right of the Village to
assess a lien against the property shall be one of the remedies available
to the Village but shall not be the exclusive remedy. The Village may
also sue for a money judgment for any invoices which are past due.
F. The Village may seek enforcement of violations of this chapter through
a court of equity located in Kenosha County.
A. Any development, redevelopment, or property land division that is
commenced without an approved stormwater management plan as
required by this chapter.
B. Any stormwater facility not maintained in accordance with this chapter
and the required discharge permit.
C. Any activity that adversely impacts surface water or groundwater
quality or endangers the health, safety or welfare of the public.
D. Any property owner that does not obtain an active discharge permit
pursuant to this chapter or comply with the requirements of such
permit.
§ 298-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 298-13
277:496
§ 298-13. Appeals.
Any appeal to this chapter shall be pursuant to Chapter 18, Article V, Zoning
Board of Appeals, of this Code.
§ 298-14. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is judged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the chapter shall remain in force and not be affected by such
judgment.
Chapter 300
STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES
§ 300-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DETENTION BASIN — A topographical depression created naturally or by
man-made methods that detains water during a storm event but is usually
dry or not submerged in water all other times.
FILL — Any material or compound element, natural or man-made, which
would reduce the volume of water that could be stored in a basin.
RETENTION BASIN — A topographical depression created naturally or by
man-made methods that holds water at all times but retains an additional
volume of water during a storm event, that eliminates or reduces flooding
of any area downstream from the outfall of the basin.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, garden waste, leaves, branches, weeds
that have been pulled loose, dirt or mulch, any other organic waste
generated by a property.
§ 300-2. Filling prohibited.
It shall be illegal to fill or deposit any yard waste in any retention or
detention basin in the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
§ 300-3. Diversion of water to retention or detention basin.
Water shall not be diverted to a retention or detention basin that does not
naturally drain to said basin.
§ 300-4. Alteration of outfall structure.
It shall be illegal to alter, change or inhibit in any manner the shape, size,
or slope of any outfall structure of any detention or retention basin.
§ 298-13 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 300-5
300:497
§ 300-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subsequent
to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4, of the Code of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie.
Chapter 305
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic— See Ch. 348.
Land division and development control — See
Ch. 395.
Public improvement projects — See Ch. 405.
§ 300-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 300-5
300:498
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 305-1. Grades.
§ 305-2. Obstructions and encroachments.
A. Establishment. The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be
established and described by the Board and shall be recorded by the
Clerk in his office.
B. Required. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade
thereof is established.
C. Altering prohibited. No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley,
sidewalk or public ground, or any part thereof, unless authorized or
instructed to do so by the Board.
A. Prohibited. No person shall encroach upon or obstruct or encumber any
street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds or land dedicated to public use,
or any part thereof, or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be
placed or remain on any public way adjoining the premises of which he
is the owner or occupant, except as provided in Subsection B.
B. Exceptions. The prohibitions of Subsection A shall not apply to the
following:
(1) Signs and clocks attached to buildings which project not more than
six feet from the face of such building and which do not extend at
any point lower than 10 feet above the sidewalk, street or alley.
(2) Awnings which do not extend at any point lower than seven feet
above the sidewalk, street or alley.
(3) Public utility encroachments authorized by the Village.
(4) Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded
which do not extend more than three feet on a sidewalk, provided
that such goods, wares, etc., do not remain thereon for more than
three hours.
(5) Building materials when placed upon the street, alley or sidewalk
upon conditions prescribed by the Superintendent of Streets, who
may require such materials to be protected by barricades or
appropriate lights.
(6) Mailboxes with only a standard treated four-by-four wooden post
with one metal mailbox and flag to be maintained by the owner of
the property. [Added 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-65]
(7) Multi-user mailboxes approved by the United States Postal Service.
[Added 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-65]
§ 305-1 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-3
300:499
§ 305-3. Construction of road improvements along municipal
boundary lines.
§ 305-4. Driveway culverts. [Added 1-20-1992]
A. Authority. The Village may, by action of the Village Board, enter into an
agreement or agreements with a neighboring municipality to provide
for the improvement of roads lying in part within the Village and in part
within such municipality pursuant to the intergovernmental
cooperation provisions of § 66.0301, Wis. Stats., as more fully set forth
hereafter.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
IMPROVEMENT OF ROADS — Includes, without limitation because of
enumeration, construction of a roadbed, or improvement or widening
of the same installation of a road base in whole or in part, installation
of drainage facilities reasonably related to road construction, paving
of road surfaces and construction of curbs with either concrete or
blacktop, and any materials necessary to complete any of the foregoing
construction. "Improvement of roads" further means construction and
installation of any appurtenances reasonably necessary for any of the
foregoing road improvements.
MUNICIPALITY — Town, village or city.
C. Special assessments.
(1) All road improvements provided for herein shall be paid by special
assessments on landowners of property abutting such improved
roads to the extent of benefits accruing to such landowners'
property, in accordance with the provisions of §§ 66.0701 and
66.0703, Wis. Stats.
(2) All special assessments collected as aforesaid, except for excess
assessments refunded to the property owners, shall be used to pay
the municipality performing the road improvement or shall be
allocated in proportion to the amount of work performed by each
municipality.
A. The property owner or his/her agent must make application for a
driveway culvert permit with the Community Development Department
of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
B. All driveway culvert installations must be done by the Village of
Pleasant Prairie Public Works Department.
C. The actual cost for installation of a driveway culvert, including labor,
materials and equipment, is to be charged to the property owner. If not
paid when due, the invoice is placed on the next succeeding tax roll,
along with interest and penalty.
§ 305-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-5
300:500
§ 305-5. Construction of public works projects by Village. [Added
3-4-1996]
§ 305-6. Concrete driveways. [Added 3-5-2001 by Ord. No. 01-11;
amended 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-50; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 12-30]
On municipal streets that are constructed to a rural profile, concrete
driveways are not permitted from road edge to five feet from the ditch
center line.
A. Section 62.15, Wis. Stats., shall be incorporated herein.
B. The Village Board may direct that the Village Administrator shall
undertake the construction of public works projects and improvements
with employees and equipment of the Village when the Village
Administrator has determined that such work can be performed more
efficiently and at less cost than bidding the work under a public
contract.
A. Rural profile streets. On municipal streets that are designed and
constructed to a rural profile, the construction of a concrete driveway
from the road edge to five feet beyond the ditch center line is
prohibited. The only improved surface that connects a private drive to
this type of public street is either asphaltic cement or No. 2 crushed
limestone, compacted with screenings. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to limit the construction of a concrete cement driveway on
private property. In addition, the width of a driveway between the
paved or gravel street edge and the property line shall be a minimum of
12 feet and a maximum of 24 feet; however, a maximum radius of three
feet is allowed where the driveway meets the street edge. In no case
shall a driveway extend into the right-of-way so as to cross the
extension of the side property line unless approved by the Director of
Public Works.
B. Urban profile streets. On municipal streets that are designed and
constructed to an urban profile, the construction of a concrete driveway
is permitted within the right-of-way. The only type of improved surface
that connects a private drive to this type of public street is either
asphaltic cement or concrete cement. In addition, the width of a
driveway between the street pavement and the property line shall be a
minimum of 12 feet and a maximum of 24 feet; however, a maximum
radius of three feet is allowed where the driveway meets the street
edge. In no case shall a driveway extend into the right-of-way so as to
cross the extension of the side property line unless approved by the
Superintendent of Streets.
C. The Director of Public Works will make the determination when the
ditch line is not present.
§ 305-5 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-7
300:501
§ 305-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-2005 by Ord. No.
05-13]
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter, or any order, rule or regulation made hereunder,
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4, of this Code.
§ 305-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-7
300:502
ARTICLE II
Construction and Maintenance of Sidewalks and Driveway
Approaches
[Amended 11-7-1994]
§ 305-8. Adoption of statutory provisions.
Section 66.0907, Wis. Stats., shall apply in the Village.
§ 305-9. Sidewalks required.
§ 305-10. Costs for installation, replacement or repair.
The cost of sidewalk installation, replacement or repair shall be incurred
by the developer, in the case of a new subdivision or land division, or the
abutting property owner, in the case of existing sidewalk(s). Payments for
sidewalk(s) shall be made within 30 days of receipt of the Village's invoice.
Nonpayment of such an invoice shall cause the cost of said replacement or
repair to be placed upon the tax roll of the affected parcel with an additional
10% of the cost.
A. New sidewalks shall be required on a case-by-case basis wherein the
Village Board determines that the amount of pedestrian traffic and the
risks to pedestrian safety justify the installation of sidewalks.
[Amended 6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-28]
B. Existing sidewalk(s) shall be required to be repaired or removed and
replaced for those existing sidewalks found to be in disrepair by the
Village.
C. The Village Director of Public Works shall notify the abutting property
owner via first class mail to the last recorded property owner address
when the sidewalk is in disrepair. The sidewalk shall be repaired or
removed and replaced by the order of the Village Administrator within
30 days, weather permitting. [Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No.
19-3994]
D. The Village Board may, in its discretion, at any time, order the
construction of sidewalks where they presently do not exist, or the
reconstruction or repair of or replacement of public sidewalk(s) at the
expense of the abutting property owner, when it is determined that the
amount of pedestrian traffic and the risks to pedestrians justify the
installation or replacement of the sidewalk(s).
A. Special assessments may be utilized to recover the cost of sidewalk(s)
removal, land restoration and construction. Upon the execution of a
waiver of notice for a special assessment, the special assessment
charge will be amortized over a five-year time period at an interest rate
94.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also amended the title of this article, which was formerly
Sidewalk Construction and Repair.
§ 305-8 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-10
300:503
§ 305-11. Snow and ice removal. [Amended 4-18-2005 by Ord. No.
05-13; 12-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-48]
equal to the interest rate being charged by the Village at the time the
waiver is executed.
B. Written notice of the proposed construction, repair or replacement of
the public sidewalk(s) must be sent by first class mail to the last
recorded address of the abutting property owner.
C. The abutting property owner shall be given the opportunity to be heard
before the Village Board on the necessity for the proposed construction,
repair or replacement of the sidewalk(s). The abutting property owner
shall be given the opportunity to appear, with or without counsel, to
examine all written reports, call witnesses and submit written reports.
D. The Village Board must approve the necessity for the proposed
construction, repair or replacement of public sidewalk(s) by a Board
resolution after giving the abutting property owner and the public the
opportunity to be heard and after reviewing the report of the Village
Administrator.
E. The Village Board must approve, by resolution, the amount of the
special assessment to be imposed upon the benefited property after the
final determination of charges has been made. Appeal from this final
determination shall be pursuant to the procedures outlined in the
§ 66.0703(12), Wis. Stats.
A. Removal from sidewalks. The owner, occupant or person in charge of
any parcel or lot which fronts upon or abuts any sidewalk shall keep
said sidewalk clear of all snow and ice. In the event of snow
accumulating on said sidewalk due to natural means and/or by any
other means, said sidewalks shall be cleared of all accumulated snow
and/or ice within 24 hours from the time the snow ceases to
accumulating on said sidewalk. In the event that ice has formed on any
sidewalk in such a manner that it cannot be removed, the owner,
occupant or person in charge of the parcel or lot which fronts upon or
adjoins said sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk sprinkled with deicing
material to permit safe travel by pedestrians.
B. Depositing snow on streets and public property. No person shall throw,
blow, pile or place, or cause or allow to be thrown, blown, piled or
placed, any snow or ice on any public street, public place or public
property, except on the terrace area located between the sidewalk and
the roadway. This subsection may be enforced against any person or
entity performing snow removal or the person or entity owning the
property from which the snow was removed or all of the aforesaid
parties. This subsection shall not apply to any employee of the
Department of Public Works, Fire Department or Police Department
while acting within the scope of Village employment.
§ 305-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-11
300:504
§ 305-12. License required to perform work. [Amended 8-20-2018
by Ord. No. 19-39]
§ 305-13. Bond required; indemnification of Village. [Amended
8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 19-39]
C. Village may effect compliance. Whenever any owner of any lot or parcel
fails or neglects to remove snow and ice from any sidewalk as required
by Subsection A above or if snow or ice is deposited on any sidewalk,
street, alley, terrace, public place or street in the Village in violation of
Subsection B above, the Director of Public Works, without notice, shall
cause such snow and ice to be removed therefrom, and the person in
charge of the premises from which the snow or ice was removed and so
deposited shall be charged for the Village costs of such removal. If not
paid within 30 days, such charge shall be placed on the tax roll,
pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats. In addition to the aforesaid Village
abatement costs, any person or entity who violates any provision of this
§ 305-11 may, after given written notice, be subject to all of the
remaining terms and provisions of § 1-4, the penalty provisions of this
Municipal Code.
A. No person, party, firm or corporation shall construct, modify, destroy,
remove or repair any sidewalk in the public right-of-way without first
obtaining a license to do so from the Director of Public Works.
B. There shall be a fee for such license for the first year and an annual
renewal fee thereafter. The Village Board will, from time to time, by
resolution, establish the license fee. All fees shall be paid to the Village,
and all licenses shall expire on January 1 following the issuance thereof,
unless renewed.
C. The Director of Public Works, following notice and an opportunity to be
heard, may suspend or revoke any license or permit of any holder
thereof who violates this or any other relevant Village ordinance or
state law, rule, regulation or any order of the Director of Public Works.
A. Every person, party, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
constructing, modifying, destroying, removing or repairing sidewalks
or driveway approaches, prior to the issuance of a license, shall provide
a surety bond to the Village of Pleasant Prairie in the sum of $10,000,
which bond shall guarantee that all work is performed in accordance
with this article and other ordinances of the Village of Pleasant Prairie
and the regulations of Kenosha County and the State of Wisconsin.95
B. Every person, party, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
constructing, modifying, destroying, removing or repairing sidewalks
or driveway approaches shall indemnify the Village for any damages to
95.Editor's Note: Original § 8.02(6)(b), Owner's bond, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13.
§ 305-11 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-13
300:505
§ 305-14. Insurance. [Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 19-39]
A condition of the license shall be the furnishing of a certificate of insurance
containing a provision that the Director of Public Works must be notified
20 days in advance of the effective date of any termination or cancellation
thereof, which certificate shall indicate that there is in full force and effect
a policy of public liability insurance and motor vehicle liability insurance for
each motor vehicle used in conjunction with the licensed activity, issued by
an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Wisconsin, in
the amount of $300,000 protecting against claims involving death, personal
injury or property damage.
§ 305-15. Sidewalk permit required. [Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord.
No. 19-39]
No person, party, firm or corporation may construct, modify, destroy,
remove or repair a particular sidewalk within the Village, even though
licensed to do so, without first receiving a sidewalk permit. A sidewalk
permit shall be issued by the Director of Public Works to anyone having a
license, bond and insurance as herein required for a new sidewalk, sidewalk
repair or mudjacking, parkway walk and/or walk grade for building
construction. The Village Board will, from time to time, by resolution,
establish the permit fees. Should any sidewalk work be commenced prior to
the issuance of a permit, the fees shall increase to five times the amount of
the fee established by the Village Board by resolution.
§ 305-16. Design and construction. [Amended 4-18-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-13; 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 19-39]
All sidewalks shall be designed, located, constructed, installed, provided
and completed in a workmanlike manner, to the satisfaction of the Director
of Public Works. Such sidewalks shall be replaced and/or installed at the
subdivider's, homeowner's or landowner's cost and in accordance with the
provisions of this article and all other applicable ordinances of the Village.
In the case of a new subdivision, large lot subdivision or minor land division,
the developer agreement entered into by and between the divider and
the Village shall specifically have the sidewalk plans and specifications
approved by the Village Board.
§ 305-17. Specifications.
or obstructions of the public right-of-way, including the storm sewer,
sanitary sewer or water mains located in said right-of-way.
A. The size and location of required sidewalks for new subdivisions, large
lot subdivisions or minor land divisions shall be in accordance with
Table 1 in § 395-60 and §§ 395-60A and 395-62C of Chapter 395, Land
Division and Development Control, of this Code and with applicable
supplemental engineering and construction standards and
specifications approved by the Village Board.
§ 305-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-17
300:506
§ 305-18. Sidewalk plans.
Sidewalk plans shall be submitted as a detail of the public street plans for
any new subdivision or land division.
§ 305-19. Curbs and gutters.
Sidewalks shall be prepared and completed with curbs and gutters in all
new subdivisions and land divisions where required, in accordance with
§ 395-71 of Chapter 395, Land Division and Development Control.
§ 305-20. Inspection and approval.
The Village shall be contacted and shall inspect and approve all sidewalks.
§ 305-21. Appeals. [Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 19-39]
Any person, partnership or organization aggrieved by an administrative
decision made by the Director of Public Works or the Village Board may
appeal such decision to the Village Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Replacement of existing sidewalks shall be made at the same width and
grade and thickness as exists at the match point on either end of the
replacement sidewalk.
C. Variances in line and grade due to trees and other obstructions shall be
approved by the Director of Public Works. [Added 8-20-2018 by Ord.
No. 19-39]
§ 305-17 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-21
300:507

ARTICLE III
Work in Village Right-of-Way
[Amended 1-22-1990; 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13; 5-18-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-29]
§ 305-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate work being done within a Village
right-of-way and to ensure public safety during any time such work is
permitted. Nothing herein, in accordance with § 86.07(2), Wis. Stats., shall
abridge the authority of the Village, the Village Administrator, or the Village
Public Works Director, or designee, to make additional rules, regulations
and conditions not inconsistent herewith as may be deemed necessary and
proper for the preservation of streets and rights-of-way or for the health,
safety and welfare of the public and to make the granting of any such permit
conditional thereon.
§ 305-23. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words shall
have the meaning:
APPLICANT — Any person making written application to the Village for a
road opening or work in the right-of-way permit hereunder.
BUSINESS DAY — A day the office of the Village is routinely and
customarily open for business.
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt activity that is
being conducted without a valid permit.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, trust,
body politic or corporate or any other legal entity.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, or other
public way owned, maintained or dedicated to the Village.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the Village Engineer, or
designee, which requires that all construction activity on the site be
stopped.
§ 305-24. Permit required.
A. Any person requesting to perform any of the following work within a
Village right-of-way shall first obtain a permit from the Village:
(1) Construction of any new public streets or public trails, paths or
walkways;
(2) Road openings for the installation of sanitary sewer, water and
storm sewer laterals;
(3) Grading or land disturbance within the Village right-of-way, that is
not specifically exempt pursuant to Subsection B below;
§ 305-22 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-24
300:509
§ 305-25. Special provisions.
(4) Planting within a Village right-of way;
(5) Temporary site access; or
(6) Any other work that may be proposed within the Village right-ofway
that is not specifically exempt pursuant to Subsection B below.
B. The following work within a Village right-of-way does not require a
work in the right-of-way permit:
(1) Installation of a driveway; however, a zoning permit is required
pursuant to Chapter 420 and a culvert permit may be required
pursuant to § 305-4. In addition, driveways shall comply with
§ 305-6 of this code.
(2) Curb cuts; however, a curb cut permit is required pursuant to
§ 305-69 of this Code;
(3) Any work under the direction of the Village or by any contractor of
the Village performing work for and in behalf of the Village
necessitating openings or excavations in streets;
(4) Any emergency work as determined by the Village Administrator,
Public Works Director, or designee, the Village Engineer or the
Village Police Chief; however, a permit shall be obtained pursuant
to § 305-30; or
(5) Any work within a county or state right-of-way; however, permits
may be required from the county or state, respectively.
A. Protection of traffic. The applicant shall install and maintain suitable
timber barriers to confine earth from trenches or other excavations in
order to encroach upon rights-of-way as little as possible. The applicant
shall construct and maintain adequate safe crossings over excavations
and across rights-of-way under improvement to accommodate vehicular
and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections. Vehicular crossings
shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers and blocking of
adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safely. Decking shall not
be less than four inches thick and shall be securely fastened together
with heavy wire and staples. Pedestrian crossings shall consist of
planking three inches thick, 12 inches wide and of adequate length,
together with necessary blocking. The walk shall be not less than three
feet in width and shall be provided with a railing as required by the
Village Public Works Director, or designee.
B. Clearance for fire equipment and other emergency vehicles. The work
in the right-of-way shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or
obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire hydrants.
Passageways leading to fire escapes or fire-fighting equipment or other
§ 305-24 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-25
300:510
emergency vehicles shall be kept free of piles of material or other
obstructions.
C. Protection of watercourses. The applicant shall provide for the flow of
all watercourses, sewers or drains intercepted during the excavation
work and shall replace the same in as good condition as he found them
or shall make such provisions for them as the Village Public Works
Director, or designee, may direct. The applicant shall not obstruct the
gutter of any street but shall use all proper measures to provide for the
free passage of surface water. The applicant shall make provisions to
take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, or other runoff pumped from
excavations or resulting from washing or cleaning or other operations
and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from his failure to so
provide.
D. Sidewalk excavations. Any excavation made in any sidewalk or under a
sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge
over the excavation on the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at
least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that foot
passengers can pass over safely at all times.
E. Protective measures. The applicant shall erect such fence, railing or
barriers around the site of the excavation work in order to prevent
danger to persons using the Village street or sidewalks, and such
protective barriers shall be maintained until the work shall be
completed or the danger removed. If work is not completed by the end
of the workday, any materials, structures or other obstructions or open
excavations shall be adequately covered, barricaded. In addition,
sufficient lights shall be provided during the night. No person shall
remove or tear down the fence, railing or other protective barriers or
any lights provided there for the protection of the public.
F. Attractive nuisance. No applicant shall suffer or permit to remain
unguarded at the place of excavation or opening any machinery,
equipment or other device having the characteristics of an attractive
nuisance likely to attract children or which may be hazardous to their
safety or health.
G. Care of excavated material. All material excavated from trenches and
piles adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and
maintained in such manner as not to endanger those working in the
trench, pedestrians or users of the streets and so that as little
inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining
property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too
narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, the
Village Public Works Director, or designee, shall have the authority to
require that the applicant haul the excavated material to a storage site
and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be
the applicant's responsibility to secure the necessary permission and
make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal
sites.
§ 305-25 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-25
300:511
H. Damage to existing improvements. Any damage done to existing public
or private improvements during the permitted work shall be repaired
by the applicant. Materials for such repair shall conform to the
requirements of any applicable Village code or ordinance. If, upon being
ordered, the applicant fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials
for such repairs, the Village Public Works Director, or designee, shall
have the authority to cause such necessary labor and materials to be
furnished by the Village, and the cost shall be charged against the
applicant.
I. Cleanup operations. As the work progresses, all streets and private
properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock
and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the
location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the
applicant and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Village Public
Works Director, or designee. From time to time, as may be ordered by
the Village Public Works Director, or designee, and, in any event,
immediately after completion of such work, the applicant shall, at his
own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of
any kind resulting from such work, and upon failure to do so within 24
hours after having been notified to do so by the Village Public Works
Director, or designee, such work may be done by the Village Public
Works Director, or designee, and the cost thereof charged to the
applicant.
J. Breaking through pavement. Whenever it is necessary to break through
existing pavement for excavation purposes, or where trenches are to be
four feet or over in depth, the pavement in the base shall be removed to
at least six inches beyond the outer limits of the subgrade that is to be
disturbed in order to prevent settlement, and a six-inch shoulder of
undisturbed material shall be provided in each side of the excavated
trench. A face of the remaining pavement shall be approximately
vertical. A power-driven concrete saw shall be used so as to permit
complete breakage of concrete pavement or base without ragged
edges. Asphalt paving shall be scored or otherwise cut in a straight line.
No pile driver may be used in breaking up the pavement.
K. Tunnels. Tunnels under pavement shall not be permitted except by
permission of the Village Public Works Director, or designee, and, if
permitted, shall be adequately supported by timbering and backfilling
under the direction of the Village Public Works Director, or designee.
L. Backfilling. Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to
work in the right-of-way permit shall be compacted to a degree
equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was
dug. Compacting shall be done by mechanical tappers or vibrators, by
rolling in layers, or by water settling, as required by the soil in question
and sound engineering practices generally recognized in the
construction industry. The decision as to whether a trench shall be
backfilled by water settling shall be based upon such engineering
practices and shall be made by the Village Engineer. The use of public
§ 305-25 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-25
300:512
water shall be paid for by the applicant on the terms agreed upon with
the Public Works Department.
(1) Backfilling by water settling. When backfilling is done by water
settling, excavated materials above utility installations shall be
deposited uniformly in layers of not more than five feet in thickness
and shall be allowed to flow slowly to the trench from high spots
and shall be worked down to the full depth of the layer of backfill
with bars. All bars used shall be long enough to extend entirely
through the layer being filled and shall be forced down through the
loose backfill material. As the bars are withdrawn, the water shall
be allowed to flow downward around the bar. The channel or hole
formed by the bar shall be kept open and the water kept running
into it until the fill has settled. All work shall be done in such
manner as to obtain a relative compaction through the entire depth
of the backfill of not less than that existing adjacent to the
excavation.
(2) Dry backfilling. Backfilling up to the first 18 inches above the top of
the utility pipes or similar installations shall be done with thin
layers. Each layer is to be tamped by manual or mechanical means.
Layers that are hand tamped shall not exceed four inches in
thickness. Layers that are power tamped shall not exceed six
inches in thickness. The same requirements shall apply to the
remainder of the backfilling if tamping is the method used for
backfilling. Backfilling of all pipes of over 24 inches in diameter
shall be carried up to the spring line of the pipe in three-inch
layers, with each layer moistened and thoroughly tamped with
suitable mechanical equipment. The backfill around all pipes 24
inches or less in diameter shall be flooded or tamped as specified
above to a depth of 18 inches above the top of the pipe before any
additional backfilling is placed thereon.
(3) Backfill material. Whenever any excavation for the laying of pipe is
made through rock, the pipe shall be laid six inches above the rock
bottom of the trench, and the space under, around and six inches
above the pipe shall be backfilled with clean river sand,
noncorrosive soil or one-fourth-inch minus gravel. Broken
pavement, large stones, and debris shall not be used in the backfill.
(4) Backfilling at the surface. Backfilling shall be completed by placing
the backfill material well up over the top of the trench. For dry
backfilling, the material shall be compacted with a roller of an
approved type or with the rear of a truck carrying at least five tons
until the surface is unyielding. The surface shall then be graded as
required.
M. Restoration of surface.
(1) The applicant shall restore the surface of all streets broken into or
damaged as a result of the excavation work to its original condition
§ 305-25 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-25
300:513
in accordance with the specifications of the Village Public Works
Director, or designee.
(2) The applicant may be required to place a temporary surface over
openings made in paved traffic lanes. Except when the pavement is
to be replaced before the opening of the cut to traffic, the fill above
the bottom of the paving slab shall be made with suitable material
well tamped into place and this shall be topped with a minimum of
at least one inch of bituminous mixture which is suitable to
maintain the opening in good condition until permanent restoration
can be made. The crown of the temporary restoration shall not
exceed one inch above the adjoining pavement. The applicant shall
exercise special care in making such temporary restorations and
must maintain such restorations in safe traveling condition until
such time as permanent restorations are made. The asphalt which
is used shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Village
Public Works Director, or designee.
(3) If, in the judgment of the Village Public Works Director, or
designee, it is not expedient to replace the pavement over any cut
or excavation made in the street upon completion of the work
allowed under such permit by reason of the looseness of the earth
or weather conditions, the applicant shall lay a temporary
pavement of wood or other suitable material designated by him
over such cut or excavation to remain until such time as the repair
of the original pavement may be properly made.
(4) Permanent restoration of the street shall be made by the applicant
in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the
Village Public Works Director, or designee, to restore the street to
its original and proper condition or as determined by the Village
Public Works Director, or designee.
N. Preservation of monuments. The applicant shall not disturb any surface
monuments or hubs found on the line of excavation work until ordered
to do so by the Village Public Works Director, or designee.
O. Trenches. Except by special permission from the Village Public Works
Director, or designee, no trench shall be excavated more than 250 feet
in advance of pipelaying nor left unfilled more than 500 feet where pipe
has been laid. The length of the trench that may be opened at any one
time shall not be greater than the length of pipe and the necessary
accessories which are available at the site ready to be put in place.
Trenches shall be braced and sheathed according to generally accepted
safety standards for construction work as prescribed by the Village
Public Works Director, or designee. No timber bracing, lagging,
sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench.
P. Noise, dust and debris. Each applicant shall conduct and carry out the
excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience
and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring
§ 305-25 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-25
300:514
§ 305-26. Application; permit; permit conditions.
No person shall commence any work in a Village right-of-way, as defined in
this chapter, without first submitting a work in the right-of-way application
together with the required application materials for review, paying the
required permit fee and receiving a work in the right-of-way permit from
the Village Public Works Director, or designee.
property. The applicant shall take appropriate measures to reduce to
the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the excavation work
any noise, dust and unsightly debris, and between 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. no excavation work shall be done, except by express written
permission of the Village Public Works Director, or designee, or in case
of an emergency as herein otherwise provided, with any tool, appliance
or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep
or repose of occupants of the neighboring property.
A. Content of a work in the right-of-way permit application shall include, at
a minimum:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The nature, location and purpose of the proposed work in the
Village right-of-way;
(3) The date of commencement and date of completion, and other data
as may reasonably be required by the Village Public Works
Director, or designee;
(4) Plans showing the extent of the proposed work, including the
location of adjacent property lines and limits of any easements;
(5) Any proposed lane closures or detours;
(6) Any additional information as requested by the Village Public
Works Director, or designee; and
(7) A liability insurance policy or certificate of insurance issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state shall be
filed with the Village. The policy shall insure the person performing
acts described in this section and the Village, listed as an additional
insured party, in the sum of at least $1,000,000 for injury to one
person and $1,000,000 for one accident and at least $1,000,000
property damage or in such other amounts as the Board shall
determine. The policy shall be kept in effect until the termination of
a permit granted pursuant to this section.
B. Review of a work in the right-of-way permit and application materials. If
the Village Public Works Director, or designee, determines that the
work in the right-of-way permit application or plan is lacking the
necessary information or is not in compliance with this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified of the inadequacy. Within 10 business days of
§ 305-25 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-26
300:515
the receipt of the work in the right-of-way application, the Village shall
review the application to determine whether the requirements of this
chapter are met.
(1) If the application materials comply with this chapter, the Village
Public Works Director, or designee, shall approve the application,
inform the applicant of any conditions of approval and issue the
work in the right-of-way permit.
(2) If the application materials are incomplete or do not comply with
this chapter, the Village shall inform the applicant that further
information is required. Upon receipt of the additional information,
the Village shall again determine whether the work in the right-ofway
plan meets the requirements of this chapter. If the application
is still not approved, the Village shall inform the applicant in
writing of the reasons for the denial.
C. Permits.
(1) Duration. Permits shall be valid for a period of 30 days or the length
of a building permit or other construction activity authorized by the
Village, whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The Village
Public Works Director, or designee, may extend the period one or
more times for up to an additional 90 days, at no additional cost.
The Village may require additional conditions to be satisfied, as a
condition of the extension, if they are necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) Permit conditions. The Village Public Works Director, or designee,
may place reasonable conditions on said permit to ensure
compliance with this chapter and all other applicable federal, state
and Village laws and regulations, including the standard provisions
as provided listed below.
(a) Traffic shall be allowed to pass and to be protected at all times.
If it is not possible to allow traffic to pass, a detour must be
preapproved by the Public Works Department. Notification
must be three working days prior to commencement.
(b) Traffic control devices shall be in accordance to the most
current MUTCD "Field Manual." When a trail or roadway/
driveway has been cut, appropriate signage must be kept in
place and maintained until restoration is complete.
(c) Notification shall be provided to the Village Fire & Rescue and
Police Departments 24 hours prior to the commencement of
construction, upon the morning of construction and when
construction has been completed for any fire hydrants that will
be obstructed during the construction.
(d) Excavations shall be shored or sheeted, as required by OSHA,
when necessary, to prevent the undermining of roadways,
§ 305-26 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-26
300:516
trailways, utilities, or for safety reasons. The stockpiling of
excavated material shall not occur within the public right-ofway
without proper traffic control.
(e) Guy wires shall be freestanding and not be attached to any
public or private appurtenances without written permission
from the owner.
(f) Flaggers and/or warning lights at night shall be furnished by
the applicant whenever the work being done creates a hazard
either to the traffic using roadway or the personnel engaged in
the construction or when directed to do so by the Public Works
Department.
(g) The applicant shall replace any destroyed property monument
corners with the services of a Wisconsin-licensed registered
land surveyor.
(h) The general provisions, specifications and Standard Plate
#360 shall be considered as forming an integral part of each
and every permit issued for operations within the Village.
Installation, placement, location, and relocation of equipment
and facilities shall comply with all federal, state, county, and
local laws. The work shall be done at such time and in such
manner as shall be consistent with the safety of the public and
shall conform to all requirements and standards of the Village.
If at any time it shall be found by the Village that the work is
not being or has not been properly performed, the applicant,
upon being notified by the Village, shall immediately take the
necessary steps, at his own expense, to place the work in
condition to conform to said requirements or standards.
[1] Public right-of-way alignments and grades shall be
maintained, unless otherwise authorized by the Village.
[2] Unless otherwise approved by the Village, fiber optic
facilities that cross Village utilities shall be buried in a
solid ductile iron pipe no less than five feet on either side
of the crossing. The exact horizontal and vertical location
of the casing pipe shall be recorded on the "as-built"
drawing of the construction plans; copper cable facilities
below concrete or bituminous paved roadway surfaces
shall be buried no less than three feet deep and no more
than four feet deep, and all other copper cable facilities
shall be buried no less than 30 inches deep.
[3] All underground facilities that cross streets or hardsurfaced
driveways shall be bored. Natural gas lines do
not need to be installed in conduit.
[4] When utilizing trenchless installation methods to cross an
area in which a Village utility is located or when directed
§ 305-26 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-26
300:517
by the Public Works Department, the applicant shall
excavate an observation hole over the Village utility to
ensure that the Village utility is not damaged.
[5] If the project work involves open cut, the applicant shall
install visual tracers of either 10-gauge wire or tracer tape
at 12 inches over buried facilities. If other construction
methods are used, substitute location methods may be
used upon approval by the Public Works Department.
[6] During plowing or trenching of facilities, a warning tape
shall be placed at a depth of 12 inches above copper cables
with over 200 pairs and all fiber facilities. A locating wire
or conductive shield shall be installed above buried
telecommunications facilities, except for dielectric cables.
[7] Restoration of areas disturbed by facilities will include
returning the right-of-way to the same condition that
existed before excavation. The right-of-way user is
responsible for all of its work done in the public right-ofway,
whether by employees, agents, or independent
contractors. All levels of restoration include compaction of
the materials in lifts placed in the excavation of the
subgrade and aggregate base, plus pavement
replacement, in kind. Slurry shall be brought to bottom of
the gravel of the approved street section. Compaction shall
be accomplished with hand, pneumatic or vibrating
compactors as appropriate. Compaction testing may be
required as determined by the Village. Restoration of
boulevards or parkways shall include a minimum or four
inches of topsoil and either sod or seed, mulch, and
matting as approved by Public Works Department.
[8] All landscaped areas shall be replaced within two weeks of
end of project with a minimum of four inches of screened
and pulverized topsoil, seeded and covered with straw and
mesh. Ditch lines need to be replaced immediately with
erosion control matting. Any other landscaping damaged
or excavated shall be replaced in kind.
[9] All facilities shall be located so as to not interfere with
existing and potential future traffic signals and signs.
[10] All aboveground appurtenances shall be located no closer
than 10 feet to Village hydrants, waterline valves,
manholes, lift stations or catch basins unless approved by
the Village and shall not be installed in front of or within
visual sight lines of any Village signs, monuments or
amenities for facilities or parks. Minimum offsets from
sidewalks and trails shall be two feet unless approved by
the Village.
§ 305-26 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-26
300:518
[11] Underground facilities shall not be installed between a
hydrant and an auxiliary valve. Underground facilities
shall not be installed within five feet of hydrants, waterline
valves, lift stations, manholes or catch basins where utility
easements exist beyond the roadway surface area of the
public right-of-way and space is available therein. No
utility shall be constructed within four feet of the center
line of a ditch. Where a road ditch exists, utilities will be
installed no closer than four feet outside the center line of
the ditch.
[12] The location and installation of telecommunications
facilities shall comply with the National Electric Safety
Code, as incorporated by reference in Wisconsin.
(i) The applicant shall use diligence in the execution of the work
authorized under this permit in order not to endanger the
public or unnecessarily obstruct travel along any road or rightof-
way. Operations shall be so conducted as to permit safe and
free travel over the roads and trailways at all times within the
limits of the work herein prescribed. The applicant, at his own
cost, shall provide all safety measures for the free movement of
traffic.
(j) The applicant shall notify abutting property owners prior to
commencement of any project work that may disrupt the use of
and access to the abutting property.
(k) All work under this permit shall be made in conformity with all
applicable laws, regulations, and codes covering said
installations. All installations shall be made in conformity with
regulations of governmental agencies for the protection of the
public.
(l) For all fiber installations, the applicant shall furnish a
performance and payment bond in the amount to be
determined by the Village that is required to ensure adequate
and timely completion of repair. This bond or financial
guarantee shall remain in effect for two years (one year for turf
establishment) subsequent to completion of street repair to
protect the Village from defects in material, workmanship or
noncompliance with Village standards or specifications.
(m) Except for the negligent acts of the Village, its agents and its
employees, the applicant shall assume all liability for and save
the Village, its agents and its employees, harmless and defend
same at its sole cost and expense from any and all claims for
damages, actions or causes of action arising out of the work to
be done herein and the continuing uses by the applicant,
including but not limited to the placing, constructing, and
§ 305-26 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-26
300:519
reconstructing, maintaining, protecting and use of said facility
under this application and permit for construction.
(n) The utility facility and installations shall not interfere with any
existing utility facility in the Village's right-of-way or
easements. It is the responsibility of the applicant to call for
timely, necessary locations of existing utilities.
(o) The right-of-way permit for construction as issued does not in
any way imply an easement or right to enter private property.
(p) Finished surface, base and subbase of all disturbed surfaces
upon completion of work shall be at least equal to or better
than current Village specs for similar construction. New
surfaces must match existing roads or trailways. Hard surfaces
shall be replaced within 48 hours upon completion of slurry
backfill.
(q) Unless specifically permitted, the issuance of a work in the
right-of-way permit does not grant the applicant the right to
cut, remove, or destroy trees or shrubbery within the legal
limits of the right-of-way or easements that are not specifically
identified on the plan attached to this permit or relieve the
applicant from obtaining any consent otherwise required from
the owner of the property adjacent thereto. The applicant shall
protect the root growth of significant trees and shrubbery
within the public right-of-way adjacent thereto.
(r) All waterways and overland drainage shall remain operative
during the performance of the work. Proper erosion control
shall be established and maintained throughout the
construction and restoration. No silted construction water
shall be discharged to either the street or to any storm sewer
system. No excavation spoils shall be stored in any ditch, swale
or other drainageway that may impede or alter the flow of
stormwater.
(s) No groundwater from construction shall be diverted to any
sanitary sewers.
(t) Pole anchors, anchors, braces or other construction may be
permitted within right-of-way or easements and must be
approved on a case-by-case basis.
(u) Driving limitations:
[1] Driving or parking on Village trails or sidewalks shall not
be permitted.
[2] Vehicles within the right-of-way area shall utilize their
warning flashers at all times.
[3] Vehicles shall not be parked on trailways or sidewalks.
§ 305-26 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-26
300:520
(v) Vehicles or equipment traversing roads or sidewalk surfaces
shall not utilize studded or chained tires, caterpillar traction,
or any other form of traction that will result in damage to the
surface. The applicant shall be subject to municipal citations in
the event that traction or chained tire equipment has been
used on public roadways, curb and gutters, or sidewalks. In
addition, the applicant shall be responsible for the restoration
of the surface and base course of any streets, curb and gutter,
and/or sidewalks damaged during excavation activities to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Department.
(w) Street and trailways shall be broomed and removed at the end
of each workday, and affected rights-of-ways shall be broomed
and removed after construction is completed and left in a neat
and presentable condition. Any sediment or debris from
improvement shall be removed from sanitary or storm sewer
systems, including drainage swales and ponds, as needed.
Public Works Department crews will broom and remove any
debris not broomed and removed by the applicant at the
expense of the applicant.
(x) Burning operations and/or the use of chemicals to control or
destroy trees, brush and other vegetation is prohibited without
prior approval from the Fire & Rescue Department.
(y) Wherever topsoil and sod are disturbed, they shall be replaced
and maintained satisfactorily until the turf is established. Any
turf that fails to be established shall be replaced and
satisfactorily reestablished. Restoration of boulevards,
parkways, and terraces shall include a minimum of four inches
of topsoil and sod or seed, mulch and matting.
(z) The following conditions apply to bituminous street and
trailway restoration:
[1] Curb and gutter shall be removed only after saw cutting at
existing, nearest joints and replaced according to
specifications or Standard Plate.
[2] Bituminous pavement area shall be removed only after saw
cut. Any damaged edges shall be saw cut prior to patching.
[3] Sod shall be removed in boulevards and parkways and
shall be replaced with minimum four inches of topsoil and
cultured highland (nonpeat) sod.
[4] Hot mix asphalt courses shall be replaced in kind from
May 1 until asphalt plants close in the fall. Four inches of
concrete shall be used temporarily when asphalt plants
are not open.
§ 305-26 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-26
300:521
[5] All road markings shall be replaced no later than one week
after asphalt patching.
[6] Backfill for all road crossings or right-of-way openings
shall be slurry. Slurry shall be replaced to the edge of the
existing shoulder.
[7] Roadway closures in accordance with Appendix B, Traffic
Control for Street or Highway Work Zones, MUTCD.
[8] Compaction in any trench or hole outside of any hard
surface shall be 95% of Standard Proctor.
[9] Public street construction shall comply with Chapters 298,
381, 395 and 405 of this Code.
(aa) Any person who does not conform to the standard provisions
specified above and any other conditions of the work in the
right-of-way permit will prohibit said person from being
approved for future permits until all standard provisions are
complete.
(bb) A copy of the work in the right-of-way permit and approved
plans (including approved detour plans) shall be kept on the
work site while it is in progress and in the custody of the
individual in charge and shall be presented upon request made
by any Village official.
(cc) Any contractors or subcontractors performing work in the
right-of-way shall be prequalified by the Village.
(dd)No person shall excavate or obstruct the public right-of-way
after the date specified in the permit, unless the person obtains
a new permit or signed permit extension before the expiration
of the original permit. The permit is valid only for the area of
the public right-of-way specified in the permit; no applicant
shall do any work outside the area specified in the permit,
unless approved by the Public Works Department.
(ee) If the obstruction or excavation of the public right-of-way
begins later or ends sooner than the dates specified in the
permit, the applicant shall promptly notify the Public Works
Department.
(ff) The applicant is responsible for to coordinate project work and
installation of facilities in co-locations with other public rightof-
way users.
(gg) The applicant shall be responsible for any damage caused to
any highways by the operation of his equipment.
D. Upon approval of the permit application, the applicant shall be issued a
written permit with any applicable conditions. The permit shall be
§ 305-26 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-26
300:522
§ 305-27. Work in the right-of-way permit fee.
The permit fee is $150, except that a bulk work in the right-of-way permit
may be obtained for utilities such as gas, electric and telephone for short
extensions under 300 feet, individual residential services, for $150 per year
and $30 for each job. However, said utilities shall pay a permit fee of $150
for any proposed open cutting of the road or for establishing service for a
new subdivision or commercial project.
§ 305-28. Prompt completion of work.
The applicant shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all work
covered by the work in the right-of-way permit and shall promptly complete
such work and restore the right-of-way to its original condition, or as near
as may be, as soon as practicable and in any event no later than the date
specified in the permit.
§ 305-29. Emergency work.
If the safety or convenience of the traveling public or the public interest
requires that the work be performed as emergency work, the Village Public
Works Director, or designee, shall have full power to order, at the time the
permit is granted, that a crew and adequate facilities be employed by the
applicant 24 hours a day to the end that such work may be completed as
soon as possible.
§ 305-30. Emergency action.
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in or
under any right-of-way breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to
immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual,
the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility,
without first applying for and obtaining a work in the right-of-way permit,
shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the
dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety of
individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall
apply for the required work in the right-of-way permit not later than the
end of the next business day and shall not proceed with permanent repairs
without first obtaining an excavation permit hereunder.
§ 305-31. Inspections.
issued and the required fee as specified in this article shall be paid to
the Village.
A. The Village Public Works Director, or designee, shall make inspections
as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this article.
B. The Village Public Works Director, or designee, shall have the authority
to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as
§ 305-26 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-31
300:523
§ 305-32. Record drawings, plans and profiles.
Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans
and profiles showing the location and character of all underground
structures, including abandoned installations. Corrected maps shall be filed
with the Village Public Works Director, or designee, within 60 days after
new installations, changes or replacements are made.
§ 305-33. Excavations barred in new street improvements.
may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this
article.
C. The presence of the Village Public Works Director, or designee, during
the performance of any work shall not relieve the applicant of his
permit responsibilities.
D. Acceptance or approval of any work by the Village Public Works
Director, or designee, shall not prevent the Village from asserting a
claim against the applicant for incomplete or defective work if
discovered within 24 months from the completion of the excavation
work.
A. Whenever the Village Board enacts any ordinance or resolution
providing for the paving or repaving of any street, the Village Public
Works Director, or designee, shall promptly mail a written notice
thereof to each person owning any sewer, main, conduit or other utility
in or under such street or any real property, whether improved or
unimproved, abutting such street. Such notice shall notify such persons
that no excavation permit shall be issued for openings, cuts or
excavations in such street for a period of five years after the date of
enactment of such ordinance or resolution. Such notice shall also notify
such persons that applications for excavation permits for work to be
done prior to such paving or repaving shall be submitted promptly in
order that the work covered by the excavation permit may be completed
not later than 45 days from the date of enactment of such ordinance or
resolution. The Village Public Works Director, or designee, shall also
promptly mail copies of such notice to the occupants of all houses,
buildings and other structures abutting such street for their
information and to state agencies and Village departments or other
persons that may desire to perform excavation work in such Village
street.
B. Within 45 days, every public utility company receiving notice as
prescribed herein shall perform such excavation work, subject to the
provisions of this article, as may be necessary to install or repair
sewers, mains, conduits or other utility installations. If any owner of
real property abutting such street fails within 45 days to perform such
excavation work as may be required to install or repair utility service
lines or service connections to the property lines, any and all rights of
such owner or his successors in interest to make openings, cuts or
§ 305-31 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-33
300:524
§ 305-34. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
excavations in such street shall be forfeited for a period of five years
from the date of enactment of such ordinance or resolution. During
such five-year period, no excavation permit shall be issued to open, cut
or excavate in such street unless, in the judgment of the Village Public
Works Director, or designee, an emergency as described in this article
exists which makes it absolutely essential that the excavation permit be
used.
C. Every Village department or official charged with responsibility for any
work that may necessitate any opening, cut or excavation in such street
is directed to take appropriate measures to perform such excavation
work within the forty-five-day period so as to avoid the necessity of
making any openings, cuts or excavations in the new pavement in such
street during such five-year period.
A. Stop-work order.
(1) The Village Public Works Director, or designee, may post a stopwork
order if:
(a) Any activity regulated under this article is being undertaken
without a permit;
(b) The approved plan is not being implemented in a good faith
manner; or
(c) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
(2) Stop-work order retraction. The Village Public Works Director, or
designee, may retract the stop-work order or the revocation.
(3) After posting a stop-work order, the Village Public Works Director,
or designee, may issue a notice of intent to the applicant of the
Village's intent to perform work necessary to comply with this
article. The Village may go on the land and commence the work
after 14 days from issuing the notice of intent.
B. Permit revocation. If any person or the applicant does not cease the
activity or comply with the permit conditions within a reasonable time,
the Village Public Works Director, or designee, may revoke the permit.
C. Cease and desist order. If the person, where no permit has been issued,
does not cease the activity immediately, the Village Public Works
Director, or designee, may request the Village Attorney to obtain a
cease and desist order.
D. If any action of the applicant or any person is likely to result in damage
to private properties, public facilities, or may cause harm to the public,
the Village Public Work Director, or designee, may take emergency
actions necessary to prevent such damage or harm.
§ 305-33 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-34
300:525
§ 305-35. Liability of Village.
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the Village or any
official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person
injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation
permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the Village or any official or employee
thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by
reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or
the approval of any work.
§ 305-36. through § 305-57. (Reserved)
E. The applicant is responsible for any costs incurred by the Village to
bring the right-of-way or property into compliance with any orders. The
Village shall mail an invoice for any such work to the applicant. All
invoices shall be paid within 30 days. There is a penalty of 1.5% per
month on the unpaid invoice balance, and there is an additional tenpercent
penalty if the outstanding invoice. If applicable, interest and
penalty will be placed on the tax roll (a lien against the property). The
right of the Village to assess a lien against the property shall be one of
the remedies available to the Village but shall not be the exclusive
remedy. The Village may also sue for a monetary judgment for any
invoices which are past due.
F. Forfeitures. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $500
and the costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense.
G. Other provisions of enforcement. Compliance with the provisions of this
article may also be enforced by injunction, uniform citation procedure
or other appropriate and available remedy. It shall not be necessary to
prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before resorting to
injunction proceedings.
§ 305-34 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-36
300:526
ARTICLE IV
Street Names and Building Numbers
[Amended 3-6-1995]
§ 305-58. Authority.
This article is created pursuant to §§ 236.295, 236.45, 61.34, 61.50(2), and
66.1399, Wis. Stats.
§ 305-59. Jurisdiction.
The Village Board of Trustees shall have jurisdiction over rural street
naming and building numbering of all streets in the Village.
§ 305-60. Administration.
The street naming and building numbering system established by this
article shall be administered by the Community Development Department
with the advice and counsel of the Village Board. The system herein
established shall be erected, developed and maintained pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
§ 305-61. Street names.
A uniform system of numbers for all public streets in unincorporated areas
is established as follows:
A. All roads and streets running easterly and westerly shall be designated
as streets, with the Kenosha/Lake County line road numbered as 128th
Street; each succeeding street or road north of 128th Street shall be
127th Street, 126th Street, etc., with the designation "place" to be used
wherever necessary and desirable. The streets and places shall be
numbered north to the Pleasant Prairie - Kenosha line and shall be
integrated with the City of Kenosha and Kenosha County numbering
system.
B. All roads and streets running northerly and southerly shall be
designated avenues, with First Avenue to be the first through street
more or less just west of the shore of Lake Michigan and each
succeeding street west of First Avenue to be designated as Second
Avenue, Third Avenue, etc., with the designation "court" to be used
wherever necessary and desirable. The avenues and courts shall be
numbered west to the Village municipal boundary line and are to be
integrated with the City of Kenosha and Kenosha County numbering
system.
C. All roads and streets remaining, not running in a northerly, southerly,
easterly or westerly direction but on a northwesterly, northeasterly,
southwesterly, southeasterly direction, may be named by the
Community Development Director, after consultation with and the
§ 305-58 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-61
300:527
§ 305-62. Changing official street names.
approval of the Plan Commission, as other than streets and places and
avenues and courts.
D. As new roads and streets are dedicated, the Community Development
Department shall assign street numbers for roads and streets running
easterly and westerly and for streets and roads running northerly and
southerly.
E. The initial cost of erecting and developing street signs on newly
dedicated roads and streets shall be borne by the developer, and the
Village Board shall require a developer to post a surety bond or other
approved means of security with the Village to cover the cost of
procuring and erecting the appropriate street signs before granting
approval to any plat.
F. Once the signs are erected, the maintenance of the signs will be the
responsibility of the Village, and the actual maintenance of all new
signs and any existing signs will be carried out by the Department of
Public Works.
A. Authority to rename official street names. Section 60.23(17), Wis.
Stats., provides that a town board may "name, or change the name of,
any street in the town under § 81.01(11), Wis. Stats." Further,
§ 61.34(1), Wis. Stats., provides in relevant part that: "The Village
Board shall have the management and control of the Village...
streets...and shall have power to act for the government and good order
of the Village... The powers hereby conferred shall be in addition to all
other grants and shall be limited only by express language."
B. Village policy for changing official street names.
(1) The Village Board, a Village resident or a Village business may
request a street name change for any official Village street.
(2) The Village Board shall use its discretion and good judgment in
considering any proposed name changes. The following criteria
shall be considered when changing official street names:
(a) The proposed street name has some historical, archaeological,
environmental or ethnic significance to a particular area or
neighborhood of the Village.
(b) The proposed street name change would be utilized to honor a
significant or outstanding person who has played an important
role in Pleasant Prairie history.
(c) The proposed street name provides significance in identifying
particular commercial or industrial centers.
§ 305-61 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-62
300:528
(d) Other such name changes which would be mutually beneficial
to the Village and its property owners in identifying a
particular area or location for emergency purposes.
(3) In an effort to allow the post office's automatic sorting system to
serve the postal needs of Village residents and businesses more
effectively, the Village Board shall not allow for duplicate official
street names.
(4) It is the Village Board's policy that the numerical grid street
addressing system established for Kenosha County holds the best
means for identifying addresses for emergency purposes in the
Village. The number of renamed streets should be held to a
minimum.
C. Procedure to rename streets.
(1) No Village street, roadway or highway shall have its official name
changed unless such requested name change complies with the
Village's policy for changing official street names identified above.
(2) The Village Board may initiate the changing of an official street
name in accordance with the procedures outlined below, with the
exception of the requirement of a written petition of the affected
property owners.
(3) Village residents or businesses requesting changes in official street
names shall submit the request in the form of a written petition to
the Village Clerk. Such petition shall be signed by at least 25% of
those individuals or businesses affected by the potential address
change.
(4) The written petition shall specifically include the following
information:
(a) The names, addresses, and signatures of the lot owners and
businesses in favor of the proposed name change (and date of
signing the petition).
(b) A detailed map identifying the street, roadway or highway
portion to be affected by the proposed name change.
(c) The specific reasons for the requested name change.
(d) An administrative processing fee of $25.
(5) The Village Clerk shall verify the names and addresses and forward
the petition information to the Village Board for consideration.
(6) The Village Board shall schedule a public hearing, request a
recommendation from the Plan Commission prior to the public
hearing to consider the matter and direct the Village Clerk to send
§ 305-62 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-62
300:529
§ 305-63. Road name signs.
§ 305-64. Building numbers.
notification via first class mail to all affected property owners and
businesses.
(7) The Village Clerk shall post the notice and publish a Class 1
notification in consideration of the matter.
(8) The Village Plan Commission shall consider the request for official
name change and provide a recommendation at a meeting prior to
the Village Board's public hearing to consider the matter.
(9) The Village Board shall hold the public hearing and make a final
determination in the form of a resolution regarding the proposed
name change.
(10) The official street name change shall become effective upon
publication of the resolution or as so stated in the resolution.
A. General requirements. Street name signs may be erected at the
intersections of all public roads within the scope of this article showing
the names of all roads in accordance with the Official Road Naming
Map. All intersection signs shall be a four-way sign, unless a multiple
intersection requires a larger sign.
B. Specifications. The type of lettering, composition, material, color,
mounting posts, and accessories shall be determined by the
Department of Public Works in accordance with the standards
established pursuant to § 349.065, Wis. Stats. The Department of Public
Works shall be responsible for procuring all materials necessary to
assemble the complete road name signs or for arranging for a
contractor to provide such service.
C. Procurement. The Department of Public Works shall be the exclusive
purchaser for all signs erected pursuant to the terms of this article, and
the County Highway Department shall be the exclusive installer, subject
to budget limitations and manpower. The Village may, at the discretion
of the Village Administrator, contract with private vendors for the
procurement and erection of signs. The fees established for the cost and
erection of any signs by the Department of Public Works shall be set by
the Village Administrator. The amount of the fee shall reflect the actual
cost of procurement and installation and shall be subject to annual
review.
D. Restrictions. No other signs except those specified above shall be
erected or used under the road naming plan established by this article.
A. A uniform system of building numbering for all residences (year-round
or seasonal), places of business, farms and public buildings in the
Village is hereby established.
§ 305-62 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-64
300:530
§ 305-65. Building number signs.
§ 305-66. Damage to signs.
No person shall willfully disturb, remove, deface or damage any sign
erected or maintained under the provisions of this article.
§ 305-67. Violations and penalties.
B. The numbering designation shall be as follows:
(1) On all streets and roads which run in a generally northerly and
southerly direction, the numbers on the west side of such streets
and roads shall end with an even number. The numbers on the east
side of such streets and roads shall end with an odd number.
(2) On all streets and roads which run in a generally easterly and
westerly direction, the numbers on the north side of such streets
shall end with an even number. The numbers on the south side of
such streets shall end with an odd number.
(3) The numbers on all roads or streets shall be multiples of the lowest
numbered street and shall not exceed the next full number. For
example: the building numbers between First Avenue and Second
Avenue on 126th Street must be 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, etc., but
may not be more than 199.
(4) The building address numbers shall be assigned by the Community
Development Department and located on the street yard side of the
building designated as the front entrance or door to the building.
A. General requirements. Building numbering signs shall consist of a plate
of identical numbers, with the numbers being not less than three inches
high, mounted so as to be horizontal to the street or road abutting. The
signs shall be attached to a building when that building is within 100
feet of the road right-of-way. In all other instances, the signs shall be
mounted on posts set at the right-of-way line of the road at a point not
more than three feet to the right or left of the private driveway or
walkway leading from the road to the building or property, or the
numbering shall be included on the ground/monument sign advertising
the business or entity. All addresses shall be readable from the road
right-of-way. Ground/monument signs shall maintain setback
requirements identified in Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, of this
Code. The signs shall be far enough above the ground to be readily
visible. As new buildings are constructed, the County Surveyor shall
assign numbers prior to the issuance of a building permit.
B. Restrictions. No other signs except those specified above shall be
erected or used under the building numbering plan established by this
article.
§ 305-64 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-67
300:531
A. Any person violating this article shall forfeit not more than $200 or, in
default of payment, be confined to the county jail for not more than six
months or until such forfeiture is paid, in addition to penalties imposed
by statutes.
B. Any person who accidentally causes any of the damage described in
§ 305-66 shall immediately report the same to the County Sheriff's
office or the County Highway Department.
C. Willful failure to so report such damage shall be a violation of this
article, and such person shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than
$100 or, in default of payment, be confined to the county jail for not
more than 30 days or until such forfeiture is paid.
§ 305-67 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-67
300:532
ARTICLE V
Curb Cuts
[Added 8-17-1998]
§ 305-68. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CURB CUT — The permitted method of cutting a mountable or vertical
faced curb is with a high-speed, water-cooled concrete saw.
CURB SECTION — A length of curb that was poured and finished as one
uniform piece of concrete. Each section is typically six feet long.
MOUNTABLE CURB — A mountable curb is made of poured concrete that
is 11 inches high on the backside or the side away from the street and is
eight inches high on the street side. The combination of the curb and gutter
is 30 inches wide. The purpose of a mountable curb is twofold. A mountable
curb is used for conveying stormwater that drains from the roadway and,
to a smaller extent, abutting lands to a catch basin or drainage inlet for
conveyance in the stormwater drainage system. The secondary purpose that
a mountable curb serves is to permit a municipal street to be constructed
at a time when the various driveway approaches are unknown. A mountable
curb can be driven over with appropriate care and caution.
TYPE D OR VERTICAL FACE CURB — A vertical face curb is a curb made
of poured concrete that is 12 inches high on the backside or the side away
from the street and is 7 1/2 inches high on the street side. The combination
of the curb and gutter is 30 inches wide. The purpose of a vertical face curb
is for conveying stormwater that drains from the roadway and, to a smaller
extent, abutting lands to a catch basin or drainage inlet for conveyance in
the stormwater drainage system as well as providing a defined limit for a
street.
§ 305-69. Permitted modifications to curbs.
A. Curbs may be removed in sections, without saw cutting, and repoured
as driveway approaches.
(1) Mountable curbs may not be repoured with a back that is less than
seven inches in height.
(a) The radius from the apex of the gutter (the apex is located 14
inches from the back of the curb) to the joint with the street
shall be 1.33°.
(b) The slope from the back of the curb to the right-of-way line
shall be no less than 4°.
(2) Vertical curbs may not be repoured with a back that is less than six
inches in height.
§ 305-68 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-69
300:533
§ 305-70. License required to perform work.
No person, party, firm, or corporation shall construct, modify, destroy,
remove or repair any curb without first obtaining a license from the Village
Clerk and becoming prequalified as a contractor in the Village. There shall
be no fee for such license.
§ 305-71. Bond required; indemnification of Village.
§ 305-72. Insurance.
A condition of the license shall be the furnishing of a certificate of insurance
containing the provision that the Village Administrator must be notified 20
days prior to the effective date of any termination or cancellation thereof,
(a) The radius from the apex of the gutter (the apex is located six
inches from the back of the curb) to the joint with the street
shall be 0.02°.
(b) The slope from the back of the curb to the right-of-way line
shall be no less than 4°.
(3) A permit for the curb removal and replacement must be obtained
prior to work commencing. An inspection shall be performed by the
Department of Public Works prior to the commencement of work.
An inspection shall be performed after work has been completed.
The fee for a repoured curb shall be $25 per approach.96
A. Contractor's bond. Every person, party, firm or corporation engaged in
the business of constructing, modifying, destroying, removing or
repairing curbs and gutters, prior to the issuance of a license, shall
provide a surety bond to the Village of Pleasant Prairie in the sum of
$10,000, which bond shall guarantee that all work is performed in
accordance with this article and other ordinances of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie and the regulations of Kenosha County as well as the
State of Wisconsin.97
B. Every person, party, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
constructing, modifying, destroying, removing or repairing curbs and
gutters, prior to the issuance of a license, shall indemnify the Village for
any damages to or obstructions of the public right-of-way, including but
not limited to the public sanitary sewers, storm sewers, municipal
water mains and services, and street improvements located within the
public right-of-way.98
96.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, concerning the cutting of curbs for driveway
approaches, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-20-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-54.
97.Editor's Note: Original § 8.15(4)(b), Owner's bond, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13.
98.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, concerning indemnification of the Village by property
owners who saw cut the curb, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
10-20-2008 by Ord. No. 08-54.
§ 305-69 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-72
300:534
which certificate shall indicate that there is in full force and effect a policy
of public liability insurance and motor vehicle liability insurance for each
motor vehicle used in conjunction with the licensed activity, issued by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Wisconsin. Such
insurance shall be in the amount of $300,000 protecting against claims
involving death, personal injury, or property damage.
§ 305-72 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-72
300:535

ARTICLE VI
Landscape Maintenance
[Added 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 15-29]
§ 305-73. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVELOPED PROPERTY — Property with a structure or property wherein a
permit has been issued, including any property, with or without structures,
wherein curb and gutter exist.
MAINTAIN — The establishment and cutting of common turf grasses such
as fescues, ryegrass and bluegrass. Cutting methods shall include, but not
be limited to, lawn mower, string line trimmer or other device that provides
a neat and uniform appearance. Grass cutting shall be conducted at a
frequency to maintain a maximum height of four inches.
PARKWAY — The area located between the curb and gutter and the
sidewalk.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The paved public street or roadway and sidewalk
and shall include the area between such pavement and the private property
line.
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY — Vacant property without curb and gutter
with no structures or permits issued.
§ 305-74. Maintenance of property located within public right-ofway.
§ 305-75. Noncompliance.
A. The owner of record of developed property located within the Village
shall maintain the parkway, drainage ditch, or other unpaved surface
located within the public right-of-way, which abuts such property. If
there is no parkway or sidewalk at a specific property, then the area
from the edge of the street pavement or curb and gutter to the property
lot line shall be maintained. If the owner fails to maintain the described
property, the Village may, after giving at least seven calendar days'
notice in writing to the owner, undertake the required maintenance and
charge the cost thereof to the abutting property owner. The Village will
maintain the public right-of-way of undeveloped property through its
road mowing program. The planting of trees, shrubs or bushes or
establishment of planters or flowerbeds within the public right-of-way is
prohibited, except where permission has been granted by the Village or
other authorized entity.
A. The Director of Public Works is hereby given authority to determine
which properties are not in compliance with this chapter. The Director
of Public Works shall give the owner of noncompliant property written
§ 305-73 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 305-75
300:537
notice that the property owner has seven calendar days from the date
of the notice within which to perform the prescribed corrections. If, at
the expiration of such seven calendar days, the owner has not complied
with the prescribed corrections, then the Director of Public Works may
direct the Public Works Department or contract services to perform the
corrective actions and notify the property owner of same and add the
cost of such corrective actions to the tax roll as a special charge if the
same is not paid in full by the property owner within 30 days of receipt
of an invoice from the Village.
B. The cost of rendering corrective actions by the Public Works
Department or contract services shall include an hourly labor charge
and hourly equipment charge as determined by the Village, plus an
additional charge equal to 5% of the total hourly labor and equipment
charge for administrative expenses incurred by the Village. Any time
spent by the Public Works Department or contract services for
conducting corrective actions over and above each hour shall be billed
at the next hourly increment.
§ 305-75 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 305-75
300:538
Chapter 320
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessments — See Ch. 11. Budget and finance — See Ch. 23.
§ 320-1. Preparation of tax roll and tax bills. [Amended 3-20-2000
by Ord. No. 00-26]
§ 320-2. Delinquent payment of personal property tax. [Amended
4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13]
If any personal property taxes assessed are not paid in full on or before the
date fixed by law, such taxes or any portion thereof shall be delinquent and
shall be collected together with interest thereon at 1.5% per month after
the final date of payment fixed by law.
§ 320-3. Hotel/motel room tax. [Amended 3-4-2002 by Ord. No.
02-13; 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-13; 11-6-2017 by Ord. No. 17-59]
A. Tax roll. The Village Clerk shall prepare the tax roll, which shall contain
the information required under § 70.65(2), Wis. Stats., and the format
of the tax roll shall conform to the form prescribed by the Department
of Revenue under § 70.09(3), Wis. Stats.
B. Property tax bills. The Village Clerk shall prepare the real and personal
property tax bills prescribed by the Department of Revenue. The tax
bills shall contain the information required under § 74.09(3), Wis.
Stats., and shall be mailed to each property tax payer or the taxpayer's
designee as prescribed in § 74.09(5), Wis. Stats.
C. Tax receipts. Pursuant to § 74.07, Wis. Stats., the Village Treasurer
shall collect the general property taxes, special assessments, special
taxes and special charges indicated on the tax bills. The Village
Treasurer shall enter in each tax receipt for the payment of taxes the
name of the person paying, if that person is not the owner of the
property taxed, the date of payment and the aggregate amount of taxes
paid. Tax receipts shall be signed and a duplicate kept by the Village
Treasurer after noting the payment of taxes upon the tax roll. The
Village Treasurer shall then deliver the receipt to the appropriate
person.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
GROSS RECEIPTS — Has the meaning, insofar as applicable, as defined
in § 77.51(4)(a), (b) and (c), Wis. Stats.
§ 305-75 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 320-3
300:539
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or group of buildings in which the
public may obtain accommodations for a consideration, including,
without limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, hotels, tourist
homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses, summer camps,
apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins and any other building
in which accommodations are available to the public, except
accommodations rendered for a continuous period of more than 30 days
and accommodations furnished by hospitals, sanatoriums or nursing
homes or by corporations or associations organized and operated
exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, provided
that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and associations
inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
LODGING MARKETPLACE — An entity that provides a platform
through which an unaffiliated third party offers to rent a short-term
rental to an occupant and collects the consideration for the rental from
the occupant.[Added 9-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-43]
OCCUPANT — A person who rents a short-term rental through a
lodging marketplace.[Added 9-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-43]
OWNER — The person who owns the residential dwelling that has been
rented on a short-term basis.[Added 9-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-43]
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — Any building, structure, or part of the
building or structure, that is used or intended to be used as a home,
residence, or sleeping place by one person or by two or more persons
maintaining a common household, to the exclusion of all others.[Added
9-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-43]
SHORT-TERM RENTAL — A residential dwelling that is offered for rent
for a fee and for fewer than 29 consecutive days.[Added 9-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-43]
TRANSIENT — Any person residing for a continuous period of less than
30 days in a hotel, motel or furnished accommodations available to the
public.
B. Room tax imposed. [Amended 9-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-43]
(1) Pursuant to § 66.0615, Wis. Stats., a tax is imposed on the privilege
and service of furnishing at retail rooms or lodging to transients
and occupants by hotel keepers, motel operators, lodging
marketplaces, owners of short-term rentals, and other persons
furnishing accommodations that are available to the public,
irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the
accommodations. The tax imposed under this subsection may be
collected from the consumer or user, but may not be imposed on
sales to the federal government and persons listed under § 77.54
(9a), Wis. Stats. The Village will also not impose and collect a room
tax from the owner of a short-term rental if the short-term rental
that is rented through the lodging marketplace and the lodging
marketplace has already collected the room tax from the occupant
§ 320-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 320-3
300:540
and has forwarded it to the Village. Such tax shall be at the rate
of 8% of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms or
lodging. Such tax shall not be subject to selective sales tax imposed
by § 77.52(2), Wis. Stats. The proceeds of such tax shall be remitted
monthly to the Village Treasurer.
(2) The Village has created a Village Travel and Tourism Fund to hold
90% of all room tax revenues collected under this section until such
time as the Pleasant Prairie Convention and Visitors Bureau
("CVB") has been established and commenced operations. The
Fund shall be discontinued after CVB has established its own bank
account in its own name, and all monies held in the Fund will be
forwarded to the CVB for tourism promotion and tourism
development.
(3) Once the CVB's bank account has been established, the Village
Administrator shall make monthly deposit payments of room tax
revenues collected directly into the CVB's designated bank
account. In December of each calendar year or as otherwise
agreed, the Pleasant Prairie Convention and Visitors Bureau shall
submit an itemized, written report relative to the use of such funds
to the Village Board.
C. Application for permit.
(1) Permit. Every person, including a lodging marketplace, furnishing
rooms or lodging shall file with the Village Clerk an application for
a permit for each place of business. Any person who maintains,
manages, or operates a short-term rental for more than 10 nights
each year is required to obtain from the Wisconsin Department of
Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection a license as a tourist
room house, as defined in § 97.01(15k), as a precondition from
obtaining a permit with the Village. Every application for a permit
shall be made upon a form prescribed by the Village Clerk and shall
set forth the name under which the applicant intends to transact
business, location of place of business and such other information
as the Village Clerk requires. The application shall be signed by the
authorized representative of the lodging marketplace, the owner of
the lodging property or short-term rental if a sole proprietor and, if
not a sole proprietor, by the person authorized to act on behalf of
the business. At the time of making an application, the applicant
shall pay to the Village Treasurer a fee of $10 for each permit.
[Amended 9-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-43]
(2) Security bond. In order to protect the revenue of the Village, the
Village Clerk may require any person liable for the tax imposed to
file with him before or after a permit is issued such security not in
excess of $5,000 as the Village Clerk determines. If any taxpayer
fails or refuses to place such security, the Village Clerk may refuse
or revoke such permit. If any taxpayer is delinquent in the payment
of taxes imposed by this section, the Village Treasurer may, upon
§ 320-3 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 320-3
300:541
10 days' notice and after giving the taxpayer an opportunity to
confer, recover the taxes, interest and penalties from the security
placed with the Village Treasurer by such taxpayer. No interest
shall be paid or allowed by the Village to any person for the deposit
of such security.
(3) Issuance of permit. After compliance with Subsection C(1) and (2),
the Village Clerk shall grant and issue to each applicant a separate
permit for each place of business with the Village. Such permit is
not assignable and is valid only for the person in whose name it is
issued and for the transaction of business at the place designated
therein. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the place
for which it is issued.
(4) Revocation of permit. Whenever any person fails to comply with
this section, the Village Administrator may, upon 10 days'
notification and after affording such person the opportunity to
show cause why the permit should not be revoked, revoke or
suspend any or all of the permits held by such person. The Village
Administrator shall give notice of this suspension or revocation to
the party affected and shall not issue a permit after the revocation
of a permit unless he is satisfied that the former holder of the
permit will comply with the provisions of this section. A fee of $10
shall be imposed for the renewal or issuance of a permit which has
been previously suspended or revoked. The decision of the Village
Administrator to revoke or suspend a permit may be appealed to
the Village Board.
D. Records to be kept. Every person liable for the tax imposed by this
section shall keep or cause to be kept such records, receipts, invoices
and other pertinent papers in such form as the Village Treasurer
requires.
E. Administration and payment of taxes. This section shall be administered
by the Village Administrator. The tax imposed for the month is due and
payable before the last day of the following month.
F. Returns to be filed. A return shall be filed with the Village Treasurer by
those furnishing at retail such rooms and lodging on or before the same
date on which such tax is due and payable. Such return shall show the
gross room receipts of the preceding calendar month from such retail
furnishing of rooms or lodging, the amount of the tax imposed for such
period and such other information as the Village Administrator deems
necessary to administer this section. The Village Administrator may, for
good cause, extend the time of filing any return, but not longer than one
month from the filing date.
G. Records to be confidential. All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings
or audit reports relating to such returns on file with the Village
Administrator are confidential, except the Village Administrator may
divulge their contents to the following persons:
§ 320-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 320-3
300:542
(1) The person who filed the return.
(2) Officers, agents or employees of the Federal Internal Revenue
Service or the State Department of Revenue.
(3) Officers, employees or agents of the Village as may be necessary to
enforce collection.
H. Determination of tax. The Village Administrator may by office or field
audit determine the tax required to be paid to the Village or the refund
due to any person under the basis of the facts contained in the return
being audited or on the basis of any other information within the Village
Administrator's possession. One or more such office audit
determinations may be made of the amount due for any one or for more
than one period. The Village Administrator or his agent may examine
and inspect the books, records, memoranda and property of any person
in order to verify the tax liability of that person or another person. The
Village Administrator may make a determination of the tax at any time.
I. Failure to file return. If any person fails to file a return as required by
this section, the Village Administrator shall make an estimate of the
amount of the gross receipts. Such estimate shall be made for the
period for which such person failed to make a return and shall be based
upon any information which is in the Village Administrator's possession
or may come into his possession. On the basis of this estimate, the
Village Administrator shall compute and determine the amount
required to be paid to the Village, adding to the sum thus arrived at a
penalty equal to 10% thereof. One or more such determinations may be
made for one or more than one period.
J. Interest on unpaid taxes and refunds.
(1) All unpaid taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 18% per annum
from the due date of the return until the first day of the month
following the month in which the tax is paid or deposited with the
Village Treasurer.
(2) All refunded taxes shall bear interest at 18% per annum from the
date of the return until the first day of the month following the
month in which such taxes are refunded. An extension of time
within which to file the return shall not operate to extend the due
date of the return for purposes of interest computation. If the
Village Treasurer determines that any overpayment of tax has been
made intentionally or by reason of carelessness or neglect or if the
tax which was overpaid was not accompanied by a complete return,
he shall not allow any interest thereon.
K. Late filing fee. Delinquent tax returns shall be subject to a late filing fee
of $10.
L. Delinquent taxes. The tax imposed by this section shall become
delinquent if not paid on or before the due date of the return or before
§ 320-3 STORMWATER STORAGE FACILITIES § 320-3
300:543
§ 320-4. Tax exemption reports. [Added 3-20-2000 by Ord. No.
00-27]
the expiration of an extension period if one has been granted. If a
return is filed late or there is no return filed, the due date for the taxes
imposed is the due date of the return.
M. False or fraudulent return. If a false or fraudulent return is filed with
the intent in either case to defeat or evade the tax imposed by this
section, a penalty of 50% of the tax due shall be paid in addition to the
tax, interest and late filing penalty.
N. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4,
of this Code.
O. Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective on January 1,
2018.
A. Filing required. On or before March 31 of each even-numbered year,
the owner of each parcel of property that is exempt under § 70.11, Wis.
Stats., except as provided in § 70.337(7), Wis. Stats., shall file with the
Village Clerk the tax exemption report required under § 70.337(1), Wis.
Stats. A fee of $35 per parcel reported or $70 for multiparcel reporting
shall accompany the exemption report (PC 220 to PC 220A) to defray
the Village's cost of administration. This fee does not apply to a church
that is required to file a report under § 70.337(1), Wis. Stats.
B. Income-producing property report. In addition to the report required
under Subsection A above, the owner of property that is exempt under
§ 70.11, Wis. Stats., except § 70.11(1) and (2), and was used in trade or
business in the most recently ended taxable year shall file with the
Village Clerk on or before March 15 of each year the report required
under § 70.339, Wis. Stats.
C. Late filing notice; penalty. In the event the reports required under
Subsections A and B above are not timely filed, the Village Clerk shall,
by certified mail, notify the property owners as follows:
(1) That the owners required to file the report under Subsection A
above shall file such report within 30 days, together with the
applicable filing fee, and, if not so filed, the property shall be
appraised either by the Village Assessor or a person hired by the
Village to conduct the appraisal. The cost of such appraisal shall be
charged to the property owner and, if not paid within 30 days, shall
be placed on the tax roll as a charge for current services as
provided in § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
(2) That the owners required to file the report under Subsection B
above shall file such report within 30 days, together with the
applicable filing fee, and, if not so filed, the owner shall be subject
§ 320-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 320-4
300:544
Chapter 326
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 326, Theaters, Drive-In, adopted 1-1-1979 (§§ 12.09 and
12.20 of the 1988 Code), as amended, was repealed 6-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-18.]
Chapter 332
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 234, Art. II.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 214.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 348.
§ 332-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future; words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
ASSIGNMENT — A call or referral by or from the Village or its Police
Department to a wrecker requesting towing service hereunder licensed.
CLASS I TOW — Involves vehicles which of necessity must be removed from
public or private property at the request of the Village Police Department
without the owner's permission where such vehicles are abandoned,
constitute a public or private nuisance, are illegally parked, are evidence,
or stolen or are or were in the ownership or control of a prisoner or dead or
disabled person who is unable to personally arrange for towing.
CLASS II TOW — Involves vehicles which have become disabled and their
operator has no preference for a tower and where the public convenience
requires the Police Department to arrange for towing service.
CLASS III TOW — Involves disabled Village vehicles which need to be towed
promptly upon request for a reasonable fee.
LICENSEE — One who has been issued a license by the Village Board
to perform towing service for or at the request of the Village of Pleasant
Prairie or its Police Department.
to a forfeiture of $10 for each succeeding day the report is not
received by the Village Clerk, but not more than $500.
§ 320-4 TOWING § 332-1
332:545
NO-PREFERENCE TOW — Any motor vehicle accident or disablement
where a motor vehicle operator requiring towing service expresses no
preference as to a named wrecker.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PREFERENCE TOW — Any motor vehicle accident or disablement where a
motor vehicle operator requiring towing service expresses a preference as
to a named wrecker.
STORAGE LOT — Premises which are subject to use in accordance with
local and state laws, rules and regulations as a place to temporarily keep
towed vehicles pending the final disposition thereof. Storage lots must be
completely enclosed with a six-foot-high fence which is of such a nature as
will offer reasonable protection for vehicles and their contents against theft
and/or vandalism. Any side of the enclosing fence which is viewable from a
public thoroughfare must be constructed in such a manner as will screen
from view the vehicles stored within the fenced enclosure. The storage
lot shall provide outside storage for a minimum of 30 vehicles and inside
storage for a minimum of two vehicles. The storage lot shall be located
at the wrecker's (licensee's) principal place of business, unless otherwise
approved by the Police Department and Village Board.
TOW — To remove a motor vehicle from a given place, whether temporarily
or permanently disabled, by use of a vehicle designed or customarily used
for that purpose, to a place of storage pending the repair, salvage, recovery,
sale or disposal of such vehicle.
TOWER — A person engaged in the business or offering the services of
a vehicle wrecker or towing service, whereby disabled motor vehicles are
towed or otherwise removed from the place where they are disabled by use
of a wrecker so designed for that purpose or by a truck, automobile or other
vehicle so adapted to that purpose and who is engaged in Class I, Class II
or Class III tows.
VILLAGE — The Village of Pleasant Prairie
WRECKER — One engaged in the business of or offering the services of a
motor vehicle tower.
§ 332-2. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate a truck or other type of
motor vehicle designed and capable to service or perform Class I, Class
II or Class III tows for hire within the Village of Pleasant Prairie unless a
license therefor shall first be obtained from the Village Clerk as hereinafter
provided.
§ 332-3. Application.
No such license shall be issued unless an application therefor shall have
been filed with the Village Clerk upon a form prescribed therefor, which
shall include.
§ 332-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 332-3
332:546
§ 332-4. Application fee.
An application hereunder shall be accompanied with a fee of $25. If the
applicant is the holder of a towing license with the City of Kenosha, a copy
of said license may be submitted with the application in place of the $25
application fee.
§ 332-5. Employment prohibition.
Licensees shall not employ on a full- or part-time basis any law enforcement
officer or any civilian employee of any law enforcement agency.
§ 332-6. Standards of operation. [Amended 4-18-2005 by Ord. No.
05-13]
The Village Board may not consider or grant a license to an applicant who
does not meet the following minimum requirements:
A. The name, home address and proposed business address of the
applicant.
B. The location, description and hourly availability of the tow trucks
owned or operated by the applicant.
C. Available space the applicant has for properly accommodating and
protecting all disabled motor vehicles to be towed or otherwise
removed from the place where they are disabled.
D. Such other information as the Village Clerk shall find reasonably
necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and to arrive at a
fair determination of whether the terms of this chapter have been
complied with.
A. Own or exclusively lease for the license period two tow trucks, one of
which shall have a minimum of four-ton winch capacity and one of
which shall have a minimum GVW of 12,000 pounds and a minimum
eight-ton winch; a flat bed truck with a minimum GVW of 12,000 pounds
and a minimum eight-ton winch; a flat bed truck with a minimum GVW
of 20,000 pounds and a minimum four-ton winch with a compatible
hydraulic combination of eight tons may be substituted. Each truck
shall be equipped with a two-way commercial radio, lights and such
other safety devices as will comply with Ch. 347, Wis. Stats., a rubber
tow sling, a dolly, 100 feet of tow cable and equipment for cleaning up
glass and debris at an accident scene. Village assignments must be
given top priority as a condition of holding a license.
B. Ownership or exclusive lease for the license period of a storage lot as
herein defined.
C. The principal place of business and storage lot must be within Kenosha
County and east of I-94, or within three miles west of I-94 for tower
§ 332-3 TOWING § 332-6
332:547
§ 332-7. Standard rate schedule; claiming of vehicles.
utilized west of STH 31 except in emergency circumstances, to be
determined by the Village Police Department.
D. Execution of an indemnity and hold harmless agreement protecting the
Village from the payment of any claims for property damage, personal
injury or death and from all expenses, attorney's fees and court costs
associated with such claims resulting from or arising out of the
licensee's operation under this chapter including, but not limited to, the
towing and storage of vehicles.
E. An inspection certificate from the Village Police Department indicating
that the applicant's storage lot and the mechanical condition of the
applicant's tow trucks meet the requirements of this chapter. If an
applicant possesses a current towing license with the City of Kenosha,
no inspection certificate is required.
F. A licensed carrier authority from the State of Wisconsin.
G. Towing equipment which is adequate to perform towing services in a
reasonable and workmanlike manner.
H. Certificates of insurance providing a minimum of 10 days' written
notice to the Village before any such policy is amended or canceled,
which shows statutory workers' compensation to employees, insurance
on the tow trucks written in comprehensive form, providing minimum
limits of bodily injury liability and property damage liability, as required
by the State of Wisconsin for obtaining carrier authority, and which
shows protection of the Village and the licensee against all claims
arising from injuries to persons or damage to property of others arising
out of any act or omission of the licensee or its agents, relative to
performance of work for which the license is granted.
I. Proof of law enforcement authority from the State of Wisconsin should
such authority be provided for by the state.
J. A statement that the applicant is not directly or indirectly financially
interested in any other such license issued under this chapter.
K. The licensee shall, at all times, be solely responsible for the conduct of
its employees.
L. Each licensee shall keep and maintain adequate and complete records
showing all vehicles towed, stored and released, all services rendered
and all fees charged and collected. All records shall be available for
inspection by the Village at any time during normal business hours.
A. Licensees shall maintain records of the amounts charged for tows and
shall charge no more than the following rates for their services while
towing for or at the request of the Village.
(1) Towing vehicles under and over 6,000 pounds.
§ 332-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 332-7
332:548
(a) Towing vehicles under 6,000 pounds: [Amended 12-18-2006
by Ord. No. 06-60]
[1] 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday: $75.
[2] 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Sundays and holidays: $85.
[3] 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday: $85.
[4] 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., Sundays and holidays: $85.
(b) Towing vehicles over 6,000 pounds, the rate shall be the
prevailing rate of the community.
(2) Dollies and flatbeds.
(a) Dollies, if required: $25.
(b) Flatbeds: the base rate specified in Subsection A above, plus
$25.
(3) Labor per man hour other than driver:
(a) 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday: $30 with a
minimum of $15.
(b) 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., Sundays and holidays: $40 per hour
with a minimum of $20.
(4) Winching, up-righting, shoveling, sweeping, waiting:
(a) 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday: $30 per
hour with a minimum of $15.
(b) 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., Sundays and holidays: $40 per hour
with a minimum of $20.
(5) Towing of Village owned vehicles:
(a) 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.: $15.
(b) 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., Sundays and holidays: $25 without any
additional charges.
(6) Remove and replace transmission linkage: $15.
(7) For indoor or outdoor storage: $20 per day. [Amended
12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-60]
(8) No charge to the Village for towing junked or abandoned vehicles.
B. Vehicles which are towed pursuant to this chapter may be claimed at
the storage lot upon which they are stored during regular business
office hours, Monday through Saturday.
§ 332-7 TOWING § 332-8
332:549
§ 332-8. License fee.
The license fee payable to the Village Clerk for such license or renewal
thereof shall be $100, regardless of the number of months such license may
be valid. All licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year.
§ 332-9. Responsibility for charges.
The vehicle owner or other party contracting or benefitting from such
towing services shall be responsible to the tower for the charges specified
in § 332-8 above.
§ 332-10. Rotating list.
Wreckers shall perform towing services for the Village on a rotation basis
from a list administered by the Police Department. When the owner or
driver of a disabled vehicle indicated a preference of a specific licensee,
that licensee shall be called, and no tow truck shall be assigned from the
rotating list. In the event that a licensee called does not respond as quickly
as is necessary, in the opinion of the police officer in charge at the scene of
an accident or other emergency, the police officer may call another licensed
tow truck. At no time shall it be more than 15 minutes from the time the
licensee is called.
§ 332-11. Interception of police calls.
No wrecker shall intercept police calls by shortwave radio.
§ 332-12. Tower to provide twenty-four-hour service.
Towing service must be provided 24 hours a day, each and every day of
the year. The failure of a licensee to perform licensed services shall be
grounds for revocation or suspension of this license. Any licensee who
fails to respond to or accept three calls during any license year may be
called before the Village Board to explain such failure. If such failure is not
justified, the licensee shall be put on probation for the balance of the license
year. Any further failure to perform services during the same license year
shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license.
§ 332-13. Revocation of license.
A. The Village Board shall revoke a license issued hereunder when it finds
any of the following grounds:
(1) The licensee illegally employed any radio to obtain information as
to the location of the scene of an accident or disabled vehicle.
(2) The licensee paid in the form of a gratuity any third person not
involved in the accident or disabled vehicle for information as to
the location of the accident.
§ 332-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 332-13
332:550
§ 332-14. Transferability.
A license issued hereunder shall not be transferred or assigned to another
person or business.
§ 332-15. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the suspension or revocation of a license issued under this
chapter, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any
regulation, rule or order made hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as
provided by Chapter 1, § 1-4, of the Code of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
Chapter 336
TRUANCY
§ 336-1. Dispositions for habitual truants.
Pursuant to § 118.163, Wis. Stats., as may be amended from time to time,
any person under the age of 18 years of age found to be a habitual truant,
as that term is defined under § 118.16, Wis. Stats., shall be subject to any of
the following dispositions which are deemed to be available to the Municipal
Court:
(3) The licensee has violated the fee schedule by overcharge or
improper charge.
(4) The licensee has violated any of the requirements of this chapter.
(5) The license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement
of a material fact or that a fact concerning the applicant was not
disclosed at the time of his making application and such fact would
have constituted just cause for refusal to issue such license.
B. Any wrecker who attempts to or who does influence the orderly rotation
of assignments or who otherwise violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to revocation, termination or suspension of his license
following written notice of a hearing containing a statement of the
complaint made against the licensee and the name of the party
requesting the hearing, and a hearing before the Village Board.
A. Suspension of the person's operating privileges for not less than 30
days nor more than one year. The Court shall immediately take
possession of any suspended license and forward it to the Department
of Transportation, together with a notice stating the reason for and the
duration of the suspension.
B. An order for the person to participate in counseling or a supervised
work program or other community service work as described in
§ 938.34(5g), Wis. Stats. The costs of any such counseling, supervised
§ 332-13 TRUANCY § 336-1
336:551
Chapter 344
VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 242. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 348.
work program or other community service work may be assessed
against the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both.
C. An order for the person to remain at home except during hours in which
the person is attending religious worship or a school program,
including travel time required to get to and from the school program or
place of worship. The order may permit a person to leave his or her
home if the person is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
D. An order for the person to attend an educational program as described
in § 938.34(7d), Wis. Stats.
E. An order for the Department of Workforce Development to revoke,
under § 103.72, Wis. Stats., a permit issued under § 103.70, Wis. Stats.,
authorizing the employment of the person.
F. An order for the person to be placed in a teen court program as
described in § 938.342(1g)(f), Wis. Stats.
G. An order for the person to attend school.
H. A forfeiture of not more than $500, plus costs, subject to § 938.37, Wis.
Stats. All or part of the forfeiture, plus costs, may be assessed against
the person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both.
I. Any other reasonable conditions consistent with § 118.163(2), Wis.
Stats., including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or remaining on
specified premises, and restrictions on associating with other children
or adults.
J. An order placing the person under formal or informal supervision, as
described in § 938.34(2), Wis. Stats., for up to one year.
K. An order for the person's parent, guardian or legal custodian to
participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's or legal custodian's
own expense, or to attend school with the person, or both.
L. An order for the person to report to a youth report center after school,
in the evening, on weekends, on other non-school days, or at any other
time that the person is not under immediate adult supervision, for
participation in the social, behavioral, academic, community service,
and other programming of the center as described in § 938.342(1g)(k),
Wis. Stats.
§ 336-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 336-1
344:552
§ 344-1. State all-terrain vehicle laws adopted.
The provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to allterrain
vehicles in § 23.33, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time, are
adopted and made part of this section by reference. Acts required to be
performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or prohibited by this
chapter.
§ 344-2. All-terrain vehicle trails designated.
Except as provided in § 23.33, Wis. Stats., no person shall operate an allterrain
vehicle upon any public right-of-way in any public park, golf course,
public walking trail or any public municipal property in the Village.
Chapter 348
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 234, Art. II. All-terrain vehicles — See Ch. 344.
§ 348-1. State traffic laws adopted. [Amended 1-9-1995]
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions in Chs. 340 to 348 and 350 to 351, Wis. Stats., describing
and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, exclusive of
any provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed and exclusive
of any regulations for which the statutory penalty is a fine or term of
imprisonment, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or
prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required
or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or
modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter and are incorporated immediately upon their statewide
effective date in order to secure uniform statewide regulations of traffic on
the highways, streets and alleys of the state.
§ 348-2. Speed restrictions. [Amended 1-9-1995]
Except as otherwise provided by state statutes, no motor vehicle shall be
operated on any streets in the Village of Pleasant Prairie at a speed greater
than 25 miles per hour, and except on the streets listed below:
A. Forty-five miles per hour.
(1) 93rd Street (5600 Block to STH 31).
§ 336-1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 348-2
344:553
§ 348-3. Official traffic signs and signals. [Amended 3-2-1992;
7-20-1992; 6-20-1994; 12-5-1994; 5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 05-17;
7-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-35; 10-20-2014 by Ord. No. 14-32]
The Director of Public Works shall procure, erect and maintain appropriate
standard traffic signs, signals and markings, conforming to the rules of
the State Department of Transportation, giving notice of the provisions of
this chapter as required by state law. Signs on roads designated to carry
traffic as arterial or greater in capacity shall be erected in such locations
and in such manner as the Village Board determines will best effect the
purposes of this chapter and give adequate warning to users of the streets
and highways. All other streets and roads shall be provided signage in
accordance with a review and approval by the Village Administrator,
Director of Public Works, Village Engineer and the Police Chief.
(2) CTH H (88th Avenue) from 93rd Place North to CTH C (Wilmot
Road). [Added 9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 04-43]
B. Thirty-five miles per hour. [Amended 10-20-2014 by Ord. No. 14-32]
(1) 47th Avenue (Springbrook Road to 128th Street).
(2) 104th Avenue (STH 50 South to 79th Street).
(3) 93rd Street (39th Avenue to 5600 Block).
(4) 116th Street (39th Avenue to STH 31).
(5) Bain Station Road.
(6) 85th Street (39th Avenue to STH 31).
C. Thirty miles per hour.
(1) Cooper Road.
(2) 1st Avenue (93rd Street to south end).
(3) All Village streets in Lakeview Corporate Park.
(4) 93rd Street (39th Avenue to Springbrook Road).
(5) 116th Street (39th Avenue to Sheridan Road).
(6) 1st Court (116th Street south to 121st Street).
A. Installation of stop signs.
(1) In order to give adequate warning to users of 86th Street, there
shall be stop signs erected on the following street intersections:
(a) On the southeast corner and northwest corner of 54th Avenue
and 86th Street in the Whittier Heights Subdivision.
§ 348-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 348-3
344:554
§ 348-4. Regulation of unattended motor vehicles.
(2) In order to give adequate warning to users of 104th Street, there
shall be stop signs erected on the following street intersections:
(a) On the southeast corner of 104th Street and 114th Avenue in
the Lake View Corporate Park West.
(3) In order to give adequate warning to users of 95th Street in the
Village of Pleasant Prairie, there shall be stop signs erected on the
following street intersection:
(a) On the northwest and southeast corners of Green Bay Road
and 95th Street.
(4) In order to give adequate warning to users of 108th Avenue and
84th Place in the Village of Pleasant Prairie, there shall be stop
signs erected on the following street intersection:
(a) On all corners of the four-way intersection of 108th Avenue and
84th Place.
(5) In order to give adequate warning to users of Cooper Road and
93rd Street in the Village of Pleasant Prairie, there shall be stop
signs erected on the following street intersection:
(a) On the northeast and southwest corners of 93rd Street and
Cooper Road for 93rd Street eastbound and westbound traffic.
(6) In order to give adequate warning to users of 104th Avenue and
79th Street in the Village of Pleasant Prairie, there shall be stop
signs erected on the following street intersection:
(a) On all corners of the four-way intersection of 104th Avenue and
79th Street.
B. Removal of unofficial signs and signals. The Chief of Police shall have
the authority granted by § 349.09, Wis. Stats., and shall order the
removal of a sign, signal, marking or device placed, maintained or
displayed in violation of this chapter or § 346.41, Wis. Stats. Any charge
imposed on any premises for removal of an illegal sign, signal or device
shall be reported to the Village Board at its next regular meeting for
review and certification.
A. Leaving unattended vehicle. No person driving or in charge of a motor
vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended in any public place, or on any
used or new car lot, or parking lot without first stopping and removing
the ignition key from the vehicle, effectively setting the brake thereon
and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the
curb or side of the highway.
B. Action by police officer. Whenever any police officer shall find a motor
vehicle standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in
§ 348-3 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 348-4
344:555
§ 348-5. Weight limits on Village roads. [Added 5-3-1993]
§ 348-6. Heavy traffic routes. [Added 6-15-1998]
violation of this section, such police officer is authorized to remove
the key from the vehicle and to deliver the key to the police officer in
charge of the nearest police station.
C. Presumption. The registered owner of a vehicle found in violation of this
section shall be held prima facie responsible for any such violation.
A. Roads limited to five-ton vehicles.
(1) 93rd Street from STH 31 to CTH ML.
(2) 7th Avenue from Chicago Northwestern Railroad tracks north to
the Village limits.
A. Heavy traffic routes designated. The following highways or parts
thereof within the jurisdiction of the Village of Pleasant Prairie are
hereby designated as heavy traffic routes:
75th Street (STH 50) from 120th Avenue to 45th Avenue
104th Street (STH 165) from West Frontage Road to STH 32
STH 31 (Green Bay Road) from Russell Road to KD tracks
91st Street from STH 32 to 7th Avenue
7th Avenue from 91st Street to 80th Street
88th Avenue (CTH H) from Russell Road to 75th Street (STH 50)
80th Avenue from 95th Street to 116th Street (CTH ML)
100th Street from 88th Avenue (CTH H) to 80th Avenue
113th Street from 88th Avenue (CTH H) to the Union Pacific tracks
102nd Street from 88th Avenue (CTH H) west to its terminus
100th Street from 80th Avenue to 77th Avenue
77th Avenue from 100th Street to 102nd Street
102nd Street from 77th Avenue to 80th Avenue
86th Avenue from 104 Street (STH 165) to 102nd Street
102nd Street from 86th Avenue to 82nd Avenue
82nd Avenue from 102nd Street to 104th Street (STH 165)
82nd Avenue from 104th Street (STH 165) to 107th Street
107th Street from 82nd Avenue to 86th Avenue
86th Avenue from 107th Street to 104th Street (STH 165)
STH 32 from Russell Road to 91st Street
CTH ML from 88th Avenue to STH 31 Green Bay Road
§ 348-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 348-6
344:556
§ 348-7. Parking spaces for vehicles displaying special registration
plates or special identification cards.
§ 348-8. Parking regulated.
B. Restrictions on use of other streets by heavy traffic. No person shall
operate or move a vehicle, except a motor bus, which is not equipped
with pneumatic tires or has a combined vehicle load weight exceeding
6,000 pounds, on any highway that has not been designated as a heavy
traffic route in Subsection A of this section except for the purpose of
obtaining orders for, or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to
or from, a place of business or residence which has an entrance
thereon, provided that, in no event shall the weight of vehicle and load
on any street not defined or designated as a heavy traffic route under
Subsection A exceed the limitations pertaining to Class A highways or
deliveries on Class B highways established by Wisconsin State Statutes.
A. In addition to any requirements relating to parking spaces established
by the Department of Commerce under § 101.13, Wis. Stats., the owner
or lessee of any parking facility which offers parking to the public shall
reserve one or more parking spaces for use by a motor vehicle with
special registration plates issued under § 341.14(1), (la), (lm) or (lq),
Wis. Stats., or a special identification card issued under § 343.51, Wis.
Stats., or a motor vehicle registered in another jurisdiction and
displaying a registration plate, card or emblem issued by the other
jurisdiction which designates the vehicle as a vehicle used by a
physically disabled person.
B. The owner or lessee shall post official traffic signs indicating that the
spaces are reserved.
C. The official traffic sign shall include the international symbol for
barrier-free environments and a statement to inform the public that the
parking space is reserved for vehicles designated under Subsection A.
D. The Village shall follow state rules governing the design, size and
installation of the official traffic signs required under Subsection B.
A. Parking restrictions. [Amended 10-4-2010 by Ord. No. 10-54]
(1) No person shall park any motor vehicle, trailer or equipment that
exceeds 7,000 pounds upon any street in the Village.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) The parking of motor vehicles, trailers or equipment,
regardless of weight, is permitted to be parked upon any street
within the manufacturing zoning districts, provided that the
motor vehicle, trailer or equipment is related to an approved
use in the manufacturing zoning districts and is not being used
for the required on-site parking. In no instance shall vehicles
§ 348-6 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 348-8
344:557
be parked upon any street in the manufacturing zoning
districts as an alternative means to on-site parking.
(b) Official public vehicles, construction-related vehicles working
on an active and adjacent construction site, or commercial
vehicles that exceed 7,000 pounds are permitted to be
temporarily stopped or parked for the purpose of working,
loading and/or unloading on any street in the Village.
B. All night parking prohibited. No person shall park any motor vehicle on
any street so posted for longer than 30 minutes between 2:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m. of any day.
C. Parking during snow emergency prohibited.
(1) No person shall park or leave unattended any motor vehicle, motor
vehicle trailer, semitrailer, mobile home or other form of
conveyance on any Village road or within the right-of-way thereof
when two inches or more of snow or sleet have fallen in any twentyfour-
hour period measured at the Village highway garage. The
snow emergency shall stay in effect until the snow or sleet removal
operations have been completed.
(2) If any motor vehicle, motor vehicle trailer, semitrailer, mobile home
or other form of conveyance is parked in violation of Subsection
C(1) above, upon receiving a citation for such violation, such
vehicle may be towed away at the owner's expense at the request of
the Village Police Department, and the tower shall have a
mechanic's lien on such vehicle until the owner pays all relevant
towing and storage charges.
(3) Any person who shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall,
upon conviction thereof, forfeit $25 plus the costs of prosecution.
And in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of
prosecution, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a
period not to exceed three days.
D. Parking prohibited.99
(1) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon 1st Avenue (Lake
Shore Drive) between 124th Street and the south end of the rightof-
way, at Prairie Harbor Marina; such street shall be marked with
official signs to such effect. [Added 7-9-1991]
(2) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon 120th Avenue
(Frontage Road) between 104th Street (County Trunk Highway Q)
99.Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 05-37, adopted 9-6-2005, redesignated former Subsections D
through O as follows: A. Former Subsections D, F, G, H, I, K, L and M are now designated
as Subsection D(1) through (8). B. Former Subsections E and J are now designated as
Subsection E (1) and (2). C. Former Subsection N is now designated as Subsection F. D.
Former Subsection O is now designated as Subsection G.
§ 348-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 348-8
344:558
and 116th Street (extended); such street shall be marked with
official signs to such effect. [Added 12-11-1989]
(3) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon 75th Street (State
Trunk Highway 50) between 118th Avenue (Frontage Road) and
104th Avenue (County Trunk Highway HH); such street shall be
marked with official signs to such effect. [Added 5-21-1990]
(4) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon old "Green Bay Road"
(referred to as State Trunk Highway 31) between 85th Street and
County Trunk Highway ML between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. Such highway shall be marked with official signs to such
effect. [Added 5-17-1993]
(5) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon 88th Avenue (referred
to as County Trunk Highway H) between STH 50 and CTH H and on
CTH C and CTH H for a distance of 600 feet north and south of the
CTH H and CTH C intersection. Such highway shall be marked with
official signs to such effect. [Added 6-7-1993]
(6) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon 22nd Avenue south of
104th Street from the 10600 Block to the termination of the 22nd
Avenue right-of-way. Such roadway shall be marked with official
signs to such effect. [Added 10-3-1994]
(7) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon 120th Avenue (East
Frontage Road) from the south edge of the CTH C right-of-way
south for a distance of 0.2 miles and from the north edge of the
CTH C right-of-way north for a distance of 0.2 miles. The identified
section of roadway shall be marked with official signs prohibiting
such parking. [Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-29]
(8) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon 120th Avenue (West
Frontage Road) from the south edge of the CTH C right-of-way
south for a distance of 0.2 miles. The identified section of roadway
shall be marked with official signs prohibiting such parking.
[Added 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 02-29]
(9) No person shall park any boat or other watercraft trailer, whether
attached or unattached to a motor vehicle, upon any public street
or road in the Village unless the area where the parking is to occur
is posted with signs permitting such parking. [Added 7-17-2006
by Ord. No. 06-35]
(10)No person shall park any boat or other watercraft trailer, whether
attached or unattached to a motor vehicle, on any Village property,
including Village parks, unless the area where the parking is to
occur is posted with signs permitting such parking. [Added
7-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-35]
(11)No person shall park any motor vehicle upon 76th and 77th Streets
between the 88th Avenue and 104th Avenue rights-of-way. Such
§ 348-8 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 348-8
344:559
roadway shall be marked with official signs to such effect. [Added
8-15-2011 by Ord. No. 11-22]
(12)No person shall park any semitractor/semicab/semitruck or
semitrailer, or any other similar commercial vehicle used especially
for the hauling of cargo/freight, including box-type trucks, whether
or not a trailer is attached or unattached to a motor vehicle, upon
any public street or roadway in the Village, except for transports
related to the limited and immediate delivery or collection of goods
and materials at the address being served. [Added 3-7-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-07]
(13)No person shall park any recreational vehicle (not attached to a
motor vehicle) or a utility trailer (open or enclosed) used to haul
materials, including but not limited to household goods,
snowmobiles, jet skis, all-terrain vehicles, branches or other items;
whether attached or unattached to a motor vehicle, upon any public
street or roadway in the Village, except for transports related to the
limited and immediate delivery or collection of goods and materials
at the address being served, on any Village property, including
Village parks, unless the area where the parking is to occur is
posted with signs permitting such parking. [Added 9-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-42]
E. Parking restricted.
(1) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon 51st Avenue (Cooper
Road) between 85th Street and 85th Place for a period to exceed a
period of two consecutive hours, from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. Said avenue shall be marked with official
signs to such effect. [Added 4-1-1991]
(2) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon 88th Avenue (also
known as CTH H) between 95th Street and 100th Street. Said
street shall be marked with official signs to such effect. [Added
7-25-1994]
(3) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon Terwall Terrace and
STH 165; Terwall Terrace and CTH H; and/or 93rd Place and CTH
H (three entrances to Prairie Springs Park) during school hours.
[Added 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 05-37]
(4) No person shall park any motor vehicle upon 24th, 26th and 29th
Avenues for a distance of 750 feet south of 89th Street during
soccer games. [Added 6-5-2006 by Ord. No. 06-27]
F. Parking signs required. Whenever any parking time limit is imposed or
parking is restricted or prohibited on designated streets, the
Superintendent of Streets of the Village shall erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless
signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense, except
§ 348-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 348-8
344:560
§ 348-9. Snowmobiles.
that this provision shall not apply to the snow emergency provisions of
Subsection C above.
G. Displays.
(1) No person shall place, park or locate for rent, lease, sale or display,
any motor vehicle, trailer truck, mobile home or other vehicle
within 67 feet of the limits of any Class A highway, so designated by
the state.
(2) No person shall place, park or locate for rent, lease, sale or display,
any motor vehicle, trailer, truck, mobile home or other vehicle
within 25 feet of the rear lot line of his property.
(3) Subsection G(1) and (2) shall not apply to the placing, parking or
locating of any motor vehicle, trailer, truck, mobile home or other
vehicle within the walls of any permanent building or structure.
A. State snowmobile laws adopted. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions describing and
defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles in the following
enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby adopted by
reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Acts
required to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or
prohibited by this section.
350.01 (Definitions)
350.02 (Operation of snowmobiles on or in vicinity of highway)
350.03 (Right-of-way)
350.04 (Snowmobile races, derbies and routes)
350.045 (Public utility exemption)
350.047 (Local ordinance to be filed)
350.05 (Operation by youthful operators restricted)
350.055 (Safety certification program established)
350.07 (Driving animals)
350.08 (Owner permitting operation)
350.09 (Head lamps, tail lamps and brakes)
350.10 (Miscellaneous provisions for snowmobile operation)
350.12 (Registration of snowmobiles)
350.13 (Uniform trail signs and standards)
350.15 (Accidents and accident reports)
350.17 (Enforcement)
350.18 (Local ordinances)
§ 348-8 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 348-9
344:561
§ 348-10. Nonpayment of fares.
350.19 (Liability of landowners)
B. Applicability of rules of the road to snowmobiles. The operator of a
snowmobile upon a roadway shall, in addition to the provisions of Ch.
350, Wis. Stats., be subject to §§ 346.04, 346.06, 346.11, 346.14(1),
346.18, 346.19, 346.20, 346.21, 346.26, 346.27, 346.33, 346.35,
346.37, 346.39, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46, 346.47, 346.48, 346.50(1)(b),
346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54, 346.55, 346.87, 346.88, 346.89,
346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1) and 346.94(1) and (9), Wis. Stats.
C. Permitting operation by improper persons prohibited. No owner or
person having charge or control of a snowmobile shall authorize or
permit any person to operate such snowmobile who is not permitted
under state law to operate such snowmobile or who is under the
influence of an intoxicant or a dangerous or narcotic drug.
D. Operation while under influence prohibited. Section 346.63, Wis. Stats.,
shall apply to the operation of a snowmobile anywhere within the
Village.
E. Written consent of owner required. The consent required under
§ 350.10, Wis. Stats., shall be written consent dated and limited to the
year in which the consent is given. If the property is owned or leased by
more than one person, the consent of each shall be obtained.
A. Taxicabs. It shall be unlawful for any person to neglect, refuse or fail to
immediately pay, in lawful United States currency, for the
transportation he or she has received in any licensed taxicab upon
discharge therefrom, where the nonpayment for said transportation is
intended to deprive the owner or operator of the taxicab of the revenue
from the service provided. Each and every passenger being transported
in a taxicab is personally liable for the cost of his or her individual
transportation. The failure of a transported passenger to promptly pay,
upon request, for the service provided, shall be prima facie evidence of
the intent of said passenger to deprive the taxicab owner or operator of
the fee owing for the service provided.
B. Buses. It shall be unlawful for any person to neglect, refuse or fail to
immediately pay, in lawful United States currency, the fare due and
owing for the privilege of riding a bus operated by the City of Kenosha
Transit Authority upon entering said bus, where the nonpayment of said
fare is intended to deprive the said transit authority of the revenue from
the transportation service provided or to be provided. The failure of a
person entering a City bus to pay, upon request to do so, the fare due
and owing, shall be prima facie evidence of the intent of said person to
deprive said Transit Authority of the revenue from the transportation
service provided or to be provided. All city bus fares shall be due, owing
and payable in advance of receiving transportation, upon entering a city
bus.
§ 348-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 348-11
344:562
§ 348-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-30]
A. Forfeiture penalty. The penalty for violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be forfeiture as hereinafter provided, together with the
court costs and fees prescribed by § 814.63(1) and (2) or 814.65(1),
Wis. Stats., the surcharge for moving traffic violations and the driver
improvement surcharge imposed by §§ 757.05(1) and (2)(a) and
346.655, Wis. Stats., where applicable. The sentencing judge may
suspend payment of the judgment for not more than 60 days. Any
person who shall fail to pay the amount of the forfeiture, costs of
prosecution and penalty imposed for violation of any provision of this
code may, upon order of the court entering judgment therefor, be
imprisoned until such forfeiture, costs and assessments are paid, but
not exceeding 90 days.
B. Other sanction. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the
sentencing court to exercise additional authority granted by the
Wisconsin Statutes to suspend or revoke the operating privileges of the
defendant, to suspend the registration of any vehicle or refuse
registration of any vehicle owned by the defendant, to order the
defendant to submit to assessment and rehabilitation or attend traffic
safety school, or to require the defendant to perform community
service, in addition to payment of a monetary forfeiture or in lieu of
imprisonment.
C. Forfeitures for uniform state offenses.
(1) Forfeitures for violations of any state regulation set forth in the
Wisconsin Statutes and adopted by reference in § 348-1 of this code
shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for
violations of the comparable state statute, including any variations
or increases for offenses.
(2) The forfeitures allowed for deposit in lieu of appearance and
stipulation of no contest shall be the amounts of the deposits set
forth in the bond schedule adopted pursuant to §§ 23.66, 345.26,
778.25(3) or 778.26(3), Wis. Stats., except as follows:
(a) The deposit schedule for any violation of this chapter or state
codes adopted herein, may be set by the Municipal Judge,
subject to the approval in resolution form by the Village Board,
in an amount not to exceed the maximum penalty for the
offense, including any penalty assessment, which would be
applicable under § 814.63(1) and (2) or 814.65(1), Wis. Stats.,
plus the costs of prosecution.
(b) The provisions for a statutory penalty in the form of a fine and/
or a term of imprisonment contained in any offense adopted in
this chapter from a state code are hereby specifically excluded
from adoption hereunder and in lieu thereof a forfeiture may
be imposed upon the defendant pursuant to this section.
§ 348-11 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 348-11
344:563
§ 348-12. Enforcement. [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-30]
D. Local regulations. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter for which a penalty is not otherwise established by this section
shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4 of this
Code.
A. Enforcement procedure. This chapter shall be enforced according to
§§ 66.0114, 345.20 to 345.33, and Ch. 800, Wis. Stats.
B. Deposit. Any person arrested for a violation of this chapter may make a
deposit of money, as directed by the arresting officer, at the police
station or at the office of the Clerk of Court or by mailing the deposit to
such places. The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit
shall comply with § 345.26, Wis. Stats., or if the deposit is mailed, the
signed statement required under § 345.26 shall be mailed with the
deposit. The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall
notify the arrested person, orally or in writing, that:
(1) If he fails to appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, he will
be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to a
forfeiture plus costs not to exceed the amount of the deposit; or
(2) If he fails to appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, and if
the court does not accept the deposit as forfeiture, he will be
summoned in to court to answer the complaint. The amount of the
deposit shall be determined in accordance with the deposit
schedule established by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference. The
deposit shall include court costs and suit tax. The arresting officer
or the person who received the deposit shall issue the arrested
person a receipt therefor as required by § 345.26(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
(3) If a deposit schedule has not been established, the arresting officer
shall require the alleged offender to deposit not less than the
maximum forfeiture permitted under this chapter.
(4) In addition to the amount of Subsection B(2) of this section, the
deposit shall include court costs, including any applicable fees
prescribed in Ch. 814, Wis. Stats., any applicable penalty
assessment, any applicable jail assessment, any applicable railroad
crossing improvement assessment and any applicable crime
laboratories and drug law enforcement assessment.
C. Stipulation of no contest. Any person charged with a violation of this
chapter may make a stipulation of no contest pursuant to § 345.27, Wis.
Stats., which must be received at the office of the Clerk of the Court any
time prior to the scheduled court appearance date of the alleged
violation. Such person shall at the time of entering into the stipulation
make the deposit required under Subsection B if he had not already
done so. A person who has mailed or filed a stipulation under this
subsection may, however, appear in court on the appearance date and
§ 348-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 348-12
344:564
§ 348-13. Definitions; nonmoving vehicle violations and penalties.
[Added 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-02]
may be relieved from the stipulation for cause shown, as required in
§ 345.27, Wis. Stats.
A. Definitions.
NONMOVING VIOLATION — Any parking of a vehicle in violation of a
statute or local ordinance.
PARKING CITATION — The paper form designated by the Chief of
Police required for use in enforcing the nonmoving violations created or
adopted in this chapter in accordance with § 66.0113 of the Wisconsin
Statutes. Such parking citation shall contain:
SUSPENDING AUTHORITY — The Pleasant Prairie Police Department
shall be the suspending authority and shall be responsible for
submitting requests to the TVRP for registration suspension for unpaid
parking citations. The person authorized to sign suspension forms shall
be the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
TVRP — Refers to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic
Violation and Registration Program.
A printed explanation of the procedure for either paying or
contesting the citation.
(1)
A printed warning that nonpayment may result in the suspension
of current and the denial of future vehicle registrations for the
registered owner of the vehicle cited.
(2)
(3) The location, date and time of the violation.
The vehicle registration information, including the license plate
number, state, expiration, vehicle make and year.
(4)
A specific reference to the ordinance violated and the forfeiture
associated with that violation.
(5)
B. Parking regulations and penalties. Pursuant to § 349.06, Wis. Stats., the
Village of Pleasant Prairie has the authority to enact and enforce the
parking regulations, also referred to as "nonmoving violations," in
conformity with §§ 346.50 to 346.55, Wis. Stats.; and that in addition to
those regulations directly referenced by statute, regulations restricting
parking under Chapter 348 of this Code have been created; and that the
penalties and provisions for those ordinances and adopted statutes
shall be governed by this chapter in conformity with § 345.28, Wis.
Stats.
C. Nonmoving Traffic Violation and Registration Program. Pursuant to the
provisions of § 345.28(4), Wis. Stats., the Village of Pleasant Prairie is
authorized and elects to participate in the Nonmoving Traffic Violation
and Registration Program (TVRP) of the Wisconsin Department of
§ 348-12 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 348-13
344:565
Transportation and pay the costs established by the Department under
§ 85.13, Wis. Stats. Such costs shall, in turn, be assessed against
persons charged with nonmoving violations. The Chief of Police shall
be responsible for complying with the requirements set forth in
§ 345.28(4), Wis. Stats.
D. Violations and penalties. The penalty for violation of this chapter for
nonmoving violations shall be forfeiture in the amount set forth by the
Chief of Police in conformity with § 346.56, Wis. Stats.; plus any
applicable court costs which may be imposed by the Municipal Court in
accordance with § 814.65(1), Wis. Stats. for contested violations, plus
any fees or charges authorized under § 345.28(4)(d) for unpaid citations
where the vehicle registration has been submitted to the TVRP for
suspension. The following forfeiture schedule shall apply:
Forfeiture Schedule
Violation
Code/
Statute
References Forfeiture
After 30
Days
TVRP
Fee
Parking where
prohibited on highway
§ 348-1/§ 346.53 $20 $40 $5
Parking where
prohibited: private
property
§ 348-1/§ 346.55 $20 $40 $5
Parking on highway
during snow
emergency
§ 348-8C $25 $50 $5
Handicap parking
violation
§ 348-1/§ 346.505$100 $200 $5
E. Procedure.
(1) A person charged with a nonmoving traffic violation under this
section may make a deposit of money to the Pleasant Prairie Police
Department by mail, by electronic means authorized by the agency,
or in person, in which case the citation shall not be filed with or
transmitted to the Municipal Court, and no further action is
required of the person charged.
(2) A person charged with a nonmoving violation under this section has
the option to contest the citation by giving notice in writing to the
Pleasant Prairie Police Department. The registered owner of the
vehicle shall forfeit his/her right to contest the citation if such
notice is not received by the agency within 28 days of the initial
notice date sent under § 348-13E(4)(b) of this chapter.
(3) If the person charged gives notice of his/her desire to contest the
citation, the citation shall be submitted to the Municipal Court
§ 348-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 348-13
344:566
pursuant to § 345.30, Wis. Stats., and the procedures under
§§ 345.34 to 345.47, Wis. Stats., will apply.
(4) Notice.
(a) If payment for the citation is not received by the Pleasant
Prairie Police Department within 30 days of the date of issue
and a request to contest has not been received by the agency,
the forfeiture amount for the violation shall be double, and a
notice will be sent to the last known address of the registered
owner of the vehicle cited.
(b) The notice shall include the date the citation was issued, the
license number of the vehicle involved, the place or manner in
which the citation may be paid, the means by which the
citation may be contested, and the date by which the person
must pay or contest the citation to avoid further action by the
Police Department.
(5) If the citation remains unpaid after 14 days of the first notice, and
no request to contest the charge has been received, a second notice
will be sent to the last known address of the registered owner of the
vehicle cited.
(6) If, after 14 days of the second notice, the citation remains unpaid
and a request has not been received to contest the citation, the
Pleasant Prairie Police Department may proceed under § 345.28,
Wis. Stats., to suspend the registration and deny future registration
until the amount of the forfeiture plus any authorized fees and costs
are paid.
(7) If the person subsequently pays the forfeiture and any fees and
costs, the Pleasant Prairie Police Department shall send written
notification to the TVRP within three working days that payment
has been satisfied so that the suspension and/or refusal of future
registrations will be lifted.
(8) In the event that a vehicle cited under this section is a vehicle
registered in a state other than Wisconsin and if the owner fails to
pay any parking citation, the Chief of Police shall be authorized to
utilize a commercial collection firm to collect the outstanding
forfeiture, along with any authorized fees or costs.
§ 348-13 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 348-13
344:567
Chapter 355
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire and rescue protection — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 285.
Stormwater storage facilities — See Ch. 300.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 305.
Building and Mechanical Code — See Ch. 370.
Land division and development control — See
Ch. 395.
Public improvement projects — See Ch. 405.
§ 355-1. Agreement to comply with water utility operating rules.
All persons now receiving a water supply from the Utility, or who may
hereafter make application therefor, shall be considered as having agreed to
be bound by all rules and regulations as filed with the State Public Service
Commission.
§ 355-2. Public Service Commission Rules adopted.
The following provisions of Ch. PSC 185, Wis. Adm. Code, are adopted by
reference and made a part of these rules as if set forth in full. A violation
of any of such rules shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be
punishable as provided in § 355-20.
§ 185.11 Authorization for and application of rules
§ 185.12 Definitions
§ 185.13 General requirements
§ 185.15 Free or discriminatory service prohibited
§ 185.16 Protection of Utility facilities
§ 185.17 Interference with public service structures
§ 185.18 Location of records
§ 185.19 Retention of records
§ 185.21 Schedules to be filed with the commission
§ 185.22 Information available to customers
§ 185.31 Metered service
§ 185.32 Meter readings and billing periods
§ 185.33 Billing
§ 185.35 Adjustment of bills
§ 185.36 Deposits
§ 185.37 Disconnection and refusal of service
§ 185.38 Deferred payment agreement
§ 348-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 355-2
344:568
§ 185.39 Dispute procedures
§ 185.41 Employees authorized to enter customers' premises
§ 185.42 Customer complaints
§ 185.43 Construction records
§ 185.44 Records and reports of service interruptions
§ 185.45 Pumpage records
§ 185.46 Meeting equipment records
§ 185.47 Other records
§ 185.51 Requirement for good engineering practice
§ 185.52 Construction standards
§ 185.61 Meters
§ 185.65 Accuracy requirements for customer meters
§ 185.71 Meter testing facilities and equipment
§ 185.72 Calibration of meter testing equipment
§ 183.73 Testing of customer meters
§ 185.74 Test flows
§ 185.75 Required tests of customer meters
§ 185.76 Periodic tests
§ 185.77 Complaint tests
§ 185.78 Referee tests
§ 185.79 Testing of metering installations having remote registers
§ 185.795 Jumpering meter settings
§ 185.81 Quality of water
§ 185.815 Adequacy of water supply
§ 185.82 Pressure standards
§ 185.83 Station meters
§ 185.84 Emergency operation
§ 185.85 System losses
§ 185.86 Flushing mains
§ 185.87 Operation of distribution system valves and hydrants
§ 185.88 Interruptions of service
§ 185.89 Thawing frozen services
§ 355-3. Management of water utility.
A. Village Board to operate. The management, operation and control of the
water system for the Village is vested in the Village Board, which shall
serve as the Water Utility. All records, minutes and all written
§ 355-2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 355-3
344:569
§ 355-4. Water utility service.
proceedings thereof shall be kept by the Village Clerk; the Village
Treasurer shall keep all financial records of such utility.
B. Powers. The Water Utility of the Village shall have the power to
construct waterlines for public use and shall have the power to lay
water pipes in and through the alleys, streets, and public grounds of the
Village, and generally, to do all such work as may be found necessary or
convenient in the management of the water system. The Water Utility
shall have power by itself, its officers, agents, and servants, to enter
upon any land for the purpose of making examination or supervise in
the performance of its duties under this chapter, without liability
therefor, and the Village shall have power to purchase and acquire for
the Water Utility all real and personal property which may be necessary
for construction of the water system or for any repair, remodeling, or
additions thereto.
C. Condemnation of real estate. Whenever any real estate or any easement
therein or use thereof shall, in the judgment of the Village, be necessary
to the water system, and whenever, for any cause, an agreement for the
purchase thereof cannot be made with the owner, the Village Board
shall proceed with all necessary steps to take such real estate easement
or use by condemnation in accordance with the Wisconsin Statutes.
D. Title to real estate and personalty. All property, real, personal and
mixed, acquired for the construction of the water system, and all plans,
specifications, diagrams, papers, books, and records connected
therewith, and all buildings, machinery, and fixtures pertaining thereto,
shall be the property of the Water Utility.
A. Application. Every person connecting with the water system shall file an
application in writing to the Village Clerk in such form as prescribed for
that purpose.
(1) Blanks for such application must state fully and truly all uses
intended. Additional uses or changes in stated uses will not be
allowed except upon further application and permission regularly
obtained from the Village Board.
(2) If the applicant is not the owner of the premises, the written
consent of the owner must accompany the application.
(3) Persons whose premises are connected to the Village Water Utility
are referred to herein as "users."
(4) If it appears that the service applied for will not provide adequate
service for the contemplated use, the Village Board may reject the
application. If the Village Board approves the application, it shall
issue a permit for services as shown on the application.
§ 355-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 355-4
344:570
§ 355-5. Excavations.
B. Deposit. Each user shall, prior to hookup and to guarantee payment of
all charges herein, pay a deposit in cash in the amount equal to the
minimum quarterly water charge, such charge to be determined by the
type of service by which the property is connected to the mains. Such
deposits shall be refunded after two years of timely payment of
quarterly charges or when the user moves from the premises,
whichever is first, providing all charges are current.
C. User to repair. All users shall keep their own service pipes in good
repair and protected from frost, at their own risk and expense, and shall
prevent any unnecessary waste of water. All expenses relating to the
connection with the water system shall be paid by the applicant. No
charge, however, shall be made for the services of the Superintendent
in directing where and in what manner the mains shall be tapped and
excavations made in the street for laying pipe.
D. Use restricted. No user shall allow others to connect to the water
system through his lateral.
E. User to permit inspection. Every user shall permit the Water Utility or
its duly authorized agent, at all reasonable hours of the day, to enter his
premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures and the manner
in which the water is used, and must at all times, frankly and without
concealment, answer all questions put to him relative to its use.
F. Utility responsibility. It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall be
made against the Village Water Utility by reason of the breaking,
clogging, stoppage, or freezing of any service pipe; nor from any
damage arising from repairing mains, making connections or
extensions or any other work that may be deemed necessary. The right
is hereby reserved to cut off the service at any time for the purpose of
repairs or any other necessary purpose, any permit granted or
regulation to the contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it shall become
necessary to shut off the water service within any district of the Water
Utility, the Village Clerk or agent shall, if practicable, give notice to
each and every user within such district of the time when the service
will be shut off.
G. Meters. The owner of any premises shall provide a location for a water
meter and maintain such location and passageway thereto clean and
sanitary and free from any obstruction or any condition hazardous in
nature. No connection for water meters shall be installed in any
location not easily accessible or which is, or may be, unclean,
unsanitary, or in any manner unsafe to Utility employees in the
discharge of their duties.
A. In making excavations in streets or highways for laying service pipe or
making repairs, the paving and earth removed must be deposited in a
manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the public.
§ 355-4 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 355-5
344:571
§ 355-6. Tapping mains.
§ 355-7. Installation of house laterals.
B. No person shall leave any such excavation made in any street or
highway open at any time without barricades, and during the night,
warning lights shall be maintained at such excavation.
C. In refilling the opening after the service pipes are laid, the earth shall
be laid in layers of not more than nine inches deep and each layer
thoroughly compacted to prevent settling. This work, together with the
replacing of sidewalks, ballast and paving, shall return the street to a
condition at least as good as before it was disturbed and satisfactory to
the Building Inspector. No opening of the streets for tapping the pipes
will be permitted when the ground is frozen.
A. No persons, except those having special permission from the Water
Utility or persons in their service and approved by them, will be
permitted, under any circumstances, to tap the water mains or
distribution pipes. The kind and size of the connection with the pipe
shall be that specified in the permit or order from the Water Utility.
B. Pipes should always be tapped on the top, and not within six inches (15
cm) of the joint, or within 25 inches (60 cm) of another connection.
A. All waterlines on private property, whether underground or within a
structure, will be installed in accordance with Ch. COMM 82, Wis. Adm.
Code, "Design, Construction, Installation, Supervision and Inspection of
Plumbing;" specifically § COMM 82.13, "Water Distribution Systems."
B. The building's waterline shall be inspected upon completion of
placement of the pipe, before backfilling, and tested before and after
backfilling.
C. All water service laterals installed within the Village shall have a
permanent, operable control valve installed by the Utility contractor or
homeowner within three feet of the point where the water service first
enters the building. This control valve shall be installed at the time of
water lateral installation to facilitate the Village's installation of the
meter horn. All valves shall be one inch in size or be reduced down with
adaptors so that a one-inch male fitting can be installed by the Village
Water Utility. Valves shall be gate or ball valves and shall be onehundred-
twenty-five-pound rated with a cast bronze body and brass
trim, as manufactured by Red-White Value Corporation or equal
comparison. Additional reference: § COMM 82.40 (4)3.a, as amended
from time to time. [Added 8-23-1993]
D. Water service lines and curb stops shall be located outside of any paved,
hard surface driveway approaches or driveway areas where a new
water service is installed for all existing one- and two-family dwellings.
In all new subdivisions, water service lines and curb stops must be
§ 355-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 355-7
344:572
§ 355-8. Maintenance of service.
All water service within the limits of the Village from the street main
to the property line and including all controls between the same will be
maintained by the Water Utility without expense to the property owner
unless such damage is a result of negligence or carelessness on the part of
the property owner, a tenant, or an agent of the owner, in which case they
will be repaired at the expense of the property owner. All water services
from the point of maintenance by the Utility to and throughout the premises
must be maintained free of defective conditions by and at the expense of the
owner or occupant of the property.
§ 355-9. Payment of bills.
The property owner is held responsible for payment within the prescribed
period of all water bills on premises that he owns. All water bills and notices
of any nature relative to water service shall be addressed to the owner and
delivered to the premises referred to on such bill or notice.
§ 355-10. Damage recovery.
The Utility shall have the right to recover from all persons any expense
incurred by the Utility for the repair or replacement of any water pipe,
curb-cock, gate valve, hydrant, or valve box damaged in any manner by
any person by the performance of any work under his control or by any
negligent act. Owners or operators of motor vehicles shall be liable for the
utilized in their designed and approved locations. If the water service
curb stop falls within the driveway approach or driveway surface, the
property owner shall sign a letter of indemnification with the Village,
holding the Village harmless for any and all future liability, loss, or
damage associated with any work as may be required by the Village
within the property owner's paved portion of the driveway which is
located in the Village road right-of-way. This letter of indemnification
shall be recorded with the Register of Deeds, with the recording fee
paid by the property owner. The water service curb stop located within
the driveway approach or paved surface shall be isolated with
expansion material. [Added 8-23-1993; amended 6-17-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-33]
E. Each individual single-family dwelling unit shall require its own water
service lateral. If a single-family dwelling exists with a commercial/
business on the same property, each dwelling shall have its own water
service lateral. [Added 9-18-2000 by Ord. No. 00-49]
F. A licensed master plumber is required to make the interior piping
connection and disconnection, as required by the Wisconsin State
Plumbing Code, of a water service when a single or two-family
residential dwelling is currently serviced by a well, after a permit is
issued by the Village of Pleasant Prairie. [Added 9-18-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-49]
§ 355-7 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 355-10
344:573
cost of repair of any hydrant damaged by them, and the Utility shall not be
responsible for damage to the motor vehicle by reason of such accident.
§ 355-11. Vacation of premises and discontinuance of service.
Whenever premises served by the Utility are to be vacated or whenever
any person desires to discontinue service from the Utility, the Utility must
be notified in writing. The owner of the premises shall be liable for any
damages to the property of the Utility by reason of failure to notify the
Utility of a vacancy or any damage occurring to the property of the Utility
other than through the fault of the Utility or its employees, representatives
or agents.
§ 355-12. Charges shall be a lien on property.
All water services, charges, and special assessments shall be a lien on a lot,
part of a lot or land on which water services were supplied. All sums which
have accrued during the preceding year and which are unpaid by the first
day of October of any year shall be certified to the Village Clerk to be placed
on the tax roll for collection as provided by the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 355-13. Unit of service definition.
§ 355-14. Cross-connection control. [Amended 6-5-2006 by Ord. No.
06-26; 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 11-16]
A. A unit of service shall consist of any residential, commercial, industrial
or charitable aggregation of space or area occupied for a distinct
purpose such as a residence, apartment, flat, store, office, industrial
plant, church or school. Each unit of service shall be regarded as one
user.
B. Suites in houses or apartments with complete housekeeping functions
(such as cooking), shall be classed as apartment houses; thus houses
and apartments having suites of one, two or more rooms with toilet
facilities, but without kitchen for cooking, are classed as rooming
houses.
C. When a user's premises has several buildings, for which services are
eligible and such buildings are used in the same business and
connected by the user, the Water Utility shall set a separate rate for
such complex.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect consumers and the
public water supply system of the Village from the possibility of
contamination or pollution due to a backflow of contaminants into
building plumbing and/or into the public water supply system.
B. A "cross-connection" shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which
contains potable water from the Village water system, and the other,
§ 355-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 355-14
344:574
water from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety,
or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one
system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure
differential between the two systems.
C. No person shall establish or permit to be established, or maintain or
permit to be maintained, any cross-connection. No interconnection
shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply, other than the regular water supply of the
Village, may enter the supply or distribution system of such
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply
and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been
approved by the Water Utility and the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources in accordance with § NR 811, Wis. Adm. Code.
D. It shall be the duty of the Water Utility to cause inspections to be made
of all properties served by the public water system where crossconnection
with the public water system is deemed possible. The
frequency of inspection and reinspections based on potential health
hazards involved shall be as established by the Water Utility and as
approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in
accordance with § NR 811, Wis. Adm. Code.
E. Upon presentation of credentials, the Water Utility, Village and/or its
representative shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable
time to examine any property served by a connection to the public
water system of the Village for cross-connections. If entry is refused,
such representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant under
§ 66.0119, Wis. Stats. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any
property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent
information regarding the piping system or systems on such property.
F. The Water Utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of
this section exists and to take such other precautionary measures
deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the
public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after
reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats.,
except as provided in Subsection G. Water service to such property
shall not be restored until the cross-connection(s) has been eliminated
in compliance with the provisions of this section.
G. If it is determined by the Water Utility that a cross-connection or an
emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires
immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the
Village Clerk and delivered to the customer's premises, service may be
immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for
hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., within 10 days of such emergency
discontinuance.
§ 355-14 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 355-14
344:575
§ 355-15. Compulsory connection to sewer and water.
§ 355-16. Well regulation program. [Amended 1-6-2003 by Ord. No.
03-03; 6-5-2006 by Ord. No. 06-26; 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 12-22]
H. The Village of Pleasant Prairie adopts by reference the State Plumbing
Code of Wisconsin being Ch. Comm 82, Wis. Adm. Code. This section
does not supersede the State Plumbing Codes but is supplementary to
them.
A. Notice to connect. Whenever the public sewer or water system becomes
available to any public, commercial, mercantile or business building, or
any building used for human habitation, the Village Administrator shall
notify in writing the owner, agent or occupant thereof to connect
thereto all facilities required by the Village Administrator. If the person
to whom notice has been given fails to comply within 10 days after
notice, the Village Administrator shall cause the necessary connections
to be made, and the expense thereof shall be assessed as a special tax
against the property pursuant to § 281.45, Wis. Stats. [Amended
3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
B. Deferred payment. The owner or his agent or the occupant may, within
30 days after the completion of the work, file a written option with the
Village Treasurer electing to pay the amount of the assessment in 10
equal annual installments with interest on the unpaid balance at 12%
per year.
C. Privies and waterless toilets prohibited. After connection of any
building to a sewer main hereunder, no privy or waterless toilet shall be
used in connection with such building.
D. When it has been determined by the Village Administrator that any
public, commercial, mercantile or business building, or any structure
used for human habitation, has access to municipal sewer or water and
has not connected within the one-year period provided for with the
installation of said utilities, the Village Administrator shall cause no less
than three proposals from licensed and qualified contractors and
plumbers to be secured for the construction, installation, connection
and restoration of the private utility service. The lowest and best
qualified contractor shall be authorized to commence work. Upon
completion of said work, the person receiving the service shall be
assessed the cost for the work as a special tax against the property
pursuant to § 281.45, Wis. Stats. [Added 7-20-1992]
A. Purpose.
(1) To prevent unused and/or improperly constructed wells from
serving as a passage for contaminated surface or near surface
waters or other materials to reach the usable groundwater. These
wells shall be properly filled and sealed.
§ 355-14 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 355-16
344:576
(2) To prevent unused, unsafe and noncomplying wells from acting as
vertical conduits for aquifer contamination or as sources of unsafe
water that could enter the public water system through crossconnections.
B. Required well abandonment. Wells that do not have a valid operational
permit issued pursuant to Subsection D below, wells which are not
routinely used, wells which are in noncompliance with Ch. NR 812 or
wells which test bacteriologically unsafe shall be property sealed and
abandoned in accordance with Ch. NR 812 by an established date not to
exceed one year from date of connection to the public system or date of
discovery or construction.
C. Coverage. All private wells located on any premises which are served by
the public water system of the Village shall be properly filled by June 1,
1985. Only those wells for which a well operation permit has been
granted by the Village of Pleasant Prairie may be exempted from this
requirement, subject to conditions of maintenance and operation.
D. Well operation permits. A permit may be granted to a well owner to
operate a well for a period not to exceed five years if the following
requirements are met:
(1) The well and pump installation meet the requirements of Ch. NR
812, Wis. Adm. Code, and the well constructor's report is on file
with the Department of Natural Resources, or certification of the
acceptability of the well has been granted by the Private Water
Supply Section of the Department of Natural Resources.
(2) The well has a history of producing safe water and in accordance
with § NR 810.16, Wis. Adm. Code, presently produces
bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by one sample. A
minimum of one safe sample be taken prior to issuing or reissuing
the permit to establish that the water is bacteriologically safe.
(3) The proposed use of the well can be justified as being necessary in
addition to water provided by the public water system.
(4) No physical connection shall exist between the piping of the public
water system and the private well in accordance with § NR 812.26,
Wis. Adm. Code.
E. Cost of well operation inspections and permits. The cost of a well
inspection and to obtain a well operation permit is $50, which permit is
valid for five years. This cost will be added onto your utility bill. In the
case of a shared well, only the parcel containing the physical well will
be required to obtain a permit. Any residence connected to a shared
well must pass all required inspections and produce one safe water
sample as is required by the permit holder. Failed well inspections will
result in the need for a reinspection which is an additional $25 per
inspection. [Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-34]
§ 355-16 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 355-16
344:577
§ 355-17. Performance of water tests. [Added 9-13-1993]
§ 355-18. Public fire protection charges. [Added 3-1-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-20]
The Village shall allocate the costs associated with public fire protection
based on the property values of all parcels within the Public Fire Protection
District. [Note: Mechanism to charge for PFP services in § 196.03(3)(b),
Wis. Stats.]
F. Methods. Wells to be abandoned shall be filled according to the
procedures outlined in Ch. NR 112, Wis. Adm. Code.100 The pump and
piping shall be removed and the well checked for obstructions prior to
plugging. Any obstruction or liner shall be removed.
G. Reports and inspection. A well abandonment report shall be submitted
by the well owner to the Department of Natural Resources on forms
provided by that agency. The report shall be submitted immediately
upon completion of the filling of the well.
A. Purpose, intent. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter that the
health, safety and welfare of the public of the Village of Pleasant Prairie
be promoted by the performance of water tests for residents of the
Village. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for water tests to be
performed by the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
B. Definitions. In this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
WATER — Water which is used for potable purposes.
WATER TESTS — A sample which shall be evaluated for the presence
of bacteria.
C. Village Administrator to develop rules. The Village Administrator shall
develop rules for the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
D. Cost. [Amended 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 02-16; 6-4-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-21]
(1) The cost for the coliform/bacteria test shall be $25 per sample.
(2) Water sample dropoff/pickup fee for regular hours (Monday
through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.) shall be $55.
(3) Water sample dropoff/pickup fee for after hours shall be $75.
A. For this purpose, the property value of all real estate parcels not
exempt from general property taxation will be equal to the assessed
value established in the year prior to the year of collection. In instances
where building improvements are sited on leased land, the assessed
100. Editor's Note: See now Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 355-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 355-18
344:578
§ 355-19. Dispute procedures for values of properties exempt from
general property taxation. [Added 3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 04-20]
value of the building, if valued as personal property, shall be added to
the assessed value of the land to produce a total property value.
B. For those properties exempt from general real estate property taxes, a
property value will be determined pursuant to the valuation procedures
outlined in the Wisconsin Statutes, including but not limited to § 70.32,
Wis. Stats., as may be amended from time to time, and in a manner
commensurate with the valuation of taxable real property in the Village.
In instances where building improvements are sited on leased land, the
value of the building, if valued as personal property, shall be added to
the value of the land to produce a total property value.
A. Purpose. This section provides the only allowable means for owners of
real property that is exempt from general property taxation to question
a value or revaluation of property made pursuant to § 355-18.
B. Board of Review meeting.
(1) Meeting. Upon receiving properly filed written objections, the
Board of Review, organized pursuant to Chapter 18, Article VI,
Board of Review, of this Code, shall meet the third Tuesday in
October for the purpose of hearing and deciding disputes regarding
values of properties exempt from general property taxation. At that
meeting, the Board of Review shall take testimony and other
evidence pursuant to the procedures in Subsection D below for
properly filed written objections. [Note: Parallels the meeting
provisions in § 70.47, Wis. Stats.]
(2) Assessor present. The Village Assessor or designated staff shall be
present at the meeting. [Note: Parallels § 70.47(3)(ag), Wis. Stats.]
C. Notice. At least 15 days before the meeting under Subsection B, the
Assessor shall issue written notice of the property value of each tax
exempt property only if the Assessor arrives at a value different than
the value used in the previous year. The notice shall be sent by ordinary
mail to the owners of such properties and shall include the date of the
meeting under Subsection B and the property owner's rights to be
heard at that meeting pursuant to the terms of this section. [Note:
Parallels § 70.47(2), Wis. Stats.]
D. Objections.
(1) A property owner who disputes the value or revaluation for which
they receive notice under Subsection C may file with the Board of
Review Clerk written objections on the forms provided by the
Board of Review and in compliance with § 70.47(7)(ae), Wis. Stats.
Such written objections must be filed by at least 5:00 p.m. on the
Thursday before the meeting under Subsection B. The Board of
Review Clerk shall notify the Board of Review and the Village
§ 355-18 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 355-19
344:579
Assessor of each written objection within 24 hours of receipt of the
objection. [Note: Parallels § 70.47(7), Wis. Stats.]
(2) The Board of Review may consider objections first presented in
writing at the meeting under Subsection B if good cause is shown
explaining why written objection could not be made pursuant to
this section. [Note: § 70.47(3)(a)4, Wis. Stats.]
(3) Persons who own land and improvements to that land may object to
the aggregate valuation of that land and improvements to that land,
but no person who owns land and improvements to that land may
object only to the valuation of that land or only to the valuation of
improvements to that land. [Note: Restates provision in § 70.47(7),
Wis. Stats.]
E. Procedures. The Board of Review shall use the procedures in § 70.47(8),
Wis. Stats., as may be amended from time to time, to hear objections
filed pursuant to Subsection D. Proceedings under this section are also
subject to the provisions of § 70.47(7)(aa), (ac), (ae) and (af), Wis. Stats.
F. Board's duties and authority. The Board of Review shall correct all
apparent errors in description or computation for all property values
disputed pursuant to Subsection D. The Board of Review may adjourn
from time to time until all objections are heard and decided and shall
provide notice of the revised schedule to parties whose objections
under Subsection D remain pending. [Note: Parallels § 70.47(6), Wis.
Stats.]
G. Correction of values. From the evidence before it, the Board of Review
shall determine whether the Assessor's value is correct. If the value is
too high or too low, the Board of Review shall raise or lower the
assessment accordingly and shall state on the record the correct
assessment and that that assessment is reasonable in light of all of the
relevant evidence that the Board of Review received. A majority of the
members of the Board of Review present at the meetings to make the
determination shall constitute a quorum for purposes of making such
determination, and a majority vote of the quorum shall constitute the
determination. In the event there is a tie vote, the assessment shall be
sustained. [Note: Parallels § 70.47(9)(a), Wis. Stats.]
H. Notice of decision. The Board of Review shall provide the objecting
property owner notice by personal delivery or by mail, return receipt
required, of the amount of the assessment as finalized by the Board of
Review and a statement of appeal rights pursuant to Subsection I. Upon
delivering or mailing the notice under this subsection, the Board of
Review Clerk shall prepare an affidavit specifying the date when that
notice was delivered or mailed. [Note: Parallels § 70.47(12), Wis. Stats.]
I. Further objections. A property owner who disputes the Board of
Review's decision under Subsection H may use the procedures
available under Wisconsin Statutes to further challenge that decision.
§ 355-19 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 355-19
344:580
§ 355-20. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter, or any regulation, rule or order made hereunder,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as provided by
Chapter 1, § 1-4 of this Code.
Chapter 360
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
§ 360-1. Purpose.
The Village of Pleasant Prairie is required by Ch. 98, Wis. Stats., to either
create a department of weights and measures to enforce the statutory
provisions contained therein or contract with the Department of
Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection, for such services. Section
98.04(2), Wis. Stats., authorizes villages electing to contract with the state
for enforcement services to recover the contract costs from those persons
who receive services under the weights and measures program. The Village
of Pleasant Prairie hereby elects to recover the costs of the state-mandated
weights and measures program from those persons who receive the service.
§ 360-2. Fee assessment.
A fee shall be assessed to each business entity that is inspected or receives
any weights and measures service under Ch. 98, Wis. Stats., provided
by the Village or for which the Village is billed by the state or other
contracted entity. The total fees assessed shall not exceed the actual costs
of the inspection or other service provided under the weights and measures
program.
§ 360-3. Notice of invoice.
A notice of invoice shall be mailed to any business entity inspected or which
received any service under the weights and measures program. The notice
shall be considered served when mailed by first-class mail, postage prepaid,
to the business entity's last known address.
§ 360-4. Fee payment.
Fees shall be paid in full to the Village within 30 days of notice. If the
assessed fee is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of mailing of the
invoice, an additional administrative collection charge of 10% of the unpaid
fee shall be added to the amount due, plus interest shall accrue thereon at
the rate of 1% per month or fraction thereof until the fee, plus costs and
interest, is paid in full. Fees properly assessed under this section shall be
[Note: Statutory appeal options include certiorari review under
§ 70.47(13), Wis. Stats.]
§ 355-19 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 360-4
344:581
enforceable against any person or business entity and against any owner
or person in charge of any business entity as a personal action for debt. If
the owner or person in charge is also the owner of the real estate on which
the weights and measures devices are located, any delinquent fee may be
placed upon the tax roll as a charge for current services as provided in
§ 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
§ 360-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation
made hereunder may be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-4,
of this Code.
Part III: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 370
BUILDING AND MECHANICAL CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 114.
Contractors — See Ch. 150.
Fair housing — See Ch. 173.
Fire and rescue protection — See Ch. 180.
Manufactured/mobile homes — See Ch. 221.
Sewers — See Ch. 285.
Stormwater management and drainage
system facilities — See Ch. 298.
Water — See Ch. 355.
Construction site maintenance and erosion
control — See Ch. 381.
Land division and development control — See
Ch. 395.
Zoning Ordinance — See Ch. 420.
§ 370-1. Authority.
These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by §§ 62.17,
66.0103, 66.0413, 66.0435, 66.1019, 101.12, 101.65, 101.76 and 101.86,
Wis. Stats., and annotations, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 370-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general health, safety and
welfare and to maintain the required local uniformity with the
administrative and technical requirements of this chapter and to set forth
regulations designed to safeguard life and property by regulating and
providing for the plan review and inspection of all buildings and structures
for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 360-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-3
344:582
§ 370-3. Title.
This chapter, as amended from time to time, shall be known, referred to and
cited as the "Village of Pleasant Prairie Building and Mechanical Code" or
as "Chapter 370 of the Code of the Village of Pleasant Prairie."
§ 370-4. Scope.
This chapter pertains to the construction, addition, enlargement, alteration,
modification, improvement, conversion, repair, maintenance, demolition,
relocation, or change of use of all new or existing residential, commercial,
agricultural, recreational or related accessory buildings and structures
within the Village of Pleasant Prairie (the "Village"). In addition, this chapter
pertains to any structural changes; changes to mechanical systems,
including plumbing, electrical and heating, air conditioning and ventilation;
and the restoration or repair of an installation to its previous codecompliant
condition as determined by the inspector.
§ 370-5. Terminology.
For the purpose of this chapter, words used in the present tense include
the future, the singular number includes the plural number, and the plural
number includes the singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory and
"may" is permissive; however, the phrases "shall not" and "may not" are
synonymous. Words of a particular gender include all genders. Words shall
be construed according to any applicable definition set forth in either the
Wisconsin State Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code or other Village
ordinance or, in lieu thereof, shall be construed according to accepted
building, land use, scientific, or architectural definition or, in lieu thereof,
according to their customary dictionary definition.
§ 370-6. Administration.
A. Building Inspection Department. The Building Inspection Department
was created by the Village Board of Trustees for the purpose of
administering and enforcing all inspections for building-related
functions required by the Wisconsin State Statutes and Village
ordinances enacted by the Village Board under the direction of the
Building Inspection Superintendent.
B. Building Inspection Superintendent.
(1) The Building Inspection Superintendent or his designees shall
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and all other
relevant state and local laws, rules and regulations.
(2) The Building Inspection Superintendent or his designees may, at all
reasonable hours, enter upon any public or private premises for
inspection purposes and may require the production of the permit
for any building, plumbing, electrical or heating work or any other
§ 370-3 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-6
344:583
permits which may be required. No person shall interfere with or
refuse to permit said access to any such premises.
(3) The Building Inspection Superintendent or his designees shall
perform all administrative tasks required by Village or state laws,
rules and regulations regarding public health, safety and welfare
pertaining to this chapter, including but not limited to the
following:
(a) To administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and, in
particular, the state regulations as referenced in § 370-7 of this
chapter;
(b) To maintain records of all permits issued, inspections made,
work approved and other official actions taken;
(c) To investigate all complaints made and violations found
relating to the location, removal, construction or
reconstruction of all structures or portions thereof;
(d) To assist the Village Attorney in the prosecution of violations of
this chapter;
(e) To be permitted access to the properties and structures during
reasonable hours to make those inspections as deemed
necessary by him or his designees to ensure compliance with
this chapter; if, however, he or his designees are refused entry
after presentation of identification, he or his designees may
procure a special inspection warrant in accordance with the
Wisconsin Statutes; and
(f) To prohibit the construction of any structures or modifications
to any structures until the proper permits have been first
applied for and issued by the Village.
C. Inspectors.
(1) The Building Inspection Superintendent may fill such vacant
positions of inspectors as funded by the Village Board and
approved for filling by the Village Administrator.
(2) Under the direction of the Building Inspection Superintendent, the
Village shall employ or contract with State of Wisconsin certified
inspectors for the inspection and implementation of this chapter.
Nothing in this chapter, however, shall preclude the Village from
hiring or training persons to become fully certified for the building
inspector positions. Inspectors shall have the authority to complete
inspections for the following areas in which they are certified:
(a) Single-family and two-family residential inspectors shall be
certified by the State of Wisconsin as:
[1] Certified Uniform Dwelling Code: construction inspector.
§ 370-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-6
344:584
§ 370-7. Adoption of codes.
The following codes are hereby adopted and incorporated into this chapter
by reference:
[2] Certified Uniform Dwelling Code: electrical inspector.
[3] Certified Uniform Dwelling Code: HVAC inspector.
[4] Certified Uniform Dwelling Code: plumbing inspector.
[5] Certified soil erosion inspector.
(b) Commercial inspectors shall be certified by the State of
Wisconsin as:
[1] Commercial building inspector, which includes
commercial HVAC.
[2] Commercial electrical inspector.
[3] Commercial plumbing inspector.
[4] Certified soil erosion inspector.
(c) The above-noted State of Wisconsin certified inspectors shall
hereinafter be referred to as "inspector(s)."
A. The code titled "Flammable, Combustible and Hazardous Liquids," Ch.
SPS 310, Wis. Adm. Code, and all amendments thereto.
B. In accordance with § SPS 316.015, Wis. Adm. Code, the Wisconsin
Electrical Code, Ch. SPS 316, Wis. Adm. Code, and all amendments
thereto.
C. In accordance with § SPS 320.06, Wis. Adm. Code, the Wisconsin
Uniform Dwelling Code, Chs. SPS 320 to 325, Wis. Adm. Code, and all
amendments thereto.
D. The code titled "Smoke Detectors and Carbon Monoxide Detectors," Ch.
SPS 328, Wis. Adm. Code, and all amendments thereto.
E. In accordance with § 101.12, Wis. Stats., the Wisconsin Heating,
Ventilating and Air Conditioning Code, Ch. SPS 364, Wis. Adm. Code,
and all amendments thereto.
F. The code titled "Existing Buildings Code," Ch. SPS 366, Wis. Adm.
Code, and all amendments thereto.
G. The code titled "Commercial Building Code," Chs. SPS 361 to 366, Wis.
Adm. Code, and all amendments thereto.
H. The code titled "Historic Building Code," Chs. SPS 375 to 379, Wis.
Adm. Code, and all amendments thereto.
§ 370-6 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-7
344:585
§ 370-8. Licenses required for electrical work.
§ 370-9. Compliance required.
No person shall perform any work except in full compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, and in full compliance with the terms and
conditions of any required permit, and in full compliance with the
requirements of any applicable approvals, decisions, orders, judgments
or other requirements made, issued or imposed pursuant to or in the
enforcement of this chapter, and in full compliance with the requirements
of any other applicable Village, county, state or federal statute, ordinance,
code, regulation, permit, approval, decision, order or judgment relating to
land use, land division, environmental protection or development control.
I. In accordance with § 145.13, Wis. Stats., the Wisconsin Plumbing Code,
Chs. SPS 381 to 387, Wis. Adm. Code, and all amendments thereto.
J. The NFPA 54 titled "National Fuel Gas Code" and all amendments
thereto.
K. The code titled "Private Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems," Ch.
SPS 383, is hereby adopted and regulated on behalf of the Village by
Kenosha County.
A. State electrical license required.
(1) All electrical contractors intending to do work in the Village shall
be licensed by the state prior to commencing said work. An
electrical contractor licensed by the state shall complete all
electrical wiring or electrical work done in the Village, including
but not limited to one- and two-family dwellings, outbuildings,
rental buildings, and buildings used for commercial purposes,
except as provided below.
(a) Upon successful permit application, including a plan
demonstrating substantial code knowledge and understanding,
and after a certificate of compliance or occupancy has been
issued for a single-family dwelling, the owner-occupant may
perform electrical operations with the following exclusions:
[1] New electrical services and service upgrades;
[2] Swimming pools, pond electric, spas or hot tubs;
[3] Wiring over 120 volts; or
[4] Any rental property.
(b) If the inspector deems that the owner-occupant is incapable of
installing the wiring per this chapter, then the inspector may
elect not to issue a permit or to condemn the installation and
require the homeowner to hire a licensed electrical contractor.
§ 370-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-10
344:586
§ 370-10. Certified municipality for examination of commercial
building plans and inspections.
§ 370-11. Permit application procedure.
A. Authority. On March 27, 2000, the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services granted the authority and certified the Village of
Pleasant Prairie as a certified municipality to examine commercial
building plans and perform inspections.
B. Inspector. An inspector as referenced in this section shall be authorized
by the Village to enforce the adopted codes and shall be properly
certified by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional
Services as a commercial building inspector.
C. Certified municipality plan examination jurisdiction. The inspector shall
have the authority to review plans, specifications and calculations for
all the types of commercial and public buildings and structures, except
state-owned buildings and structures, proposed to be constructed
within the Village, if the plans are for:
(1) A new building or structure containing less than 50,000 cubic feet
of total volume;
(2) An addition to a building or structure where the area of the
addition results in the entire building or structure containing less
than 50,000 cubic feet of total volume; or
(3) An alteration to an existing building or structure that is less than
100,000 cubic feet of total volume.
D. Certified municipality plan examination waiver. The Village may waive
its jurisdiction for the plan review of a specific project, in which case
the required plans shall be submitted to the Department of Safety and
Professional Services for review and approval prior to issuance of local
permits.
A. Preconditions to issuance of permit. No permit application shall be
deemed complete and no permit shall be issued until all of the
applicable preconditions set out below have first been satisfied. No
permit issued in error shall be valid or effective until all such
preconditions have been satisfied.
(1) A complete application, signed by the owner and licensed
contractor, if applicable, together with all required information and
documentation related to the proposed project to demonstrate
compliance with this chapter, has been filed with the Village
Building Inspection Department;
(2) All fees imposed by or pursuant to § 370-27 of this chapter have
been paid to the Village;
§ 370-10 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-11
344:587
(3) All unpaid overdue forfeitures resulting from violations of any
Village ordinance or code owed by the applicant or the owner of the
property for which the work is proposed have first been paid
pursuant to § 66.0115, Wis. Stats., unless the imposition of such
unpaid forfeiture(s) is being appealed;
(4) With respect to any work proposed for any lot or parcel created in
violation of Chapter 395, Land Division and Development Control,
of the Village Code, all such violations have first been cured, in
accordance with § 395-14B of that chapter;
(5) All outstanding building or zoning violations on the property on
which the work is proposed, regarding which the Village has issued
a written notice of violation, have first been cured, unless the
notice of violation is being appealed; and
(6) The use of the property on which the work is proposed is in
conformance with the provisions of Chapter 420, Zoning
Ordinance, of the Village Code.
B. Binding nature of application.
(1) It shall be the duty of the owner to duly authorize the filing of any
permit application and any information submitted with or in
connection with any such application. Every permit shall be
conditioned upon the accuracy of all such information.
(2) Any permit approved or issued on the basis of materially inaccurate
information may be suspended by the inspector or revoked or
voided by the inspector.
C. Acceptance of permit before commencement of work. It shall be the
duty of the contractor and/or owner to review and accept the terms and
conditions of any permit at least 30 days after said permit has been
approved by the Village and before commencement of said work
pursuant to such permit. Commencement of said work pursuant to a
permit automatically constitutes acceptance of the permit and waives
any right to appeal or challenge the permit decision, the permit or any
condition thereof. Any permit not accepted prior to commencement of
said work may be suspended or revoked or voided by the inspector.
D. Duration of rights pursuant to permit.
(1) Every permit shall automatically expire 60 days from the date of
issuance of the permit if the proposed work has not commenced.
(2) Every permit shall automatically expire one year form the date of
issuance of the permit except as provided below:
(a) Permits for the construction of a new single-family or twofamily
dwelling shall automatically expire two years from the
date of issuance of said permit.
§ 370-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-11
344:588
(b) Permits for the construction of a new commercial building shall
automatically expire two years from the date of issuance of
said permit.
(c) If said permit(s) is a part of a larger project, such as a new
residential or commercial structure, then said permit(s) shall
expire at the same time that said building permit expires.
(d) Permits for temporary work shall automatically expire 60 days
after the date of issuance of said permit.
(3) After such permit expires, or after the permit is revoked or voided,
or while it is suspended, no work requiring such a permit shall be
commenced, continued or resumed until after a new permit is
issued or until after the original permit has been reinstated. A
suspension of the permit tolls the remainder of such permit period.
(4) It shall not be necessary for the Building Inspection Department to
serve any notice declaring said permit null and void.
(5) A valid permit may be extended in writing by the inspector for up to
60 additional days upon a showing of good cause by the applicant
and the payment of any permit extension fee imposed by or
pursuant to § 370-27 of this chapter, provided that the applicant's
rights under the permit have not expired or been revoked or
voided. New regulations that have become effective after the
approval of the initial permit shall be applied to any application for
an extension, and an extension shall not be granted unless the
original application is amended to conform to such new or
amended regulations.
E. Assignment. A permit shall not be assigned to a new contractor unless
the new contractor receives written consent of the inspector, provided
that the rights pursuant to the permit have not expired or been revoked
or voided and that the assignee or successor accepts the permit and
timely satisfies all conditions of the permit.
F. Permit application required.
(1) A complete written application shall be filed with the Village of
Pleasant Prairie on a form supplied by the Village. Without
limitation, such application form shall require the following
minimum information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property;
(b) The name, address, telephone number and e-mail of the
applicant (the person who is authorized to act for the owner in
connection with the application);
(c) The name, address, telephone number and e-mail of the
contractor;
§ 370-11 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-11
344:589
(d) Contractor's license (if applicable);
(e) The street address of the property (if available);
(f) The tax parcel number(s) of the property;
(g) The zoning classification of the property;
(h) The proposed use of the structure as it relates to the
application; and
(i) The estimated value of the proposed work to be completed in
the permit application.
(2) The completed permit application shall include or attach to it the
following documents and information; provided, however, that the
inspector is authorized to waive in writing, on the application or in
a separate written document, the submission of any information
which is readily available to the Village or which the inspector
believes is not required to process the application:
(a) A fully completed written application form as provided by the
Village. Said application shall be signed by the owner and the
licensed contractor, if applicable.
(b) Two sets of complete detailed plans and specifications to
ensure compliance with this chapter, except if a certified
municipality plan examination pursuant to § 370-10 of this
chapter is requested, then four sets of complete building plans
and specifications, which at a minimum shall include the
information as specified in § SPS 361.60(5) and (4), Wis. Stats.
In addition, the applicant shall provide calculations showing
the total volume of the building.
(c) Two sets of state-approved plans for commercial buildings
wherein an applicant is not requesting or meeting the
requirements for a certified municipality plan examination
pursuant to § 370-10 of this chapter.
(d) A copy of the Kenosha County sanitary permit, if an on-site
sanitary sewer system is proposed.
(e) Commercial electrical permits for new construction and Level
2 or higher alterations will require two complete sets of
electrical plans including an emergency egress lighting plan
and an outlet location letter for any new service or service
upgrade.
(f) For a plumbing permit to install a multipurpose piping system
(single- and two-family residential sprinkler system), the
following shall be provided:
§ 370-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-11
344:590
[1] A certificate indicating that the contractor has completed
a State of Wisconsin training program for the installation
of said system; and
[2] A drawing indicating the layout and material proposed to
be used.
(g) If applicable, the required application fee pursuant to § 370-27
of this chapter.
(h) Any other information required by this chapter or requested by
the inspector to process the application.
G. Incomplete application. The inspector is authorized to hold for
completion or deny, in his or her discretion, any incomplete permit
application. With respect to any such application held for completion,
the inspector shall promptly notify the contractor or owner in writing by
first-class mail or by e-mail what information is needed to complete the
application and what, if any, preconditions must be satisfied pursuant to
Subsection A of this section. Any application not completed within 30
days after the filing of the application shall be denied.
H. Application approval/denial.
(1) Upon the Village's receipt of a complete permit application, the
inspector shall approve or deny said application within 10 business
days. The inspector shall have authority to impose any conditions
reasonably based upon the requirements of this chapter. The
inspector shall promptly notify the applicant of the approval, or in
the event that the application is denied, the owner and the
contractor shall be notified in writing by first-class mail or by email.
In the event of denial, the notice shall state the reasons for
the denial.
(2) The inspector shall have the authority to impose any conditions
reasonably based upon the requirements of this section. Additional
conditions to be imposed on any permit shall be the following:
(a) That the owner has duly authorized the contractor to file the
application and all related information and that all information
contained in or submitted in connection with the application is
true and accurate;
(b) That the contractor has a valid state certification;
(c) That the permit and all terms and conditions thereof must be
reviewed and accepted by the contractor prior to
commencement of the proposed work and that such
commencement constitutes acceptance;
(d) That the applicant shall request the required inspections a
minimum of 48 hours in advance and shall request a final
occupancy inspection a minimum of 72 hours in advance;
§ 370-11 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-11
344:591
(e) That the work shall be completed only in full compliance with
the conditions of approval and the required adopted
Department of Safety and Professional Services (SPS) codes or
other federal, state, county or local ordinances or regulations
and must be in accordance with the approved plans,
specifications and other information submitted with the
application; and
(f) That commencement of said work constitutes a waiver of any
right to appeal the decision or permit of the inspector or any
part thereof to the Village Zoning Board of Appeals or to
otherwise challenge such decision or permit.
(3) If a permit is not issued within 30 days after the date on which
notice of approval of said permit was made to the applicant, the
application approval shall automatically be terminated. No permit
shall be issued on the basis of a terminated permit application
approval. The applicant may reapply at any time thereafter without
prejudice.
(4) All non-code-complying and other conditions stated in the
conditional approval notice shall be corrected or met before or
during construction and before occupancy or issuance of a
certificate of compliance of the building or a structure.
(5) If the inspector determines that the plans and specifications
submitted do not substantially conform to the provisions of adopted
Department of Safety and Professional Services (SPS) codes or
other federal, state, county or local ordinances or regulations, the
inspector shall deny plan approval in the following manner:
(a) The plans shall be stamped "Not Approved," signed and dated
by the inspector.
(b) One set of the not-approved plans and specifications shall be
retained by the Village, and the other sets shall be returned to
the applicant with the notice of "not approved."
(c) A notice of the not-approved plans shall be provided in writing
to the applicant and the owner stating the reasons for the
denial.
I. Permit issuance. Following a conditional approval of the permit
application, the inspector or his designee shall promptly notify the
applicant of the conditional approval of the application and the
procedure for issuance of the permit. A permit shall be issued only upon
payment of any permit fees provided in § 370-27 of this chapter.
J. Revisions to approved plans.
§ 370-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-11
344:592
§ 370-12. Inspections.
(1) All revisions and modifications, which involve provisions of this
chapter, made to the approved plans or specifications shall be
submitted to the Village for review.
(2) Any revisions and modifications to the plans shall be approved in
writing by the Village prior to the work involved in the revision or
modification being commenced.
K. Liability. A conditional approval of a plan by the Village shall not be
construed as an assumption of any responsibility on the part of the
Village or the inspector for the design or construction of the building.
A. All inspections, for the purpose of administration and enforcement of
the adopted Department of Safety and Professional Services (SPS)
chapters, shall be performed by an inspector.
B. Inspections shall be conducted by an inspector to ascertain whether or
not the work conforms to the conditionally approved plans, the notice of
conditional approval and the adopted Department of Safety and
Professional Services (SPS) chapters.
C. The inspectors periodically shall make thorough examinations of all the
work pursuant to this chapter.
D. A written record of each inspection shall be prepared and kept by the
Village. The record shall include, at a minimum, the date of the
inspection, the type of inspection, the name of the inspector, the result
of the inspection, and all items of noncompliance noted during the
inspection and any other relevant information.
E. A copy of each inspection record shall be made available to the owner
and applicant; the original inspection record shall be permanently
maintained by the Village.
F. When any work is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the
inspector shall notify the person, firm or corporation owning, using,
operating or installing the same to place it in a safe condition. If
noncompliance items are not corrected, written orders to correct shall
be issued in accordance with Village ordinances. Any person, firm or
corporation failing or refusing to make the necessary repairs or
changes shall constitute a violation punishable in accordance with
Chapter 1, § 1-4, of the Village Code.
G. Inspection types. The following inspections, if applicable to the permit
issued, shall be required:
(1) Erosion control inspection prior to any land disturbance on
commercial buildings performed by the Engineering Department.
(2) Staking inspection is required for all accessory structures or
additions to principal structures prior to work commencing.
§ 370-11 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-12
344:593
§ 370-13. Certificate of occupancy or compliance.
(3) Footing forms inspection is required prior to any concrete being
poured.
(4) Foundation wall inspection is required prior to the backfilling of the
foundation. For all new residential principal structures, a plat of
survey that certifies the top of foundation shall be submitted for
review and approval prior to the foundation being backfilled.
(5) Basement drain tile inspection is required prior to backfilling and
prior to the basement floor being poured.
(6) Electric service inspection is required prior to WE Energies making
the connection.
(7) Rough plumbing inspection is required prior to any plumbing work
being concealed from view.
(8) Rough electrical inspection is required prior to any electrical work
being concealed from view.
(9) Rough HVAC inspection is required prior to any HVAC work being
concealed from view.
(10) Rough carpentry inspection is required after all other rough
inspections are completed and prior to any insulation being
installed.
(11) Insulation inspection is required prior to applying any finish
materials.
(12) Inspection is required prior to obtaining sewer, water and storm
sewer permit for all new one- and two-family homes.
(13) Sewer, water and storm sewer lateral inspection is required prior
to backfill.
(14) Piping from the building drain to the on-site septic tank shall be
inspected by the inspector, and the rest of the system shall be
inspected by the Kenosha County Sanitarian and written
verification shall be submitted to the Village.
(15) Low-voltage wiring inspection.
(16) Fire alarm system wiring inspection.
(17) Any other inspections may be required to ensure compliance with
this chapter and the permit conditions.
(18) Final inspection is required after all work associated with the
permit is completed and prior to occupancy of the building.
(19) Signs (self-illuminated).
§ 370-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-13
344:594
§ 370-14. Suspension, revocation or voiding of permit.
A. Upon completion and prior to occupancy of any new principal structure
or addition thereto and prior to occupancy of a new use within an
existing structure, a written certificate of occupancy or compliance
shall be issued by the Village.
B. The inspector may verbally authorize occupancy if all life and safety
issues are satisfied. Said verbal authorization shall be valid for 30 days,
or such other specified time frame, as determined by the inspector, and
all outstanding issues shall be satisfied prior to the inspector issuing a
written certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance, except as
provided in Subsection D below. The inspector shall make a written
record of such verbal approval and place it in the applicant's file.
Failure to comply with this provision shall result in violations and
penalties as set forth in § 370-26.
C. Commercial projects shall require approval from other Village
departments prior to issuance of a verbal or a written certificate of
occupancy or compliance.
D. All new one- and two-family projects shall require the satisfaction of all
outstanding issues within one year from the issuance of verbal
occupancy. Failure to comply with this provision shall result in
violations and penalties as set forth in § 370-26.
A. In the event that the inspector, prior to the completion of permitted
work pursuant to a valid permit, finds that the work is not in accordance
with the terms and conditions of such permit or the requirements of this
chapter, or that the information on the basis of which the permit was
approved or issued was untrue or inaccurate in material respects, the
inspector may suspend such permit, notify the owner and the
contractor in writing by first-class mail or by e-mail of the reasons for
the suspension and issue a written stop-work order until the problem or
defect is cured. In the event that the owner or the contractor refuses or
fails to cure the problem or defect within the prescribed time following
such notice of suspension, and after conferring with the owner or the
contractor regarding such refusal or failure, the inspector may revoke
the permit and notify the applicant in writing by first-class mail or by email
of the reasons for the revocation and any related violations.
B. In the event that the inspector determines, after the completion of work
done pursuant to any such permit, that the work was not in accordance
with the terms and conditions of such permit or the requirements of this
chapter, or that the information on the basis of which the permit was
approved or issued was inaccurate in material respects, the inspector
shall issue and cause to be served a notice of violation. If such violations
are not cured to the reasonable satisfaction of the inspector within the
prescribed time following service of such notice of violation, the
inspector may, in addition to all other remedies, void the permit and
promptly notify the owner and the contractor and user of the property
§ 370-13 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-14
344:595
§ 370-15. Permit not required.
§ 370-16. Permit required.
No person shall alter, directly or indirectly, or cause the construction,
addition, enlargement, alteration, modification, improvement, conversion,
repair, demolition, relocation, or change of use of new or existing
in writing by first-class mail or by e-mail of the reasons for voiding the
permit.
C. Any work pursuant to a permit which has been revoked or voided is
illegal and a violation of this chapter. If the permit has been revoked, a
new complete application and permit fee shall be submitted to the
Village to complete the work as if the project was starting anew.
A. The following shall not require a permit:
(1) Siding or re-siding of a single-family or two-family dwelling.
(2) Finishing of existing interior surfaces, such as the installation of
cabinetry.
B. The following electrical apparatus and/or equipment manufacture or
repair shall not require an electrical permit:
(1) Any person manufacturing or repairing electrical apparatus and
equipment and employing a competent electrician shall not be
required to have a permit for his testing equipment.
(2) The completion of minor repair work, such as repairing drop cords,
snap switches, replacing fuses or changing lamp sockets.
(3) The installation of portable devices, such as grinders, drills,
washing machines, vacuum cleaners, radios, electric refrigerators,
and similar devices, not permanently wired but intended to be
connected to the circuit by a flexible cord and plug.
(4) The installation, alteration or repair of electrical generation,
transmission or distribution equipment which is owned and
operated by an electrical utility company or the Village.
(5) The installation, alteration or repair of signal or communication
equipment where such equipment is owned and operated by a
public utility company or the Village.
C. It is recognized that it is not practical to list all of the work not requiring
a permit, and therefore it is intended that the above list be only
illustrative. Any individual aggrieved by a failure to list a particular type
of work not requiring a permit in this section shall have the right to file
a written petition explaining the proposed work with the inspector for a
determination as to if the work proposed to be performed requires a
permit to be issued.
§ 370-14 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-16
344:596
residential, commercial, agricultural, recreational or related accessory
buildings and structures within the Village without first obtaining a building
permit for such work from the Village, except as specified in § 370-15 of
this chapter. In addition, any structural changes, changes to mechanical
systems, including plumbing, electrical and heating, air conditioning and
ventilation, and the restoration or repair of an installation to its previous
code-compliant condition as determined by the inspector shall require a
permit to assure full compliance with this chapter.
§ 370-17. Municipal work.
Any work proposed for any property, building or structure owned by the
Village shall be required to follow this chapter, except that no application or
permit fees shall be required for said permit.
§ 370-18. Cash deposit.
§ 370-19. Additional requirements.
In addition to the regulations and requirements adopted in § 370-7 of this
chapter, the following shall be required to promote the purpose and scope
of this chapter:
A. New single-family or two-family structures. Prior to return of the
grading and erosion control cash deposit pursuant to Chapter 381,
§ 381-9E, of the Village Code and in addition to satisfying the
requirements of § 381-9E, all conditions of the related building permit
shall be complied with and a final certificate of occupancy or
compliance shall be issued.
B. Other grading activities. Prior to return of the street sweeping payment
pursuant to Chapter 381, § 381-9F, of the Village Code and in addition
to satisfying the requirements of § 381-9F, all conditions of the related
building permit shall be complied with, and a final certificate of
occupancy or compliance shall be issued.
A. Drain tile. Complete drain tile systems shall be required for all new
structures. Partial drain tile systems shall be required for all additions
to existing buildings where the footings of the addition are at the same
elevation as, or lower than, the lowest footing level of the existing
building.
B. Authority to discontinue electrical system. The electrical inspector may
order the cutting off of all electrical current from any electrical system
which is found to be in an unsafe condition and order the cutting off of
electrical current in cases of emergency and where such electrical
currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the
work of the Village's Fire & Rescue Department. No person shall
reconnect any equipment that is cut off until the electrical inspector
gives permission.
§ 370-16 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-19
344:597
C. Residential electrical service update. Any alterations to the electrical
service shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) All work shall be installed per current adopted NEC, SPS 316101
and We-Energies metering manual.
(2) All dwelling units shall be metered separately.
(3) Any exposed knob and tube wiring shall be replaced.
(4) Receptacles in unfinished basements, crawl spaces, garages,
outdoors and within six feet of a sink shall be ground fault
protected.
(5) Individual branch circuit shall be installed for fixed motor-operated
appliances.
(6) An individual branch circuit is required for furnace.
(7) An individual branch circuit is required for laundry appliances.
(8) Two ground-fault-protected small appliance circuits shall be
provided with a minimum four-foot separation or separate
countertops.
(9) Each bathroom/toilet shall have a ground-fault-protected
receptacle located adjacent to the lavatory.
(10) Garage door openers shall have a ground-fault-protected
receptacle within two feet of the motor.
(11) Outdoor ground-fault-protected receptacles required in the front
and rear of dwelling.
(12) Illumination shall be provided in stairways and exits.
(13) Every habitable room shall have a lighting outlet controlled by a
switch located at the entrance.
(14) Any unsafe or noncompliant installations shall be replaced with
code-complying methods.
D. Temporary electrical work. An application for a permit for temporary
work shall specify the period of time, not to exceed 60 days, in which
such wiring is to remain in service. Electrical service shall be cut off at
the end of this period and shall not again be connected without
permission from the inspector.
E. Energy conservation. In lieu of submitting the required thermal
performance calculations for additions or alterations to a single-family
or two-family dwelling, said dwelling shall meet the following minimum
insulation and energy requirements:
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. SPS 316, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 370-19 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-19
344:598
(1) R-3.5 for the full foundation wall area;
(2) R-11 for the exterior walls adjacent to outside or unconditioned air;
(3) R-25 in cathedral ceilings;
(4) R-25 in floors over unconditioned space;
(5) R-30 in floors over outside air;
(6) R-38 in conventional ceilings; and
(7) U value of 0.51 or less for all glazing.
F. Exhaust fan venting. All exhaust fans shall be oriented in the direction
of discharge, and no unnecessary turns or bends shall be installed from
said fan to the point of discharge unless specified below:
(1) A minimum 50 cubic feet per minute shall be demonstrated.
(2) Full compliance with the manufacturer's specifications shall be
demonstrated.
G. Field drain tile. In the event that field drain tile is encountered during
the excavation of a new principal or accessory structure, the field drain
tile shall be rerouted and reconstructed with rigid pipe identical in
inside diameter to the existing field tile, so as to maintain the integrity
of the drainage system.
H. Floors open to outside air. All insulated framed floors open to outside
air and within 18 inches of earth shall not be allowed without treated
lumber fastened to and completely covering the underside of the
framework.
I. Foundation requirements.
(1) Additions to existing foundations, footings, piers, slabs, etc., shall
be fastened/anchored together using standard engineering
practices and design methods accepted by this code and approved
by the building inspector. Foundations for additions to existing
buildings shall be of like dimension and depth below grade, or
expansion joints shall be utilized.
(2) Foundations for detached structures over 250 square feet and
falling outside the scope of this chapter shall have at minimum a
twelve-inch by twelve-inch grade beam or thickened edge slab
foundation around the entire perimeter.
(3) Foundations for structures over 800 square feet shall conform to
this chapter or be designed through structural analysis. Concrete
slabs shall be completely reinforced with six-inch by six-inch by No.
10 woven wire mesh or other equivalent and approved method of
primary reinforcement.
§ 370-19 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-19
344:599
J. Manufactured homes and manufactured home communities. This
chapter shall apply to all manufactured homes and additions thereto,
where not in conflict with state or federal law.
K. Moving buildings.
(1) The written application shall be submitted to the Village a
minimum of 30 days prior to the date the building is proposed to be
moved. In addition, the following information shall be submitted:
(a) A description of the structure proposed to be moved.
(b) A plat of survey, pursuant to Subsection Q of this section,
indicating the location that the building or structure is
proposed to be located.
(c) Moving a building off site shall require:
[1] A copy of the proposed and alternate routes. Prior to
submitting said routes to the Village for final review and
approval, the routes, if applicable, shall be approved in
writing by the Village of Pleasant Prairie Police
Department.
[2] A copy of a permit or other written approval by the state, if
the route includes travel on a state highway.
[3] A copy of a permit or other written approval by the county,
if the route includes travel on a county highway.
[4] A copy of a permit or other written approval related to any
utilities that may be impacted by the move.
(2) If the move involves traveling on a Village road right-of-way, then a
cash deposit of $5,000 shall be deposited with the Village
Treasurer in an interest-bearing account prior to issuance of the
moving permit to guarantee payment for any repair or damage
resulting from moving said building. Upon completion of the
moving, the Village shall inspect the route for any damages. The
inspector shall notify the owner in writing of any damages to be
repaired and the time frame for said repair. If the damages are not
repaired as specified in the written notice, the cash deposit on file
with the Village shall be used to repair said damages. If the cost to
repair said damages exceeds the cash deposit, the Village shall
invoice the property owner for the additional costs. Upon
completion of the move and compliance with the permit, the cash
deposit shall be refunded to the property owner, with interest, less
a six-percent administrative fee and less any amount paid by the
Village to repair said damages. Any damages to any state or county
road or any non-Village utility shall be settled between the
applicant and the state, county or non-Village utility.
§ 370-19 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-19
344:600
(3) Any addition, alterations and/or repairs made to the building
moved within or into the Village shall be made to conform to this
chapter in its entirety. All other areas of the building shall be made
safe for purposes of health, safety and welfare of the occupants.
L. Municipal sanitary sewer and water installation. All municipal sanitary
sewer and water shall be pursuant to the requirements of the Village
Code.102 In addition, prior to installation of municipal sanitary sewer or
water lateral, the following requirements shall be met:
(1) New single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings shall be
completely weathertight and insulated, permanent electrical
service shall be installed and energized, the sump pump shall be
permanently installed and operating, the furnace shall be installed
and operating (dictated by weather), and the basement floor shall
be complete. At least one energized receptacle shall be provided on
each floor of the dwelling to ensure that the sump pump remains
electrically connected during construction.
(2) Existing single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings. All
water lateral work shall be coordinated for installation of a Village
water meter immediately after the cross-connection inspection has
been approved.
(3) One- and two-family residential water meters. Upon approval of a
water lateral into a building, the inspector shall notify the Public
Works Department for installation of a water meter. The valve shall
be sealed with a meter seal until the meter is installed by the
Village Public Works Department. All water meters shall be sealed
with a Village-issued meter seal. Removal of said seal by anyone
other than the Village Public Works Department shall be an offense
subject to penalties as provided in this chapter.
(4) All commercial structures.
(a) Sanitary sewer laterals shall be plugged at the downstream
side of the inspection manhole(s) until the plumbing contractor
sets all of the final fixtures. All sanitary lines shall be flushed
clean prior to removal of said plug.
(b) Water laterals shall be coordinated with the plumbing
inspector and Fire & Rescue Department. Any water used
during the construction process shall be metered with a
Village-issued temporary water meter.
M. Property building or structure maintenance, unsafe buildings and
razing of buildings.
(1) The inspector is designated to carry out the provisions of
§ 66.0413, Wis. Stats.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Sewers, and Ch. 355, Water.
§ 370-19 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-19
344:601
(2) If the inspector finds that any building, structure, or part thereof is
dangerous to life, health or adjoining property by reason of bad
condition, defective construction, overloaded floors, decay, lack of
guards against fire, general dilapidation, lack of routine
maintenance or other cause, he shall notify the owner thereof to
cause the same to be made safe or to be removed, maintained or
corrected as in the judgment of the inspector may be necessary,
and he shall affix a notice of such order in a conspicuous place on
the outside wall of the building. No person shall remove or deface
such notice.
(3) The owner of such building or structure shall thereupon
immediately cause the same to be made safe, removed or repaired
as ordered, and if any such building is used for any purposes
requiring a license, the inspector may revoke such license until the
building is made safe or removed to the satisfaction of the
inspector.
(4) Where public health or safety requires immediate action, the
inspector shall enter upon the premises, with such assistance as
may be necessary from the Village Fire & Rescue Department and
the Police Department, and cause the building or structure to be
made safe or to be removed. The expense of such work may be
recovered by the Village in an action against the owner.
(5) If a property owner proposes to raze a building or structure, the
following shall apply:
(a) A written application shall be submitted to the Village pursuant
to § 370-11 of this chapter. In addition, the following
information shall be submitted:
[1] Written verification shall be provided to the inspector from
the Village Fire & Rescue Department that no hazardous
fire conditions are present or that no fire hazards could
result from the razing.
[2] The inspector shall determine if an asbestos assessment is
required. An asbestos assessment will be required if the
inspector cannot make a definite determination on any
portion of the building. If an asbestos assessment is
required, then the property owner shall contract with a
licensed abatement contractor to perform said assessment
and provide the written results to the inspector. If the
result of the asbestos assessment determines that there is
asbestos in the structure or building, then the asbestos
shall be properly removed, and the licensed abatement
contractor shall provide written verification that the
asbestos has been properly removed.
§ 370-19 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-19
344:602
[3] Written verification shall be provided to the inspector from
the electric and gas companies that the electric and gas
services have been properly disconnected.
(b) If a permit to raze a building or structure is issued pursuant to
§ 370-11 of this chapter, the following additional conditions of
the permit shall be required:
[1] If applicable, the municipal sanitary sewer and water
system shall be properly capped off by a master plumber
or utility contractor. The ditch shall be left open and
secured by the contractor for the inspector to verify
proper capping.
[2] If applicable, the private on-site sewage disposal system or
holding tank shall be properly filled and abandoned. The
contractor shall provide to the Village a copy of the
pumping ticket from a licensed solid waste carrier to verify
that the solid waste has been properly removed from the
tank, prior to filling the tank with slurry or granular
material and prior to the required inspection. In addition,
the area shall be left open and secured by the contractor
for the inspector to verify proper abandonment.
[3] If applicable, the private well shall be properly abandoned
per the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
(DNR) requirements. The contractor shall provide the
Village with a copy of the Wisconsin DNR well
abandonment report.
[4] The foundation shall be removed and/or properly filled. In
addition, all junk and building debris shall be removed
from the property, not landfilled into the property and
inspected, prior to the foundation being filled.
[5] If applicable, all existing signage shall be removed from
the site.
[6] If applicable, municipal sanitary sewer, water and garbage
collection charges will continue to be billed for the
property until all conditions of the permit have been
satisfied and final inspection by the inspector has been
passed.
[7] The building or structure will not be removed from the tax
assessment rolls until all conditions of the permit have
been satisfied and final inspection by the inspector has
been passed.
N. Space heaters. Unvented fuel-burning heating equipment is strictly
prohibited in all dwellings, habitable structures, attached garages, and
§ 370-19 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-19
344:603
in all commercial buildings unless otherwise specifically allowed by the
Department of Safety and Professional Services.
O. Stormwater systems. Connections at stormwater sump pumps to storm
sewer piping shall be made with approved vented caps or similar
approved methods to prevent the introduction of foreign objects.
Stormwater drains shall be provided with compliant vented caps.
P. Sump pumps for new construction. All residential structures shall
require a sump pump that is permanently connected and operational as
soon as possible after the electrical service to the structure is
completed. In no case shall municipal sewer and water service be
installed prior to permanent installation of a sump pump. All such sump
pumps shall discharge at least eight feet from the foundation wall until
the sump pump discharge can be permanently connected to the
municipal storm sewer system, if available.
Q. Top of foundation and grade levels. The height of all proposed top of
foundations and grades for single-family, two-family, and multifamily
structures shall conform to the following:
(1) "Top of foundation" is defined as the highest elevation taken at the
top of the foundation wall. Finish grade is assumed to be 0.67 foot
below the top of the foundation wall elevation.
(2) Existing grade levels at property lines shall not be altered or
changed to an appreciable extent in relation to grade levels of
adjoining property.
(3) A plat of survey shall include the following information:
(a) All grades shown on the plat of survey shall utilize the
Wisconsin Plane Coordinate System (south zone) vertical
control datum;
(b) All items required pursuant to Chapter 381, § 381-9B, of the
Village Code;
(c) The elevation at the crown of road at the corners and center of
the lot;
(d) The highest point of the proposed top of foundation; and
(e) Finish grade at foundation of abutting residential structures;
the finished first-floor elevations are also acceptable.
(4) Top of foundation elevation shall conform to the following:
(a) The top of foundation shall comply with the approved
engineering plans for a subdivision located within the Village,
except as provided in Subsection Q(4)(b) below. Any changes to
the top of foundation shall be approved in writing by the
developer of the subdivision and the developer's engineer, as
§ 370-19 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-19
344:604
authorized by the Village. An amended development
agreement shall be provided by the developer and approved
by the Village for all new subdivisions which modify the top of
foundation or drainage plans. Such agreement shall indemnify
and hold harmless the Village for any and all liabilities
associated with the modifications or changes to the Villageapproved
engineering plans.
(b) If there are no approved engineering plans on file with the
Village, the top-of-foundation elevation shall be approved by
the inspector based on the following criteria:
[1] An average of the top of foundation of the adjacent
structures. Example: Existing Dwelling No. 1: 650 feet;
Existing Dwelling No. 2: 656 feet; top of foundation for
new dwelling: 653 feet.
[2] The top of foundation shall not be less than one foot or
more than two feet above the center line of the average
height of the adjacent roadway, except that if the existing
lot grade is more than two feet above existing road grade,
the inspector may approve a top of foundation that
exceeds two feet above the center of the average height of
the adjacent roadway.
[3] In the event that extraordinary or unusual circumstances
exist on the property, the Village may consider altering the
top of foundation; however, the Village may impose other
requirements to ensure that the structure will not cause a
drainage problem.
[4] In all cases, the top-of-foundation elevation shall be
approved by the Village.
R. Unsafe electrical equipment. No person shall keep, offer for sale or sell
within the Village any appliance, equipment or fixtures designed for or
intended to be used for the production, transmission or utilization of
electric current or power unless said appliances, equipment or fixtures
are approved by the electrical inspector in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the Wisconsin State Electrical Code.
S. Well abandonment. All persons abandoning a well within the Village
shall complete the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
(DNR) Form 3300-5B. The property owner/contractor shall submit one
copy to the DNR and one copy to the Village, and one copy shall be
retained by the person/contractor performing the abandonment
procedures. If the abandonment is not performed by a licensed well
contractor, an inspection shall be required prior to filling the well
casing.
§ 370-19 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-19
344:605
§ 370-20. Continuation of existing uses.
Buildings and structures that were legally created and whose use and
occupancy are legal may be continued without change, except for
regulations related to backflow prevention, fuel-burning appliance venting,
smoke detection, carbon monoxcide detection, connection of the perimeter
drain tiles to the municipal sanitary sewer system, property maintenance
and other requirements as deemed necessary by the inspector for the
general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.
§ 370-21. Emergency work.
In the event that emergency work is required, the person doing or causing
such work to be done shall report the same to the Building Inspection
Department the next business day after beginning work. Such work shall be
done in accordance with the provisions of this code. The required permit
and inspection process shall be followed and initiated at this time.
§ 370-22. Temporary work.
All temporary work shall comply with this chapter.
§ 370-23. Stop-work order.
T. Workmanship. An inspector has the authority to require that
construction, alteration, repair and removal of buildings or structures
be performed in accordance with the standards of good workmanship.
A. The inspector may issue a stop-work order for construction to be
stopped for any of the following reasons:
(1) If written violations are not corrected within 30 days.
(2) Construction significantly deviates from approved and permitted
plans, as determined by the inspector.
(3) When construction is dangerously unsafe, as determined by the
inspector.
(4) The inspector is denied access to property.
B. The stop-work order shall be posted at the construction site, and the
property owner and contractor shall be notified in writing of the
reasons for issuance of the stop-work order and corrections required
prior to the order being lifted.
C. The inspector is authorized to remove the stop-work order and allow
construction to continue upon correction of said violation(s).
§ 370-19 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-24
344:606
§ 370-24. Appeals.
Any appeal to this chapter, except for as it relates to § 370-14 of this
chapter, shall be pursuant to Chapter 18, Article V, Zoning Board of
Appeals, of this Code.
§ 370-25. Liability.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility or liability of any person engaged in any activity within the
scope of this chapter for damages to person or property caused by any
defect therein or therefrom, nor shall the Village be held as assuming any
such responsibility or liability by reason of the issuance or revocation of any
license, permit or certificate, or the inspection or reinspection authorized
by this chapter, or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any work
as authorized by this chapter, nor shall the Village be held liable for any
damages resulting from the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 370-26. Violations and penalties.
Enforcement of this chapter shall be by means of the issuance of a stopwork
order, withholding of building permits, imposition of forfeitures and
injunctive action. Forfeitures shall be pursuant to Chapter 1, Article I, of the
Village Code.
§ 370-27. Building permit fees.
A. Fees required.
(1) Any construction, use, occupancy or other work requiring a permit,
certificate, or approval within the Village's ordinances shall not
commence, resume or continue until all required approvals have
been made and all required fees as required by this chapter or any
other Village ordinance are paid to the Village Treasurer.
(2) Whenever any construction, use, occupancy or other work
requiring a permit, certificate, or approval within the Village's
ordinances is commenced, resumed or continued before such a
permit, certificate or approval is issued, the fees for reviewing and
processing the application for such permit shall be tripled to take
into account the added difficulty and time required to process the
application.
(3) If an application for a permit, certificate, or approval is withdrawn
after the review and processing of such application has
substantially commenced, the application fee shall not be refunded.
(4) If two of the same inspections fail, a reinspection fee shall be paid
to the Village prior to scheduling each additional inspection, except
for commercial, including multifamily, electrical permits, wherein
the reinspection fee shall be paid to the Village if the first
inspection fails and prior to scheduling each additional inspection.
§ 370-24 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-27
344:607
B. Single-family residential permit fees. [Amended 4-20-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-16]
Type Fee
State building fee $55
Plan review (for new structures) $175
Plan review for additions $75
Plan review for alteration $50
Plan review for large detached
accessory structures
$40
Dwelling unit $0.35 per square foot; $250
minimum
Additions $0.25 per square foot; $75
minimum
Alteration with structural changes
(examples: changing roof pitch;
adding a dormer; replacing
damaged roof trusses; adding a new
window/door; enlarging a window or
door opening)
$0.10 per square foot, $50
minimum; or where square
footage cannot be calculated,
$35 minimum for first 2
structural changes; 3 or more
structural changes $50
Alteration without structural
changes (example: interior
alteration)
$0.05 per square foot of
affected area; $50 minimum
Certificate of compliance or
occupancy
New homes $100
Additions $75
Alterations $50
Large accessory structures such as
attached and detached garages, pole
barns and carports (over 151 square
feet)
$0.05 per square foot; $30
minimum
Small accessory structures such as
sheds, gazebos or structures (less
than 150 square feet)
$30
Decks/sport courts $0.10 per square foot; $30
minimum
New electric service $180
Additional electric subpanel $50 per panel
Electric service update $100 per panel
Electric service repair $50
§ 370-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-27
344:608
Type Fee
Electric wiring extension/rewiring
(fee based on area being added or
remodeled)
$0.10 per square foot; $50
minimum
Electric for swimming pool or pond $50
New heating units (gas, oil or
electric) for a new home
$150 per unit plus $25 for each
additional unit
Additional heating unit added to an
existing home
$50
Furnace update/water heater $50 per unit
Fireplace $50 per fireplace
Heating pipe extension $0.10 per square foot of area
affected; $50 minimum
Air-conditioning unit $50 per unit
Lawn sprinkler system $50
Plumbing fixtures
New home $10 per fixture; $150 minimum
Other $10 per fixture; $50 minimum
Sewer connection $75
Water connection $75
Storm sewer connection $75
Temporary city water/sewer service
fee
Current City of Kenosha rates
plus 25% Village administrative
fee
Renewal of permit 50% of original permit fee; $50
minimum
Reinspection $50 each inspection
Early start footings and foundations* $150
Special inspection* $350
Overtime inspections* $75 per hour, 2-hour minimum
Overtime plan review* $75 per hour, 2-hour minimum
New single-family house
administrative fee
$200 per dwelling unit
*Shall be preapproved by the Building Inspection Superintendent
C. Two-family residential permit fees. [Amended 4-20-2015 by Ord. No.
15-16]
§ 370-27 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-27
344:609
Type Fee
State building fee $55
Plan review (for new structures) $250
Plan review for additions to a twofamily
unit
$100
Plan review for alteration $50
Plan review for large detached
accessory structures
$40 each
Dwelling unit $0.35 per square foot; $250
minimum
Additions/remodel $0.25 per square foot; $50
minimum
Alteration with structural changes
(examples: changing roof pitch;
adding a dormer; replacing
damaged roof trusses; adding a new
window/door; enlarging a window or
door opening)
$0.10 per square foot, $50
minimum; or where square
footage cannot be calculated,
$35 minimum for first 2
structural changes; 3 or more
structural changes $50
Alteration without structural
changes (example: interior
alteration)
$0.05 per square foot of area
affected; $50 minimum
Certificate of compliance or
occupancy
New structure $200
Additions $75
Alterations $50
Large accessory structures such as
attached and detached garages, pole
barns and carports (over 151 square
feet)
$0.05 per square foot; $50
minimum
Small accessory structures such as
sheds, gazebos or structures (less
than 150 square feet)
$30
Decks/sport courts $0.10 per square foot; $25
minimum
New electric service $360
Additional electric subpanel $50 per panel
Electric service update $100 per panel
Electric wiring extension/rewiring
(fee based on area being added or
remodeled)
$0.10 per square foot; $50
minimum
Electric for swimming pool or pond $50
§ 370-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-27
344:610
Type Fee
New heating units (gas, oil or
electric) for a new two-family
structure
$150 per unit plus $25 for each
additional unit
Additional heating unit added to an
existing two-family unit
$50 per unit
Furnace update/water heater $50 per unit
Fireplace $50 per fireplace
Heating pipe extension $0.10 per square foot of area
affected; $50 minimum
Air-conditioning unit $50 per unit
Lawn sprinkler system $50
Plumbing fixtures
New structure $10 per fixture; $300 minimum
Other $10 per fixture; $50 minimum
Sewer connection $75 per connection
Water connection $75 per connection
Storm sewer connection $75 per connection
Temporary city water/sewer service
fee
Current City of Kenosha rates
plus 25% Village administrative
fee
Renewal of permit 50% of original permit fee; $50
minimum
Reinspection $35 each inspection
Early start footings and foundations* $200
Special inspection* $350 per unit
Overtime inspections* $75 per hour, 2-hour minimum
Overtime plan review* $75 per hour, 2-hour minimum
Two-family building administrative
fee
$400 per building
*Shall be preapproved by the Building Inspection Superintendent
D. Commercial permit fees, excluding multifamily. [Amended 4-20-2015
by Ord. No. 15-16]
(1) Application fee for commercial certified municipality plan review
for a new principal or accessory structure or a tenant buildout or
tenant change of an existing structure with alterations:
§ 370-27 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-27
344:611
Square Feet
Building
HVAC and
Lighting
Building
Only
HVAC
Only
Lighting
Only
Less than 2,500 $290 $220 $130 $85
2,500 to 5,000 $390 $290 $200 $100
5,001 to 10,000 $520 $430 $220 $120
Over 10,000 but
not more than
100,000 cubic
feet
$810 $570 $330 $165
(2) Other fees.
Type Fee
Application fee for commercial
plan review for a tenant change
without alterations
$50
Application fee for a commercial
plan review with state-approved
plans
$100
New buildings and additions $10 per 1,000 cubic feet;
$150 minimum
Alteration with structural changes
(examples: changing roof pitch;
adding a dormer; replacing
damaged roof trusses; adding a
new window/door; enlarging a
window or door opening)
$0.10 per square foot, $100
minimum; or where square
footage cannot be calculated
$50 minimum for first 2
structural changes; 3 or more
structural changes $100
Alteration without structural
changes (example: interior
alterations)
$0.10 per square foot of area
affected; $50 minimum
Accessory structures and
additions
$6.50 per 1,000 cubic feet;
$200 minimum
Interior demolition $160
Certificate of compliance or
occupancy
New structure $200
Additions $100
Accessory structure $100
Alteration $75
Tenant change or temporary
occupancy
$55
Fireplace $50 per fireplace
§ 370-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-27
344:612
Type Fee
Heating units $10 per 50M BTU input; $50
minimum
Air conditioning $10 per 12M BTU input; $50
minimum
Heating and air-conditioning
distribution duct
$1 per 100 square feet; $50
minimum
Hoods and exhaust systems $50 per hood or system
Lawn sprinkler $50
Plumbing fixtures
New structure $10 per fixture; $100
minimum
Other $10 per fixture; $50 minimum
Sewer connection $0.50 per linear foot; $75
minimum
Water connection $0.50 per linear foot; $75
minimum
Storm sewer connection $0.50 per linear foot; $75
minimum
Fire protection loop $0.50 per linear foot, $75
minimum
Building drain, storm $0.50 per linear foot, $75
minimum
Building drain, sanitary $0.50 per linear foot, $75
minimum
Manholes $20 each
Catch basins $20 each
Restraint systems $20 each
Temporary city water/sewer
service fee for business and
institutional
Current City of Kenosha rates
plus 25% Village
administrative fee
Temporary city water/sewer
service fee for industrial
$115
Electrical for a new principal or
accessory structure or addition
encompassing all electrical work
$35 plus $0.03 per square
foot or addition, $100
minimum
Reinspection fee (no access or
noncompliance)
$50
Failure to call for inspection $75
Minimum permit fee $100
§ 370-27 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-27
344:613
Type Fee
Electrical: replacement,
modifications and miscellaneous
items
Light, switch and convenience
outlet
$0.50 each
Power receptacles over 150
volts
$5 for first 30 amps plus $6
for each additional amp
Lighting fixtures $0.50 per fixture
Tubular lamp, such as
fluorescent
$0.25 per tube
Exterior luminaries: ground
lights, wall packs, pole lights
$3 each
Temporary service $40
Service First 200 amps or less $25,
plus $10 for each additional
100 amps or fraction thereof
Medium-voltage service (new
or replace)
$250
Range, oven, clothes dryer, water
heater, dishwasher, disposal, etc.
$5 each
Refrigeration unit $5 for first 5 HP plus $1 for
each additional HP or fraction
thereof
Furnace unit heater $5 each
Air conditioner $5 for first 5 tons, plus $1 for
each additional ton or fraction
thereof
Combination heating and cooling
unit, split systems
$20
Feeder, subfeeder branch circuit
and raceway
$10 per 100 amps
Medium-voltage feeder $100
Construction trailer feeder $50
Motors $0.50 per HP; $1 minimum
Dispenser: gasoline, fuel oil,
permanent vending machines and
well pumps
$6 each
Generator, transformer, reactor,
rectifier, capacitor, welder,
converter and electric furnace
$1 per kw
Medium-voltage transformer $100
§ 370-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-27
344:614
Type Fee
Electric unit heating device (VAV) $5 per device
Dimmer and rheostats, occupancy
sensors
$2 each
Swimming pool/pond (wiring/
grounding)
$25
Sign, fluorescent, neon,
incandescent, LED (primary
power)
$25 each
Wire way, trough, cable tray $0.50 per foot/$25 each
Alarm initiating and signaling
devices
$1 per device
Fans: bath, paddle and
miscellaneous under 1 HP
$1 per device
Hydromassage and hot tubs $10 per device
Bus duct, trenches $25/$0.25 per foot
Exit light/EM light $5 per system
Fire alarm control panels and
NAC panels
$25
Renewal of permit 50% of orig. permit fee; $50
minimum
Reinspection, excluding electrical $50 each inspection
Early start footings and
foundations*
$500
Special inspection, excluding
electrical*
$350
Overtime inspection, excluding
electrical*
$75 per hour, 2-hour minimum
Overtime plan review* $75 per hour, 2-hour minimum
*Shall be preapproved by the Building Inspection Superintendent
Low voltage permit:
Control panel $15
Power supply $5
REX $1
Card readers $1
Key pads $1
Bio-readers $1
Door strikes $1
Indoor camera $5
§ 370-27 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-27
344:615
Outdoor camera $5
Door magnet switches $1
Multitechnology sensors $1
Data racks $5
Data/phone jacks $0.50
WAPs $5
Patch panels $2
Punch down blocks $2
UPS $5
Speakers $1
Receiver $5
TV outlet jacks $0.50
Splitters/boosters $1
Low-voltage/signaling/
communication cable
$10/$0.01 per foot
Signaling devices $1
Initiating devices $1
Relays $2
Thermostats $2
VAVs (low voltage) $5
Dampers (low-voltage) $5
Signs: LED (secondary power) $25
E. Multifamily permit fees (three or more units per structure). [Amended
4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-16]
(1) Application fee for multifamily certified municipality plan review
for a new principal or accessory structure or modifications to a
principal and accessory structure.
Square Feet
Building
HVAC and
Lighting
Building
Only
HVAC
Only
Lighting
Only
Less than 2,500 $290 $220 $130 $85
2,500 to 5,000 $390 $290 $200 $100
5,001 to 10,000 $520 $430 $220 $120
Over 10,000
but not more
than 100,000
cubic feet
$810 $570 $330 $165
(2) Other fees.
§ 370-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-27
344:616
Type Fee
Multifamily administrative fee $300 per building for 3 to 8
units; $400 per building for 9
to 24 units; $500 per building
over 24 units
Application fee for a multifamily
plan review with state-approved
plans
$150
Multifamily buildings $0.30 per square foot; $500
minimum per building
Alteration with structural changes
(examples: changing roof pitch;
adding a dormer; replacing
damaged roof trusses; adding a
new window/door; enlarging a
window or door opening)
$0.10 per square foot, $50
minimum; or where square
footage cannot be calculated
$35 minimum for first 2
structural changes; 3 or more
structural changes $50
Alteration without structural
changes (example: interior
alteration)
$0.05 per square foot of area
affected; $35 minimum
Certificate of compliance (new,
additions or alterations)
$50 per unit for first 8 units,
$25 per unit for next 9 to 24
units, $10 per each unit over
24 units
Additions/alteration (per unit) $0.25 per square foot, $75 per
unit minimum
Siding or roofing (replacement or
adding shingles or siding to an
existing structure)
$25 per building
Large accessory structures such
as attached and detached
garages, pole barns and carports
(over 151 square feet)
$0.10 per square foot; $50
minimum
Small accessory structures such
as sheds, gazebos or structures
less than 150 square feet
$25
Decks/sport courts $0.10 per square foot; $25
minimum
New heating units $50 per unit
Air conditioning $50 per unit
Fireplace $50 per fireplace
Heating and air-conditioning
distribution duct
$1 per 100 square feet; $50
minimum
Lawn sprinkler system $50
§ 370-27 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-27
344:617
Type Fee
Plumbing fixtures
New structure $10 per fixture; $250
minimum
Other $10 per fixture; $50 minimum
Sewer connection $0.50 per linear foot; $75
minimum
Water connection $0.50 per linear foot; $75
minimum
Storm sewer connection $0.50 per linear foot; $75
minimum
Fire protection loop $0.50 per linear foot, $75
minimum
Building drain, storm $0.50 per linear foot, $75
minimum
Building drain, sanitary $0.50 per linear foot, $75
minimum
Manholes $20 each
Catch basins $20 each
Restraint systems $20 each
Temporary city water/sewer
service fee for multifamily
Current City of Kenosha rates
plus 25% Village
administrative fee
Electrical for a new principal or
accessory structure or addition
$35 plus $0.03 per square
foot; $100 minimum
Reinspection fee (no access or
noncompliance)
$50
Failure to call for inspection $75
Minimum permit fee $50
Light switch and convenience
receptacle
$0.50
Power receptacle over 150 volts $5
Lighting fixtures: incandescent/
fluorescent/LED
$0.50
Exterior luminaires: ground lights,
wall packs, pole lights
$3
Temporary service and temporary
wiring
$40
Service switch, each or alteration
thereof
First 200 amperes $25
§ 370-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-27
344:618
Type Fee
Plus if over 200 amperes,
additional per 100 amps or a
fraction thereof
$10
Feeder, subfeeder, branch circuit
and raceway, per 100 amps or
fraction thereof
$10
Range, oven, clothes dryer,
dishwasher, disposal, water heater
$5
Refrigeration unit up to 5 HP $5 minimum, plus $1 per HP
over 5 HP
Furnace, unit heater $5
Air conditioner up to 5 tons $5, plus $1 per ton over 5 tons
Combination heating and airconditioning
unit, split systems
$20
Medium-voltage service (new or
replace)
$250
Medium-voltage feeder $100
Medium-voltage transformer $50
Each motor, per HP or fraction
thereof
$0.50; $1 minimum
Dispense: gasoline, fuel oil,
permanent vending machines, and
well pump
$6
Generator, transformer, reactor,
rectifier, capacitor, welder,
converter and electric furnace
$1/kw
Construction trailer $25
Electric unit heating device, VAVs $5
Dimmer, rheostat, occupancy
sensor
$2
Swimming pool (electrical wiring
and grounding)
$25
Sign: fluorescent, neon or
incandescent, LED (primary
power)
$25
Wire way, trough, cable tray $0.25 per foot; $10 minimum
Exit/EM light $5
Fans: bath, paddle and
miscellaneous under 1 HP
$1
Hydromassage and hot tubs $10
§ 370-27 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-27
344:619
Type Fee
Bus duct and trench $25/$0.50 per foot
Fire alarm initiating and signaling
devices
$1
Fire alarm control panel, NAC
panels and industrial control
panels
$25
Renewal of permit 50% of original permit fee;
$50 minimum
Reinspection, excluding electrical $50 each inspection
Early start footings and
foundations*
$350/building
Special inspection, excluding
electrical*
$350
Overtime inspection, excluding
electrical*
$150
Overtime plan review* $150
*Shall be preapproved by the Building Inspection Superintendent
Low voltage permit:
Control panel $15
Power supply $5
REX $1
Card readers $1
Key pads $1
Bio-readers $1
Door strikes $1
Indoor camera $5
Outdoor camera $5
Door magnet switches $1
Multitechnology sensors $1
Data racks $5
Data/phone jacks $0.50
WAPs $5
Patch panels $2
Punch down blocks $2
UPS $5
Speakers $1
Receiver $5
§ 370-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-27
344:620
§ 370-28. Property record maintenance fees.
TV outlet jacks $0.50
Splitters/boosters $1
Low-voltage/signaling/
communication cable
$10/$0.01 per foot
Signaling devices $1
Initiating devices $1
Relays $2
Thermostats $2
VAVs (low voltage) $5
Dampers (low-voltage) $5
Signs: LED (secondary power) $25
F. Miscellaneous permit fees. [Amended 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-16]
Type Fee
Razing principal building $50 plus $0.03 per square foot of
building razed; $100 minimum, $250
maximum fee per building
Razing accessory building $35 each
Moving principal buildings off
the site
$150 plus actual overtime costs for
police escort
Moving accessory building on
site
$35 per building
Moving accessory building off
the site
$50 plus actual overtime costs for
police escort
A. The Village of Pleasant Prairie Office of Assessments creates and
maintains property records for all real estate parcels within the Village
of Pleasant Prairie in which it has jurisdiction. Pursuant to § 70.32(1),
Wis. Stats., all properties that are issued building permits are field
reviewed, described, and valued by "actual view." This means that each
building permit requires assessment personnel to:
(1) Initially process existing records or create new records;
(2) Physically review, on site, the purpose of each building permit to
document all property description additions and/or alterations; and
(3) Process the information gathered in the field to determine an
assessed value.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 370-27 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-28
344:621
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING — A structure principally utilized for the
storage of farm equipment and machinery, crop production, or the
shelter and feeding of livestock.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING — A building or structure that houses a
business use, enterprise, or activity at a greater scale than home
industry involving the distribution of, or retail or wholesale marketing
of, goods or services.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, cooking, and sanitation.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A single building or
structure containing more than one dwelling unit under single
ownership and in which the owner rents or leases the right to occupy
any of the dwelling units to a tenant(s).
RESIDENTIAL — Used by occupants as a home, abode, domicile, or
dwelling that has housekeeping and cooking facilities for the occupants
only. A residential property may have multiple dwelling units.
RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM — A multiple dwelling or development
containing individually owned dwelling units and jointly owned and
shared areas and facilities.
C. Fees to be charged for property record maintenance. Every person
receiving an approved building permit from the Village in which said
building permit requires an employee of the Assessor's office to
physically view on site any descriptive property change in an effort to
maintain the property record shall pay a property record maintenance
fee commensurate with the type of building permit issued by the
Village.
D. Schedule of fees for property record maintenance.
Schedule of Fees for Property Record Maintenance
Permit Type
Residential/
Agricultural
up to 3
Dwelling Units;
Each Unit
Residential
Condominiums:
4+ Units; Each
Building
Multifamily
Residential:
4+ Units; Each
Building
Commercial
Buildings
Base Each Unit Base Each Unit
New
residential
dwellings
200 350 50 400 50
New
commercial
buildings
400
§ 370-28 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 370-28
344:622
Schedule of Fees for Property Record Maintenance
Permit Type
Residential/
Agricultural
up to 3
Dwelling Units;
Each Unit
Residential
Condominiums:
4+ Units; Each
Building
Multifamily
Residential:
4+ Units; Each
Building
Commercial
Buildings
Base Each Unit Base Each Unit
Structural
addition
80 80 80 165
Structural
alteration
80 80 80 110
Nonstructural
alterations
80 80 80 110
Accessory
structures
30 30 30 50
Porch, deck,
patio,
canopy,
gazebo
30 30 30 30
Plumbing 15 15 15 20
HVAC
addition/
upgrade
15 15 15 20
Electrical
addition/
upgrade
15 15 15 20
Fireplace 15 15 15 20
Exterior
siding;
roofing;
windows
15 15 15 20
Swimming
pool
15 15 15 20
Building
demolition/
move off site
15 15 15 15
§ 370-28 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 370-28
344:623
Chapter 381
LAND DISTURBANCE, CONSTRUCTION SITE MAINTENANCE
AND EROSION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management and stormwater
drainage system facilities— See Ch. 298.
Stormwater storage facilities — See Ch. 300.
Building and Mechanical Code — See Ch. 370.
Land division and development control — See
Ch. 395.
Design standards and construction
specifications — See Ch. 405.
§ 381-1. Authority.
§ 381-2. Findings and purpose.
A. This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by § 61.354, Wis.
Stats. Except as otherwise specified in § 61.354, Wis. Stats., § 61.35,
Wis. Stats., applies to this chapter and to any amendments to this
chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter are deemed not to limit any other lawful
regulatory powers of the Village Board of Trustees.
C. The requirements of this chapter do not preempt more stringent
erosion and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any
of the following:
(1) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) administrative
rules, permits or approvals, including those authorized under
§§ 281.16 and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
(2) Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated in
rules by the DNR under § NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. Findings.
(1) The Village Board of Trustees finds that debris and runoff from land
disturbances, grading and filling activities, and construction sites
carry a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to
public road rights-of-way, wetlands, shoreland areas, floodplains,
waterways, and waters of the state in the Village.
(2) Unregulated land disturbances, grading, and filling activities can
adversely affect downstream properties, public road rights-of-way,
wetlands, shoreland areas, floodplains, waterways, and waters of
the state.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate land disturbances,
grading, and filling activities and to require erosion control practices
§ 370-28 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 381-2
344:624
§ 381-3. Jurisdiction and applicability.
that will reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants leaving
construction sites during land development or land disturbance
activities. Specific purposes are to:
(1) Preserve natural resources; to protect the quality of the waters of
the state, or other waterways in the Village; further the
maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control
water pollution; prevent and control soil erosion; protect spawning
grounds, fish and aquatic life; regulate building sites, placement of
structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and scenic beauty;
and promote sound economic growth, by minimizing the amount of
sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from
construction activity to wetlands, shoreland areas, floodplain,
waterways and any waters in the Village.
(2) Regulate land disturbance, grading, and filling activities to
safeguard the interests of the Village of Pleasant Prairie by
ensuring that activities are designed and constructed with sound
engineering practices and accepted standards.
A. Jurisdiction. This chapter applies to land disturbance construction
activities on lands within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village
of Pleasant Prairie (referred to as the "Village"), as well as lands located
within the supervised drainage basin area within the Village of Bristol
pursuant to the 1997 Settlement and Cooperation Agreement.
B. Applicability.
(1) This section applies to all land disturbance, land development,
grading, and filling activities within the Village's jurisdiction.
(2) This chapter does not apply to the following:
(a) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices.
(b) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities and practices.
(c) Activities conducted by a state agency, as defined under
§ 227.01(1), Wis. Stats., but also including the Office of District
Attorney, which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a
memorandum of understanding entered into under
§ 281.33(2), Wis. Stats.
(d) Minor land activities that meet all the following criteria:
[1] Contains less than 400 square feet of land disturbance;
[2] Involves less than five cubic yards of fill;
[3] Activity does not block, impede, or alter drainage; is not
being completed for stormwater purposes; does not cause
§ 381-2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 381-3
344:625
§ 381-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
1997 SETTLEMENT AND COOPERATION AGREEMENT — The Settlement
and Cooperative Agreement entered into by and between the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, the Pleasant Prairie Water Utility, the Pleasant Prairie
Sewer Utility District D, the Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility District 1 and the
Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility District F and the Town of Bristol, the Town
of Bristol Utility District No. 3, the Town of Bristol Utility District No. 5 and
the Town of Bristol Water Utility District.
AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — Defined pursuant to
§ 281.16(1), Wis. Stats.
AGRICULTURAL LAND USE — The use of the land for the planting,
growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops for human or livestock
consumption and the pasturing or yarding of livestock.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A calendar year of precipitation,
excluding snow, which is considered typical.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — A structural or nonstructural
measure, practice, technique or device employed to avoid or minimize soil,
sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state or any other
waterways in the Village.
BUSINESS DAY — A day the office of the Village is routinely and
customarily open for business.
CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land
disturbance construction activity that is being conducted without a valid
permit.
upstream ponding or backwater problems; or adversely
affect adjacent or downstream properties.
[4] Activity does not alter or change Village-approved site or
lot grading and drainage plan topography, lot grades,
drainage patterns, or other approved plan requirements
and provisions.
[5] Activities that are not located within or in close proximity
to a wetland, floodplain, navigable waterway, or other
environmentally sensitive area.
(3) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements above, this chapter
applies to construction sites of any size that are likely to result in
runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities
or receiving water body, that alter or change stormwater drainage
runoff, that cause undue channel erosion, or that increase water
pollution by scouring or transporting of particulate matter or that
endanger property or public safety as determined by the Village.
§ 381-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 381-4
344:626
CONSTRUCTION SITE — An area upon which land disturbance
construction activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger plan of
development or sale where multiple separate and distinct land disturbance
construction activities may be taking place at different times on different
schedules but under one plan.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a
specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency,
and total depth of rainfall.
DNR TECHNICAL STANDARD — The DNR, in accordance with § NR 151.31,
Wis. Adm. Code, approved Stormwater Construction and Post-Construction
Technical Standards. These standards set forth specific minimum
requirements needed to plan, design, install and maintain a wide array of
conservation practices aimed at preserving the land and water resources of
Wisconsin. They are based on current research, field experience, the best
available technology.
DRAINAGEWAY or WATERWAY — A river, streambed, or defined overland
swale or channel utilized for the passage of water, sediment or other
materials from one area to another.
EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away by the
action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
EROSION CONTROL PLAN — A comprehensive land disturbance plan
developed to address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of
soil particles or rock fragments during construction, including a written
description of the number, location, sizes, and other pertinent information
of control measures designed to meet the requirements of this chapter
submitted by the applicant for review and approval by the Village.
FINAL STABILIZATION — All land disturbance construction activities at the
construction site that have been completed and, where a uniform perennial
vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least 70% of
the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures, or that employs equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
LAND DISTURBANCE CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography,
stormwater drainage, existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover that
may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement
of sediment into waters of the state or other waterways in the Village.
Land disturbance construction activity includes clearing and grubbing,
demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities.
LAND DIVISION — Any division or conveyance of land or of any interest in
land that results in the creation of one or more additional lots or parcels,
including, without limitation, any subdivision, large lot subdivision or minor
land division. Notwithstanding the foregoing definition, the creation of
any condominium, other than a conversion condominium or condominium
involving a maximum of one principal building per lot or parcel, shall be
deemed to be a land division. A land division can be legally created or
accomplished only by means of a preliminary and final plat approved by the
§ 381-4 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 381-4
344:627
Village Board or, in the case of a condominium, by means of condominium
instruments approved by the Village Board in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 395.
LAND USER — Any person operating, leasing, renting, or having made
other arrangements with the landowner by which the landowner authorizes
use of his or her land.
LAND-DEVELOPING ACTIVITY — The construction of building(s), house(s),
building or housing additions, road(s), parking lot(s), driveway(s),
sidewalk(s), patio(s), or other similar facilities.
LANDOWNER — Any person holding title to or having interest in land.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — A level of implementing best
management practices (BMPs) in order to achieve a performance standard
specified in this chapter which takes into account the best available
technology, cost effectiveness and other competing issues such as human
safety and welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic
properties and geographic features. This provides flexibility to the Village
Engineer in evaluating ways to meet the performance standards and which
may vary on a case-by-case basis depending on the performance standard
and site conditions.
MINOR LAND ACTIVITY — Land disturbance activities that are limited to
small landscaping or other minor projects that involves a limited area and
minor fill quantities, as may be determined by the Village.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
POLLUTANT — Defined pursuant to § 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
POLLUTION — Defined pursuant to § 281.01(10), Wis. Stats.
RUNOFF — The stormwater or precipitation, including rain, snow- or
icemelt, irrigation or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet
or channelized flow.
SEDIMENT — The settleable solid material that is transported by runoff,
suspended within runoff or deposited by runoff away from its original
location.
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land disturbance or land-developing activity is proposed in the
permit application.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the Village which requires that
all construction activity on the site be stopped.
STORM SEWER — A part of the stormwater drainage system which consists
of a pipe or conduit for collecting and/or conveying stormwater runoff or
unpolluted water.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins,
curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets
§ 381-4 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 381-4
344:628
all of the following criteria: is designed or used for collecting water or
conveying runoff; is not part of a combined sewer system; and discharges
directly or indirectly to waters of the state or other waterways in the
Village.
SUPERVISED DRAINAGE BASIN AREA — Pursuant to the 1997 Settlement
and Cooperation Agreement, those portions of the Village of Bristol within
the drainage basins tributary to the Village of Pleasant Prairie, as defined
on Attachment G of the 1997 Settlement and Cooperation Agreement on file
with the Village Clerk.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Defined pursuant to § 281.01(18), Wis. Stats.
§ 381-5. Applicability of maximum extent practicable.
Maximum extent practicable applies when a person who is subject to a
performance standard of this chapter demonstrates, in writing, with
engineering rationale and data, to the Village Engineer's satisfaction that
a performance standard is not achievable and that a lower level of
performance is appropriate. In demonstrating that a performance standard
is not achievable and that a level of performance different from the
performance standard is the maximum extent practicable, the best available
technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing
interests such as protection of public safety and welfare, protection of
endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic
properties shall be taken into account.
§ 381-6. Technical standards.
A. Technical standards. BMPs required to comply with this chapter shall
meet the following design criteria, standards, and specifications:
(1) Applicable design criteria, standards and specifications identified
in the DNR Technical Standards.
(2) Applicable design criteria, standards and specifications set forth in
Chapter 405 of the Village Code.
(3) Applicable requirements as set forth in Chapter 298, Stormwater
Management and Stormwater Drainage System Facilities, of the
Village Code.
(4) Other design guidance and technical standards identified or
developed by the DNR under Subchapter V of Ch. NR 151, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(5) Soil loss prediction tools [such as Universal Soil Loss Equation
(USLE)] when using an appropriate rainfall or runoff factor (also
referred to as the "R factor") or an appropriate design storm and
precipitation distribution, and when considering the geographic
location of the site and the period of disturbance.
§ 381-4 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 381-6
344:629
§ 381-7. Performance standards for construction sites under one
acre.
§ 381-8. Performance standards for construction sites of one acre
or more.
(a) WDNR Technical Standards and/or WDNR guidance
procedures shall be used to document compliance with the
performance standards.
A. Erosion and sediment control practices. Erosion and sediment control
practices at each site where land-disturbing construction activity is to
occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following:
(1) The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles.
(2) The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into storm sewer
inlets, adjacent waterways, wetlands, adjacent properties, and
waters of the state.
(3) The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities.
(4) The transport by runoff of chemicals, cement, and other building
compounds and materials on the construction site during the
construction period into unauthorized areas, including adjacent
properties, waterways, storm sewers, wetlands, and waters of the
state.
B. Location. The BMPs shall be located so that treatment occurs before
runoff leaves the construction site or enters storm sewers, waterways,
wetlands, and waters of the state.
C. Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with this chapter shall be
implemented as follows:
(1) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or
installed before land-disturbing activities begin.
(2) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until
final stabilization.
(3) Final stabilization activities shall commence when land-disturbing
activities cease and final grade has been reached on any portion of
the site.
(4) Temporary stabilization activities shall commence when landdisturbing
activities have temporarily ceased and will not resume
for a period exceeding 14 calendar days.
(5) BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment
control shall be removed.
§ 381-6 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 381-8
344:630
A. Erosion and sediment control practices. Erosion and sediment control
practices at each site where land-disturbing construction activity is to
occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following:
(1) The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles.
(2) The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into storm sewer
inlets, adjacent waterways, wetlands, adjacent properties, and
waters of state.
(3) The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities.
(4) The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles.
(5) The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in
downstream waterways.
(6) The transport by runoff of chemicals, cement, untreated wash
water, and other building compounds and materials on the
construction site during the construction period into unauthorized
areas, including adjacent properties, waterways, storm sewers,
wetlands, and waters of the state.
B. Sediment performance standards. The following erosion and sediment
control practices shall be employed:
(1) BMPs that, by design, discharge no more than five tons per acre
per year, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the sediment
load carried in runoff from initial grading to final stabilization.
(a) Credit may be given toward meeting the sediment
performance standard for limiting the duration or area, or
both, of land-disturbing construction activity or for other
appropriate mechanisms.
(b) If BMPs cannot be designed to meet the sediment performance
standard, the erosion control plan shall include a written, sitespecific
explanation of why the sediment performance
standard cannot be met and how the sediment load will be
reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
C. Preventative measures. The erosion and sediment control plan shall
incorporate all of the following:
(1) Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to surface
waters and waterways.
(2) Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of topsoil.
(3) Minimization of land-disturbing activities on slopes of 20% or more.
(4) Development of spill prevention and response procedures.
§ 381-8 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 381-8
344:631
§ 381-9. Site erosion and sediment control plan.
D. Location. The BMPs shall be located so that treatment occurs before
runoff leaves the construction site or enters storm sewers, waterways,
wetlands, and waters of the state.
E. Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be
implemented as follows:
(1) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or
installed and inspected before land disturbance construction
activities begin.
(2) Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until
final stabilization.
(3) Final stabilization activities shall commence when land-disturbing
activities cease and final grade has been reached on any portion of
the site.
(4) Temporary stabilization activities shall commence when landdisturbing
activities have temporarily ceased and will not resume
for a period exceeding 14 calendar days.
(5) BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment
control shall be removed.
A. Erosion and sediment control plan requirements for sites of one acre or
more. Land-disturbing and land development activities covering one or
more acres shall include the following:
(1) An erosion and sediment control plan statement that briefly
describes the site, the development schedule, and BMPs that will
be used to meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Civil grading and erosion control plans and other applicable
requirements specified in Chapter 405 of the Village Code.
(3) Calculations to show compliance with the performance standards
of this chapter.
(4) Applicable requirements specified in Chapter 298, Stormwater
Management and Stormwater Drainage System Facilities, of the
Village Code.
(5) Site plan of existing conditions. A map of the existing site
conditions at a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet showing the
site and immediate adjacent areas, including but not limited to:
(a) Property site boundaries and adjacent lands which accurately
identify the site location;
(b) Property owner's and contractor's name, address and
telephone number;
§ 381-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 381-9
344:632
(c) A graphic scale and North arrow;
(d) Road right-of-way lines and road names;
(e) Location of lakes, streams, wetlands, shorelands, channels,
ditches and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent
to the site;
(f) Location of the one-hundred-year floodplains, flood-fringes and
floodways, where applicable;
(g) Identification of predominant soil types;
(h) General location of vegetative cover proposed to remain and
not disturbed, and areas which will be vegetated following
construction;
(i) Location and dimensions of stormwater drainage systems and/
or direction of natural drainage patterns on and immediately
adjacent to the site;
(j) Locations and dimensions of utilities, structures, roads,
highways and paving;
(k) Existing and proposed site topography at one-foot contours;
(l) Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt piles;
(m) Locations and dimensions of all construction site control
measures, such as silt filter fences, hay bales or sedimentation
basins, necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter;
(n) Location of orange construction fence for delineation of
environmental protection areas such as wetlands, woodlands,
and floodplains;
(o) Location of six-foot perimeter construction site fencing and
proposed hours of construction activities;
(p) Location of construction entrances [graveled driveway(s)] and
stone tracking pads;
(q) Location of on-site job trailers, parking areas for construction
vehicles, such as graveled and paved parking area, and
location of equipment staging areas;
(r) Location of garbage dumpster(s);
(s) Adjacent property driveways and road openings;
(t) For the commercial, manufacturing, industrial, multifamily or
institutional uses, a plan which shows that the roof drain
system is interconnected directly to the underground storm
sewer system in the parking lot, the locations of the
underground storm sewer system and where the downspouts
§ 381-9 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 381-9
344:633
are connected directly to the underground storm sewer
system;
(u) Location and limits of land disturbance activities;
(v) Location of all structural and nonstructural controls;
(w) Location of areas where stabilization practices will be used;
(x) Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after
major grading activities;
(y) Areas used for infiltration of post-construction stormwater
runoff;
(z) A sequence of construction of the site, including stripping and
clearing; rough grading, construction of utilities,
infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and
landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on
which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure
of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary
erosion and sediment control measures and establishment of
permanent vegetation;
(aa) Estimates of total area of the site and area of the site that is
expected to be disturbed by construction activities;
(bb) Existing data describing the surface soil as well as subsoils;
(cc) Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources
Conservation Service soil information where available; and
(dd) Any other information as may be required by the Village
Engineer, or designee, to evaluate the application.
B. Erosion and sediment control plan requirements for construction sites
under one acre. Content of the erosion control plan for land disturbance
and land-developing activities covering less than one acre or individual
single-family home site or two-family home site shall include the
following:
(1) Site plan of existing conditions. A map, drawn by the Wisconsinregistered
land surveyor or a Wisconsin professional engineer, of
the existing site conditions at a scale of at least one inch equals 40
feet showing the site and immediate adjacent areas, including but
not limited to:
(a) Grading and erosion control plan and/or plat of survey
requirements per Chapter 405 of the Village Code;
(b) Property site boundaries and adjacent lands which accurately
identify the site location;
§ 381-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 381-9
344:634
(c) Property owner's and contractor's name, address and
telephone number;
(d) A graphic scale and North arrow;
(e) Existing and proposed road right-of-way lines and road names
on site and adjacent to the site;
(f) Location of lakes, streams, wetlands, shorelands, channels,
ditches and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent
to the site;
(g) Location of the one-hundred-year floodplains, flood-fringes and
floodways, where applicable;
(h) General location of vegetative cover proposed to remain and
not disturbed;
(i) Location and dimensions of stormwater drainage systems and/
or direction of natural drainage patterns on and immediately
adjacent to the site;
(j) Locations and dimensions of utilities, structures, roads,
highways and paving;
(k) Existing and proposed elevations at the property corners and
at all corners of the proposed structure(s), and bench mark
elevation;
(l) Existing and proposed elevations every 25 feet along each
property line and the center line of any drainage swales or
other required location as requested by the Village Engineer,
or designee; the location of each point shall be dimensioned
along the property line (alongside property lines, begin at the
front property line, and along rear property lines, begin at the
high point) and shall match the master grading plan (if
available);
(m) Existing and proposed elevation of the high point(s) and
direction of the drainage with spot elevations at a minimum of
25 feet apart along the proposed drainage routes; these points
shall be dimensioned as measured from the property lines;
(n) Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt piles;
(o) Locations and dimensions of all construction site control
measures, such as silt filter fences, hay bales or sedimentation
basins, necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter;
(p) Location of orange construction fence for delineation of
environmental protection areas such as wetlands, woodlands,
and floodplains;
§ 381-9 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 381-9
344:635
(q) Location of six-foot perimeter construction site fencing, and
proposed hours of construction activities;
(r) Location of construction entrances (graveled driveway);
(s) Location of job trailers and on-site parking area for
construction vehicles (graveled and paved parking area);
(t) Location of garbage dumpster; and
(u) Location of sidewalks, patios and all other impervious surfaces.
C. Additional erosion control plan measures. The following requirements
shall be met on all sites:
(1) Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by
temporary sedimentation basins or other appropriate control
measures identified in the DNR Technical Standards, as may be
amended from time to time. Water may not be discharged in a
manner that causes erosion of the site, adjacent land or receiving
channels.
(2) Waste and material disposal.
(a) All waste and unused building materials, such as but not
limited to garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, oil,
toxic materials, or hazardous materials, shall be properly
disposed of and are not allowed to be carried by runoff into a
receiving channel or stormwater drainage system.
(b) Garbage dumpsters shall be located on the construction site by
the contractor throughout the construction project for the
disposal of unwanted building materials and debris. Garbage
dumpsters shall be emptied periodically to avoid debris from
blowing out and onto the site.
(3) Tracking. Each site shall have graveled or paved roads, graveled or
paved access driveways, and graveled or paved parking areas of
sufficient width and length installed prior to any excavation or
topsoil stripping on the site in order to prevent sediment from
being tracked onto public and private roadways.
(a) Any sediment or mud tracking reaching a public or private
road shall be removed by street cleaning (not flushing) before
the end of each working day or more frequently if tracking
causes a public nuisance to the traveling public.
(b) Stone tracking pads shall meet the DNR Technical Standards.
All gravel driveways shall be maintained by the builder or
contractor throughout the construction project; however, the
landowner shall ultimately be the responsible party.
§ 381-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 381-9
344:636
(c) Each site shall provide sufficient parking areas on site for all
construction trailers, construction equipment, and
construction-related building materials. No constructionrelated
trailers, equipment, or building materials shall be
located on the public rights-of-way overnight, unless approved
by the Village.
(d) All trailer unloading and loading of construction equipment
shall be conducted on site.
(4) Vegetation preservation. Whenever possible, existing trees,
shrubbery and grasses shall be preserved on the construction site
to prevent erosion.
(a) In those locations where the site has been disturbed,
revegetation shall take place as soon as practicable, upon
completion of the construction. Revegetation involves seeding,
sodding or mulching of bare soil as soon as possible.
(b) If construction is completed after September 15 of any given
year, seeding or sodding may be delayed to the following year.
Applying mulch or temporary seed, such as rye or winter
wheat, is recommended if weather permits. Straw bales or
filter fences must be maintained until final seeding or sodding
is completed in the spring or no later than June 1 of the
following year.
(5) Storm drain inlet and catch basin protection. All storm drain inlets
and catch basins shall be protected meeting the accepted design
criteria, standards and specifications of the Village and the DNR
Technical Standards, as may be amended from time to time.
(6) Site erosion control.
(a) Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the
site shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if practical.
(b) All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical
sequence to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one
time.
(c) All disturbed ground left inactive for 14 or more days shall be
stabilized by temporary or permanent seeding; temporary or
permanent seeding and mulching; sodding; DNR-approved
polymers; or equivalent control measures. If temporary
seeding is used, a permanent cover shall also be required as
part of the final site stabilization. Seeding or sodding shall be
conducted as specified in the DNR Technical Standards or by
the Village.
(d) Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than 10 cubic
yards of material should not be located with a downslope
§ 381-9 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 381-9
344:637
§ 381-10. Permit required.
drainage length of less than 25 feet to a roadway or
drainageway.
(e) Any soil or dirt pile shall be removed upon the completion of
the project and prior to occupancy permits, unless approved by
the Village.
D. Maintenance of erosion control measures. All silt fences, hay bales,
sedimentation basins and other control measures necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter shall be maintained by the applicant or
subsequent landowner during the entire period of the land disturbance
and land development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure
adequate performance and to prevent nuisance conditions. These
erosion control measures shall be removed by the applicant or
subsequent landowner upon stabilization of the area.
A. Permit required. No landowner or land users may commence a land
disturbance, land development, or filling activity as defined in this
chapter without first submitting an erosion control permit application
and an erosion control plan for review, submitting the application
review fee and receiving an erosion control permit from the Village. By
submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the Village staff
to enter onto the site to obtain information required for the review and
inspection of the erosion control and site maintenance measures.
B. Review of erosion control plan and permit application. If the Village
determines that the erosion control application or the erosion control
plan is lacking the necessary information or is not in compliance with
this chapter, the applicant shall be notified of the inadequacy as soon as
practical after review. Within 10 business days of the receipt of the
erosion control application, the Village shall review the application and
the erosion control plan to determine whether the requirements of this
chapter are met.
(1) If the application materials comply with this chapter, the Village
staff shall approve the erosion control plan, inform the applicant
and issue the erosion control permit.
(2) If the application materials are incomplete or do not comply with
this chapter, the Village shall inform the applicant that further
information is required. Upon receipt of the additional information,
the Village shall again determine whether the erosion control plan
meets the requirements of this chapter. If the erosion control plan
is still not approved, the Village shall inform the applicant in
writing of the reasons for the denial.
C. Permits.
(1) Duration. Permits shall be valid for a period of 180 days or the
length of a building permit or other construction activity authorized
§ 381-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 381-10
344:638
by the Village, whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The
Village may extend the period one or more times, upon request of
the applicant, for up to an additional 180 days, at no additional
cost. The Village may require additional or replacement of control
measures as a condition of the extension if they are necessary to
meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Permit conditions. All valid permits shall require the permittee to:
(a) Notify the Village within 48 hours of commencing the land
disturbance or land-developing activity.
(b) Notify the Village for inspection upon the completion of any
erosion control measures within 14 business days after their
installation.
(c) Notify the Village upon completion of the project and when the
site has been stabilized.
(d) Obtain approval in writing from the Village prior to modifying
the application and erosion control plan.
(e) Install and maintain all erosion control measures as identified
in the approved erosion control plan.
(f) Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage
systems, control measures and other facilities identified in the
erosion control plan.
(g) Repair any areas which indicate siltation or erosion damage to
adjoining surfaces and drainageways resulting from landdeveloping
or disturbance activities.
(h) The owner shall inspect the erosion control measures after
each rain of 0.5 inch or more and at least once each week,
make needed repairs, keep a record of all inspections and
provide a copy of said inspection reports to the Village upon its
request.
(i) Additional conditions as specified in Chapter 298 and Chapter
405 of the Village Code.
(j) Provide any additional conditions as may be required to ensure
compliance with this chapter and any other federal, state,
county or Village requirements.
(k) The owner is responsible to keep a copy of the approved
erosion control plans and permit conditions on the project site.
D. Grading and erosion control cash deposit.
(1) Prior to the issuance of an erosion control permit land disturbances
of less than one acre, including an individual single-family site or
two-family site, the landowner shall provide a cash deposit of
§ 381-10 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 381-10
344:639
$1,000 to the Village in order to provide a guarantee that
construction site and erosion control maintenance and grading and
drainage work at the proposed site have been restored properly
and final site surveys are completed.
(2) Such cash deposit shall be deposited by the Village Treasurer in an
interest-bearing account and returned to the landowner, except for
a six-percent administrative processing fee, only after the items
listed below have been successfully completed and approved by the
Village.
(a) All required culverts and all other required drainage structures
or appurtenances shall meet Village specifications and
approved grading and drainage plans. All such drainage
culverts and structures shall be of appropriate size, gauge,
cross or length, and such structures shall be properly installed
at the required elevations and locations and in undamaged
condition and free of any silt or other deposits.
(b) All required ditches, swales, berms, drainage easements and
waterways located within the boundaries of the referenced site
or within the adjacent road right-of-way and area lying
adjacent to the referenced site shall be graded to the proper
gradients and side slopes, shall lie at the required elevations
and locations, shall be seeded or sodded and shall be covered
with healthy growing grass in accordance with Villageapproved
grading and drainage plans.
(c) The finished or final yard elevation and slope around the
perimeter of any new structure along with the entire site area
shall be final graded and finished with topsoil to the required
elevations as shown on the building permit plat of survey
submitted at the time of building permit issuance.
(d) All roof drainage and sump pump discharge shall be outletted
to the street yard, natural drainageway or approved storm
sewer system so as not to saturate, accumulate or damage the
subject property or adjacent properties.
(e) Gutters and downspouts or roof leaders and downspouts shall
be installed on all principal structures in order to direct water
runoff away from the structures to the street yard, natural
drainageway or approved storm sewer system.
(f) The site shall be cleared of all rubbish, garbage, brush, tree
limbs, debris, construction material or other unused materials,
and all clay or fill piles shall be removed from the site.
(g) A plat survey - final occupancy certification per Chapter 405 of
the Village Code shall be submitted showing final as-built
elevations as approved by the Village.
§ 381-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 381-10
344:640
[1] If the structure is completed in the nongrowing season, the
site shall be rough graded to prevent runoff to adjacent
properties. In addition, the lot shall be stabilized as
approved by the Village, and the required erosion control
measures (silt fence, gravel drive, etc.) shall remain in
good repair until the site can be final graded and
stabilized. However, the site shall be completed and a plat
of survey — final occupancy certification submitted by
landowner and approved by the Village prior to return of
any portion of the cash deposit.
(h) The entire property shall be seeded or sodded and must be
covered with healthy growing grass.
(3) At the time that the above requirements are completed and all
related inspections are satisfied, the deposited cash would be
promptly returned with interest, less an administrative finance
processing fee of 6%.
(4) If the requirements are not completed, the Village will notify the
owner to complete the required work within a reasonable time
period. Upon failure to complete the work, the Village is authorized
to complete the work and charge the work against the deposited
cash and accrued interest. If the work completed by the Village is
less than the deposited cash and accrued interest, the remainder
will be returned to the landowner. Additional costs to complete the
work will be assessed to the property at the end of the year and
placed on the tax assessment roll.
E. Street-sweeping cash deposit. Prior to an erosion control permit being
issued for land disturbance associated with preliminary grading, mass
grading or any project, other than individual permits for single-family
and two-family dwellings or minor land activities, the landowner shall
submit a street-sweeping cash deposit to guarantee to the Village that
the conditions of the erosion control permit and this chapter are being
followed as they relate to maintaining the public right-of-way and
stormwater drainage system. The cash deposit shall be used if the
Village determines that the landowner or his contractors have not kept
the right(s)-of-way clean from mud tracking, if erosion control measures
are damaged or if there is damage to stormwater drainage
improvements. The Village shall notify the owner if any mud tracking or
damaged erosion control measures or stormwater drainage
improvements exist, providing them with a time frame to clean the
streets or fix the damaged erosion control measures or stormwater
drainage improvement. If the road is not clean and the damaged
erosion control measures or stormwater drainage improvements are
not completed in the time frame specified, the Village may complete the
work and draw upon the street-sweeping cash deposit for the actual
costs. If the cash is depleted prior to the project being completed, the
owner shall post another cash deposit in the same amount. The cash
§ 381-10 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 381-10
344:641
§ 381-11. Modification of erosion control requirements.
deposit or any portion, less a 6% administrative processing fee, will be
timely refunded on completion of the project.
F. Road opening/work in the right-of-way permit.
(1) Any work within the Village's right-of-way may require a permit
pursuant to Article III of Chapter 305 of this Code.
(2) Any work within the state's or county's rights-of-way typically
requires a permit. A copy of said permit shall be submitted to the
Village prior to issuance of an erosion control permit.
G. Fees. The landowner or land user shall pay the following fees to the
Village at the time a proposed erosion control plan is filed and an
application is submitted to assist in defraying the cost of review and
evaluation:
(1) Erosion control plan review fee for filling or land disturbance on
residential lots, including multifamily lots/buildings, at the time a
principal structure is proposed: $100 per lot or building.
(2) Plan review fee for filling or land disturbance for minor land
activities, maintenance activities, and on existing residential lots,
including multifamily lots/buildings: $40 per lot or building.
(3) Erosion control plan review fee for certified survey maps (NOTE:
Individual erosion control permits are still required for each lot/
unit/building.): $75 per each certified survey map. Required only if
creating two or more new lots.
(4) Mass grading erosion control review fee for new subdivisions,
multifamily, commercial, industrial, institutional, or recreational, or
other mass grading of a site (NOTE: Individual erosion control
permits are still required for each lot/unit/building.): $150 per site
plus $5 per 1,000 square feet of disturbed site area, with a
maximum of $2,000.
A. The Village Engineer, or designee, shall have the authority, on a caseby-
case basis, to waive the requirement of the erosion control plan and/
or installation of the erosion control measures for minor land activities,
if the project does not affect stormwater runoff and construction debris
and runoff from the construction activity or land disturbance are not
anticipated, due to the topography of the land, to carry a significant
amount of sediment or other pollutants to waters or public road rightsof-
way of this state, county, or Village.
B. The waiving of the erosion control plan and/or installation of the erosion
control measures does not invalidate any other requirements set forth
in this chapter.
§ 381-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 381-12
344:642
§ 381-12. Inspections.
§ 381-13. Enforcement; violations, and penalties.
The following methods of enforcement in any combination thereof are
authorized against any landowner or responsible party that is found to be in
violation of any provision of this chapter:
A. The Village shall inspect permitted construction sites as often as
necessary to ensure compliance with the erosion control plan.
B. If land disturbance or land-developing activities are being conducted
without a permit, the Village shall enter and inspect the land pursuant
to the provisions of § 66.0119(1), (2), and (3), Wis. Stats.
A. Stop-work order. The Village may issue a stop-work order if the work
being done does not comply with Village standards, is not being done
correctly, does not have required approvals or permits from the Village
or other agencies having jurisdiction, or is deemed unsafe to the public.
B. Compliance order. The Village shall notify the owner in writing of any
noncomplying activity. The compliance order shall describe the nature
of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule of remedial action,
and additional enforcement action that may be taken.
C. Forfeiture. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $500 and the
costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
D. If the violations are likely to result in damage to private properties,
public facilities, waters of the state or other waterways in the Village,
the Village may take emergency actions necessary to prevent such
damage.
E. The owner or responsible party is responsible for any costs incurred by
the Village to bring the violation into compliance with any compliance
order. The Village shall mail an invoice for any such work to the owner
or responsible party. All invoices shall be paid within 30 days. For
invoices not paid within 30 days, there is a penalty of 1.5% per month
due on the unpaid invoice balance, along with an additional 10%
penalty if the outstanding invoice, interest, and penalty are placed on
the tax roll (a lien against the property). The right of the Village to
assess a lien against the property shall be one of the remedies available
to the Village but shall not be the exclusive remedy. The Village may
also sue for a money judgment for any invoices which are past due.
F. The Village may seek enforcement of violations of this chapter through
a court of equity located in Kenosha County.
§ 381-12 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 381-14
344:643
§ 381-14. Appeals.
Any appeal to this chapter shall be pursuant to Chapter 18, Article V, Zoning
Board of Appeals, of this Code.
§ 381-15. Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is judged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the chapter shall remain in force and not be affected by such
judgment.
Chapter 390
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 18.
Land division and development control — See
Ch. 395.
Zoning Ordinance — See Ch. 420.
§ 390-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to §§ 62.23(2) and (3), 61.35 and 60.22(3) of the Wisconsin State
Statutes, the Village of Pleasant Prairie is authorized to prepare and adopt
a comprehensive plan, by ordinance, as defined in § 66.1001(1)(a) and (2) of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 390-2. Purpose and intent.
A. The Comprehensive Plan provides a long-range guide for the Village of
Pleasant Prairie officials, staff, and citizens to effectively address future
development and natural resource protection in the Village through the
year 2035 and sets forth Village planning goals and objectives.
B. The Village Board and affected commissions and committees of the
Village shall refer to the Comprehensive Plan as a matter of course in
their deliberations on planning issues and give the plan due weight
when making decisions on such matters, particularly with regard to the
statutory requirements for consistency between the Village
Comprehensive Plan and the Village Zoning and Land Division and
Development Control Ordinances.103
C. The Comprehensive Plan is intended to provide general awareness and
understanding of Village planning goals and objectives by residents,
landowners, developers, business community, and other private
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 420 and ch. 395 respectively.
§ 381-14 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 390-2
344:644
§ 390-3. Public participation plan.
The Village has adopted written procedures designed to foster public
participation in every stage of the preparation of the 2035 Comprehensive
Plan (Village Board Resolution No. 06-53 adopted on November 20, 2006),
as required by § 66.1001(4)(a) of the Wisconsin Statutes. Also see § 390-9
below for the public participation plan required for amendments.
§ 390-4. Adoption.
§ 390-5. Public notice.
interests, and among the many government departments having land
use related responsibilities within the Village.
A. Pursuant to § 66.1001(4)(c) of the Wisconsin Statues, no
Comprehensive Plan, component of the Comprehensive Plan, or
amendment thereto may take effect until the Village Board enacts an
ordinance that adopts the plan or amendment thereto.
B. Said ordinance shall be enacted only by a majority vote of the elected
members.
C. Plan Commission recommendation.
(1) Said ordinance shall not be considered by the Village Board prior to
the Plan Commission holding the required public hearing and
noticing said public hearing pursuant to § 390-5 below.
(2) The Plan Commission shall recommend the adoption or amendment
of a Comprehensive Plan or a component thereof by resolution
approved by a majority vote of the entire Commission. The
resolution shall refer to maps and other descriptive materials that
relate to the plan or amendment thereof.
A. The Village Board may not enact an ordinance to adopt a
Comprehensive Plan, a component of the Comprehensive Plan or any
amendment thereto prior to the Plan Commission holding a public
hearing after proper notice as specified in § 390-5B below.
B. A Class 1 notice under Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes that is
published at least 30 days prior to the hearing held by the Plan
Commission. Pursuant to § 66.1001(4)(d) of the Wisconsin Statutes, the
Class 1 notice shall contain at least the following information:
(1) The date, time and place of the hearing.
(2) A summary, which may include a map of the proposed
Comprehensive Plan or amendment to such a plan.
(3) The name of an individual employed by the Village who may
provide additional information regarding the proposed ordinance.
§ 390-2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 390-5
344:645
§ 390-6. Detailed components of Comprehensive Plan.
Section 62.23(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes provides that the Village may,
from time to time, amend, extend or add to the Comprehensive Plan or
carry out any part of the subject matter in greater detail. The following
are more detailed components of the Village of Pleasant Prairie, Wisconsin,
2035 Comprehensive Plan, which shall therefore have the same force and
effect as the adopted Comprehensive Plan, and further, any amendments
to these plans shall be subject to the same notice and approval procedure
specified in this chapter. The following plans are considered components of
the Comprehensive Plan:
(4) Information relating to where and when the proposed
Comprehensive Plan or amendment to such a plan may be
inspected before the hearing and how a copy of the plan or
amendment may be obtained.
C. The Village Administrator may require additional notices be mailed by
first-class mail to any other interested persons. Failure of any person to
receive actual notice shall not invalidate any action taken by the Village
Plan Commission or the Village Board.
D. List of persons to receive notice. [Added 7-17-2017 by Ord. No.
17-29]
(1) Pursuant to 66.1001(4)(f), Wis. Stats., the Village shall maintain a
list of persons or other interested parties who submit a written or
electronic request to receive notice of any proposed ordinance
related to the Comprehensive Plan that affects the allowable use of
any property. Annually, the Village shall inform residents of the
Village that they may add their names to the list. The Village may
satisfy this requirement to provide such information by any of the
following means: publishing a first-class notice under Ch. 985;
publishing the notice on the Village's website; sending the notice
by first-class mail; or including the notice in a mailing that is sent to
all property owners.
(2) All persons on this list shall be sent a copy of the proposed notice
and proposed amendment at least 30 days before the hearing
described. The notice shall be by mail or in any reasonable form
that is agreed to by the person and the Village, including first-class
mail, electronic mail, voice mail, or text message. The Village may
charge each person on the list who receives a notice by first-class
mail a fee that does not exceed the cost of providing the notice to
the person.
A. SEWRPC Community Assistance Planning Report No. 88, A Land Use
Management Plan for the Chiwaukee Prairie-Carol Beach Area of the
Town of Pleasant Prairie, 1985.
§ 390-5 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 390-6
344:646
§ 390-7. Distribution.
B. Village of Pleasant Prairie Park and Open Space Plan: 2018-2023.
[Amended 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 13-16; 2-18-2019 by Ord. No.
19-05]
C. Village Neighborhood and Special Planning District Plans.
D. Village of Pleasant Prairie, 2010 Bicycle and Pedestrian Trails Plan.
[Added 4-19-2010 by Ord. No. 10-27]
E. (Reserved)104
F. Amendment to the Regional Water Quality Management Plan for the
Greater Kenosha Area (June 2012). [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
12-32]
G. Wisconsin Highway 50 Access Management Vision I-94 to 43rd Avenue,
Kenosha County, January 2012, providing for additional evaluation and
approval of alternative engineering designs for the intersection of STH
50 and STH 31. [Added 1-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-05]
H. Wisconsin Highway 32 Access Management Plan (North and Middle
Segments). [Added 2-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-06]
A. Pursuant to § 66.1001(4)(b) of the Wisconsin Statutes, following the
adoption of a Comprehensive Plan, a component of the Comprehensive
Plan or amendment thereto, one copy of the adopted plan, component
or amendment thereto shall be sent to all of the following:
(1) The clerk of every local governmental unit that is adjacent to the
Village of Pleasant Prairie, including every town, city, village and
county.
(2) The Wisconsin Department of Administration.
(3) The Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission.
(4) The Kenosha Southwest Library, which is the public library that
serves the Village.
(5) Kenosha Unified School District No. 1.
(6) Bristol School District No. 1.
(7) Central High School District of Westosha.
B. The Wisconsin Department of Administration has stated that plan
reports may be distributed in digital format, provided that a paper copy
of the report is available for review at the public library serving the
104. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, listing the Kenosha County Farmland Preservation
Plan, added 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-25, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-05.
§ 390-6 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 390-7
344:647
§ 390-8. Adoption of Village of Pleasant Prairie, Wisconsin 2035
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 390-9. Amendments.
Village, Kenosha County Planning and Development Department office,
Pleasant Prairie Village Hall.
C. The comprehensive planning law does not specify whether a unit of
government is required to distribute a copy of the Comprehensive Plan
to adjacent units of government across state boundaries. In the interest
of intergovernmental cooperation, the Village will provide a copy of the
adopted Comprehensive Plan to abutting counties and municipalities in
the State of Illinois.
A. The Village has published a Class 1 notice of the hearing at least 30
days prior to the hearing noticed and held a public hearing on the
Comprehensive Plan in compliance with the requirements of
§ 66.1001(4)(d) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. The Village of Pleasant Prairie Plan Commission held a public hearing
and adopted Resolution No. 09-08 on December 14, 2009, and
recommended to the Village Board the adoption of the document
entitled "Village of Pleasant Prairie, Wisconsin 2035 Comprehensive
Plan" containing all of the elements specified in § 66.1001(2) of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
A. All amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, including the adoption of a
component of the Comprehensive Plan or amendment thereto, shall be
made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. A petition for the adoption of a component to the Comprehensive Plan
or an amendment to the plan or component thereof may be made by any
owner of real property in the Village requesting an amendment
affecting the owner's real property, such as an amendment to the
Village Land Use Plan Map related to the field verification of an
environmental feature on said property. Said petition shall include
surveys, legal descriptions and other documents as deemed necessary
to cause an amendment. The public participation plan for said change
shall, at a minimum, be the required public notice pursuant to § 390-5
above.
C. Without filing a petition for an amendment, the Village Plan
Commission or the Village Board may initiate consideration of an
amendment, by resolution adopted by either the Plan Commission or
Village Board, that includes, at a minimum, a brief description of the
proposed amendment and a public participation plan pursuant to
§ 66.1001(4)(a) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
D. For plan amendments that will also require approval of a rezoning
application, the Village will make every effort to coordinate the
§ 390-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 390-9
344:648
Chapter 395
LAND DIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plan Commission — See Ch. 18, Art. I.
Contractors — See Ch. 150.
Sewers — See Ch. 285.
Stormwater storage facilities — See Ch. 300.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 305.
Water — See Ch. 355.
Building and Mechanical Code — See Ch. 370.
Construction site maintenance and erosion
control — See Ch. 381.
Public improvement projects — See Ch. 405.
Zoning Ordinance — See Ch. 420.
application process, public notice, public hearing, and Village Board
consideration of the zoning amendment.
E. All applicable fees shall be paid pursuant to Article X of Chapter 395,
the Village Land Division and Development Control Ordinance.
F. See Attachment 1, Appendix A, for a summary of all amendments to the
Comprehensive Plan adopted after January 1, 2010, pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 390-9 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 390-9
344:649

ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 395-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes, including, without limitation, §§ 236.45, 61.34, 61.35, 61.351,
61.354, 61.36 and 703.27, Wis. Stats.
§ 395-2. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control all land divisions
and development, to regulate and control residential, manufactured
housing community, institutional, recreational, commercial, and
industrial development, and to regulate and control the development of
existing platted lots within the corporate limits of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, Wisconsin, and to promote and protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
B. More particularly, and without limitation, it is the purpose of this
chapter to:
(1) Promote the wise use, development, conservation and protection of
the soil, water, wetland, woodland and wildlife resources within the
Village and its extraterritorial jurisdiction area and to achieve a
balanced relationship between land use and development and the
supporting and sustaining natural resource base;
(2) Lessen congestion in the streets and highways;
(3) Further the orderly layout and appropriate use of land;
(4) Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
(5) Provide the best environment for human habitation;
(6) Conserve the value of buildings placed upon land;
(7) Provide for proper ingress and egress;
(8) Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of
population;
(9) Provide adequate light and air, including access to sunlight for
solar collectors and to wind for wind energy systems;
(10) Facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water supply,
stormwater, wastewater and sewerage, schools, parks,
playgrounds and other public facilities and services;
(11) Secure safety from flooding, water pollution, disease and other
hazards;
§ 395-1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-2
344:651
§ 395-3. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
Except as is specifically provided herein, it is not the intent of this chapter
to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements,
covenants, agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or approvals
previously conveyed, imposed, entered into, adopted or issued pursuant
to law; provided, however, that whenever this chapter imposes greater
restrictions or burdens, and such restrictions or burdens do not contravene
rights vested under law, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
§ 395-4. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village.
Headings are provided in this chapter for convenience and ease of
reference; they shall not be used to interpret the purpose, effect or meaning
of any provision of this chapter. Words or phrases that are defined in this
chapter shall have the meaning stated in their definition. Undefined words
or phrases shall have their common, ordinary meaning unless a particular
(12) Prevent flood damage to persons and properties and minimize
expenditures for flood relief and flood-control projects;
(13) Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of
surface and subsurface waters;
(14) Preserve natural vegetation and cover and promote the natural
beauty of the Village;
(15) Restrict building sites in areas covered by poor soils or in other
areas poorly suited for development;
(16) Facilitate the further division of larger tracts into smaller parcels of
land;
(17) Ensure adequate legal description and survey monumentation of
divided land;
(18) Provide for dedication and reservation of appropriately located
sites for streets (including adequate right-of-way for anticipated
future widening of streets); water supply, stormwater and
sewerage systems and facilities; schools; parks and playgrounds;
and other desirable public facilities and services;
(19) Provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter;
(20) Provide penalties for the violation of this chapter;
(21) Assist in the implementation of the Village's Comprehensive Plan;
and
(22) Avoid the harmful effects of premature divisions or development of
land.
§ 395-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-4
344:652
meaning is clearly suggested by the context in which they appear. As used in
this chapter, "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. Singular words
generally include the plural and vice versa. Words of a particular gender
generally include all genders.
§ 395-5. Severability.
In the event that any section, subsection or provision of this chapter is
adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable,
shall not be affected by such judgment and shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 395-6. Disclaimer of liability.
The Village does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas
delineated as floodplains on plats, certified survey maps, and development
plans will be subject to periodic inundation, nor does the Village guarantee,
warrant or represent that only those soils shown to be unsuited for
particular purposes on plats, certified survey maps, or development plans
will be unsuited for such purposes, and, therefore, the Village asserts that
there is no liability on the part of the Village, its agencies or employees
with respect to flooding, sanitation or structural problems that may occur
as a result of reliance upon or conformance with this chapter or any plats,
certified survey maps, or development plans approved pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 395-7. Repeal of prior ordinances.
This chapter shall be deemed to repeal and recreate any prior ordinance of
the Village regulating land divisions, including, without limitation, the Land
Division Ordinance of the Village of Pleasant Prairie adopted on June 18,
1990, May 20, 1991, and May 18, 1998.
§ 395-8. Title.
This chapter shall be known, referred to and cited as the "Land Division
and Development Control Ordinance of the Village of Pleasant Prairie" or as
"Chapter 395 of the Code of the Village of Pleasant Prairie."
§ 395-4 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-8
344:653

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 395-9. Jurisdiction.
This chapter shall apply to all lands within the corporate limits of the Village
established by § 236.10 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 395-10. Applicability. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
This chapter shall apply to all land divisions and to all developments not
involving a land division in the Village wherein the installation of public
improvements (or private improvements in lieu of public improvements)
and/or dedication of any land or interest in land is required, including,
without limitation, developments in those areas wherein lots of record
existed prior to the adoption of this chapter.
§ 395-11. Compliance.
A. Mandatory requirements. Except as is expressly provided in this
chapter, no preliminary or final plat, no certified survey map and no
development plan shall be approved by the Village Board (or, with
respect to any site and operational plan to be approved under § 420-56
of the Village Code, by the Village Plan Commission or the Village
Zoning Administrator) after the effective date of this chapter unless and
until there is full compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter
and each of the following: [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
(1) Chapter 236, Wis. Stats., rules of the Wisconsin Department of
Administration, and all other applicable state and federal statutes;
(2) Rules of the Wisconsin Department of Commerce relating to lot size
and lot elevation necessary for proper sanitary conditions, if the
land to be divided is not served by a public sewer and provisions for
such service have not been made, and relating to the extension of
private sewers;
(3) Rules of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation relating to
provisions for the safety of entrance upon and departure from
abutting state trunk highways or connecting streets, for planned
highway expansion and for the preservation of the public interest
and investment in the highway system, if the land owned or
controlled by the divider or developer abuts on a state trunk
highway or connecting street;
(4) Rules of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources relating
to the prevention and abatement of pollution, relating to
development activities within floodplain, wetland, and shoreland
areas and within navigable waters, and relating to the extension of
municipal sanitary and water sewer;
§ 395-9 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-11
344:655
§ 395-12. Exclusions.
(5) Rules of the United States Army Corps of Engineers relating to
wetlands;
(6) Rules of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
relating to the prevention and abatement of pollution and to
wetlands;
(7) Rules of the Federal Emergency Management Agency related to
floodplain;
(8) Chapter 381, Construction Site Maintenance and Erosion Control,
of the Village Code;
(9) Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, of the Village Code and all other
applicable Village and county ordinances; and
(10) Applicable intergovernmental cooperative agreements.
(11) Rules of Kenosha County relating to provisions for the safety of
entrances upon and departure from abutting county trunk
highways or connecting streets, for planned highway expansion
and for the preservation of the public interest and investment in the
highway system, if land owned or controlled by the divider or
developer abuts on a county trunk highway.
B. Discretionary requirements. The Village Board may condition the
approval of or deny any preliminary or final plat, certified survey map,
or development plan based upon an administrative determination made
pursuant to Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, § 420-131, FPO Floodplain
Overlay District, or upon compliance with any component of the
Village's Comprehensive Plan.
A. Specific types of transactions. With respect to land divisions resulting in
fewer than five lots or parcels, the provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to the following:
(1) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order;
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements;
(3) Sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots
resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by this
chapter, Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, of the Village Code or
other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations;
(4) Cemetery plats made under § 157.07, Wis. Stats.; or
(5) Assessor's plats made under § 70.27, Wis. Stats., but such
assessor's plats shall comply with §§ 236.15(1)(a) to (g) and
236.20(1) and (2)(a) to (e), Wis. Stats.
§ 395-11 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-12
344:656
§ 395-13. Condominiums.
B. Certain condominiums. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
conversion condominiums or to condominiums involving only a single
principal building per lot or parcel.
C. Miscellaneous discretionary exemptions. In unusual circumstances,
where a particular proposed land division, condominium plat,
development or replat is technically subject to this chapter but poses
none of the potential problems addressed by this chapter, the Village
Board may, after the required preapplication staff conference, and after
review and recommendation by the Plan Commission, exempt a
particular land division from the requirements of this chapter. The
Board shall make an express finding that compliance is unnecessary to
accomplish the purposes of this chapter. This subsection shall not be
utilized, under any circumstances, to exempt any proposed land
division that would result in the creation of a new buildable lot.
A. Applicability. This chapter is applicable to all condominiums except
conversion condominiums and condominiums involving only a single
principal building per lot or parcel. In applying this chapter to
condominiums, the principles set out below shall govern.
B. Treatment.
(1) Five or more units. Any condominium having a maximum number of
five or more principal buildings per lot or parcel, including
buildings containing any condominium units or portions thereof
which may be added in a future expansion pursuant to § 703.26,
Wis. Stats., shall be treated and processed in the same manner as a
large lot subdivision.
(2) Four or fewer units. Any condominium having a maximum number
of four principal buildings per lot or parcel, including buildings
containing any condominium units or portions thereof which may
be added in a future expansion pursuant to § 703.26, Wis. Stats.,
shall be treated and processed in the same manner as a minor land
division.
(3) Expansion. Any expansion of a condominium permitted under
§ 703.26, Wis. Stats., shall be treated as a separate phase in
accordance with §§ 395-30K and 395-19E of this chapter.
(4) Reference to plats and maps. As applied to condominiums, all
references in this chapter to a preliminary or final plat or to a
certified survey map shall be deemed to be referenced to the
condominium instruments, including the condominium plat,
declarations, plans and related exhibits or schedules.
(5) References to divider. As applied to condominiums, all references
in this chapter to a divider shall be deemed to be references to the
condominium declarant.
§ 395-12 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-13
344:657
(6) Conflicts. In the event of any conflict between the mandatory
requirements of Ch. 703, Wis. Stats., and the provisions of this
chapter, the mandatory requirements of Ch. 703 shall control.
(7) Artificial lot lines. Unless a condominium development has been
approved as a planned unit development under Chapter 420,
Zoning Ordinance, of the Village Code or involves only one
principal building per lot or parcel, closing and nonoverlapping
artificial lot lines shall be placed around the site of each proposed
principal building on the condominium plat, or on a separate scaled
exhibit, to demonstrate that the spirit of the dimensional
requirements of § 395-63 of this chapter is satisfied.
(8) Fees. Each principal building involved in a condominium, exclusive
of principal buildings involved in a potential condominium
expansion under § 703.26, Wis. Stats., shall be deemed to be a lot
for purposes of the fees provided for in Article X of this chapter.
Each declared residential condominium unit, exclusive of potential
expansion units, shall be deemed to be a buildable residential lot
for purposes of the fees provided for in Article X of this chapter.
Fees relating to expansion units and principal buildings associated
with such expansion units shall be payable in connection with the
approval of the expansion as a separate phase under Subsection
B(3) above.
(9) Interpretation. Other than as specifically provided in this section,
this chapter shall be interpreted with respect to condominiums in a
common sense manner to achieve the purposes of this chapter. The
Village Board may waive technical compliance of a condominium
with the requirements of this chapter after making an express
finding, recorded in the minutes, that such compliance is
unnecessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.
C. Unlawful activity.
(1) It shall be unlawful to, and no person shall:
(a) Record, with respect to any condominium to which this chapter
is applicable, any condominium instrument after the effective
date of this chapter unless and until such time as there has
been full compliance with all applicable requirements of this
chapter and each of the statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances
and documents enumerated in § 395-11A of this chapter;
(b) Convey any condominium unit created in violation of this
chapter;
(c) Construct, install, assemble or place any building, structure or
improvement upon any land subject to condominium
instruments recorded in violation of this chapter; or
§ 395-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-13
344:658
§ 395-14. Unlawful activity.
§ 395-15. Divider/developer option regarding public improvements.
(d) Fail to comply with any applicable provision of this chapter,
and no Village zoning, building or occupancy permit or
approval shall be granted or issued with respect to any
condominium or condominium unit created in violation of this
chapter.
(2) This subsection shall be deemed to be a condominium supplement
to § 395-14 of this chapter. In the event of any inconsistency
between this Subsection C and § 395-14 of this chapter, this
subsection shall control.
A. Violations. Except as is specifically provided in this chapter, it shall be
unlawful to, and no person shall, after the effective date of this chapter:
(1) Divide any land located within the jurisdictional limits of this
chapter, or convey any interest in any such land, or create a
condominium to which this chapter is applicable with respect to
any such land, or take any other action regarding any such land so
as to create a land division (as defined in this chapter), unless and
until such time as there has been full compliance with all applicable
requirements of this chapter;
(2) Record any preliminary or final plat, replat, certified survey map,
condominium plat or declaration plat or declaration (other than
with respect to a condominium to which this chapter is not
applicable), conveyance or any other evidence of a land division
made in violation of this chapter;
(3) Construct, install, assemble or place any building, structure, or
improvement upon any lot, parcel of land or condominium which
was created by a land division made in violation of this chapter; or
(4) Fail to comply with any applicable provision of this chapter.
B. Permits; approvals. No Village zoning, building or occupancy permit or
approval shall be granted or issued with respect to any land division, lot
or parcel of land created in violation of this chapter or with respect to a
development that is not in compliance with the applicable requirements
of this chapter. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
A. The divider or developer may request the Village to design, construct,
install, provide and complete all required public improvements at the
divider's/developer's cost. If the divider/developer makes such a
request and if the Village agrees to design, construct, install, provide
and complete all required public improvements, § 395-19I of this
chapter regarding the divider's warranty, indemnification and hold
harmless agreement shall be inapplicable. Alternatively, the divider/
developer may assume the responsibility for designing, constructing,
§ 395-13 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-15
344:659
§ 395-16. Development agreement. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-59]
installing, providing and completing all required public improvements,
subject to the requirements of this chapter, at the divider's/developer's
cost.
B. Solely at its option, the Village Board may, under the limited
circumstances set out below, specially assess public improvement costs
required by this chapter and finance such improvements with special
assessment B bonds pursuant to § 66.0713, Wis. Stats., as amended
from time to time. The Village Board shall not approve the use of special
assessment B bonds in connection with public improvements required
by this chapter unless it first makes each of the following findings:
(1) That issuance of such bonds will not increase the Village's costs
with respect to other financing activity, e.g., by making any other
contemplated financing non-bank-qualified;
(2) That the Village will receive a substantial benefit, in terms of
facilitating desirable projects outside of the proposed land division
or curing or mitigating problems outside of the proposed land
division, as a result of completion of public improvements required
for the proposed land division; and
(3) That the divider's/developer's credentials, record of successful
developments, financial soundness, project plans, proffered
security and marketing strategy and plans convince the Board that
the Village will not incur any significant risk of having to raise
additional funds to retire such bonds. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter to the contrary, if the Village Board
decides to utilize special assessment B bonds to finance required
public improvements, it may modify in the development agreement
the payment requirements and the letter of credit requirements set
out elsewhere in this chapter.
A. General requirement. Before or as a condition of receiving final
approval from the Village Board (or from the Village Plan Commission
or the Village Zoning Administrator with respect to a site and
operational plan to be approved under § 420-56 of the Village Code) of
any final plat or certified survey map relating to a land division or land
development plan within the Village, with respect to which public and/
or private improvements are required under this chapter, or with
respect to which public and/or private improvements, dedications or
fees are being deferred under this chapter, or with respect to which
phasing approval is being granted under this chapter, the divider/
developer shall sign and file with the Village Board a development
agreement. The Village Board may require a development agreement in
other situations where such an agreement is desirable to accomplish
the purposes of this chapter. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
§ 395-15 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-16
344:660
B. Provision for public improvements. In the development agreement, the
divider/developer shall either engage the Village to design, construct,
install, provide and complete all required public improvements, and
agree to pay for all such improvements, or the divider/developer shall
agree to assume full responsibility for designing, constructing,
installing, providing and completing all such improvements, in a timely
and workmanlike manner, to the satisfaction of the Village, and in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan approved by the Village Board (or the
site and operational plan approved by the Village Plan Commission or
the Village Zoning Administrator under § 420-56 of the Village Code),
the development agreement and plans and specifications approved by
the Village Board in conjunction with its final approval of the plat,
certified survey map or development plan or in conjunction with the
final approval of the Village Plan Commission or the Village Zoning
Administrator of any site and operational plan. The development
agreement shall provide that the divider's/developer's obligations
regarding required public improvements and the payment for such
improvements shall not be contingent upon the divider/developer
commencing construction of any buildings or selling any lots. The
development agreement shall also provide that no breach of the
development agreement by the Village shall be deemed to excuse or
justify a failure by the divider/developer to complete the required public
improvements in accordance with the requirements of the development
agreement unless the Village's breach renders such completion
impossible. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
C. Provision for private improvements. The Village Board may approve and
require private improvements in lieu of certain public improvements. In
such event, the required private improvements shall be provided for in
the development agreement. Except as otherwise specifically provided
in the development agreement or in a planned development zoning
ordinance, such required private improvements shall be subject to the
same requirements and procedures as required public improvements
under this Chapter 395 and other related chapters of the Village Code
(e.g., Chapters 180, 285, 300, 305, 355, 370, 381 and 405), except that
required private improvements shall not be dedicated to the Village. If
and to the extent that the Village Board allows and requires private
improvements, the provisions of this chapter and of other related
chapters of the Village Code (e.g., Chapters 180, 285, 300, 305, 355,
370, 381 and 405) shall be deemed to apply to such required private
improvements, and words, phrases or references typically associated
with public improvements shall be construed to include the equivalent
words, phrases or references typically associated with private
improvements (e.g., “public street” shall be construed to include
“private road,” and “public street rights-of-way” shall be construed to
include “private road easements”). In any event, the divider/developer
shall assume the responsibility for designing, constructing, installing,
providing and completing, at the cost of the divider/developer, all
required private improvements in a timely and workmanlike manner, to
§ 395-16 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-16
344:661
the satisfaction of the Village, and in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, the final plat, certified survey map, or development
plan approved by the Village Board (or the site and operational plan
approved by the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning
Administrator under § 420-56 of the Village Code) and plans and
specifications approved by the Village Board in conjunction with its
final approval of the plat, certified survey map or development plan (or
in conjunction with the final approval of the Village Plan Commission
or Village Zoning Administrator of any site and operational plan.) The
development agreement shall provide that the divider's/developer's
obligations regarding required private improvements and the payment
for such improvements shall not be contingent upon the divider/
developer commencing construction of any buildings or selling any
lots. The development agreement shall also provide that no breach of
the development agreement by the Village shall be deemed to excuse
or justify a failure by the divider/developer to complete the required
private improvements in accordance with the requirements of the
development agreement unless the Village's breach renders such
completion impossible. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
D. Other provisions. Additionally, the development agreement shall
provide, as appropriate and without limitation, for the payment of fees,
the deadline for completion of the various required public and/or
private improvements, possible deferment of second or third phase of
street improvements, contractors' contracts, performance and payment
bonds and certificates of insurance, payment for the required public
and/or private improvements, an irrevocable letter of credit or other
approved security to secure the divider's/developer's obligations,
possible supplemental letters of credit, reduction of the remaining
balance of any letter of credit upon acceptance by the Village of
dedications of public improvements and in other specified
circumstances, dedication and acceptance of interests in land and
public improvements, covenants, restrictions, and easements on the
use of land, acceptance of private improvements, streetlighting, street
signage and street landscaping, title commitment insurance and lien
waivers, representations and warranties, investigations and remedial
action regarding environmental pollution or contamination, procedures
in the event of a breach, the indemnification of the Village, its
employees and consulting engineers for and the holding of the Village,
its employees and consulting engineers harmless against any costs or
damages or liability resulting from defects in required public and/or
private improvements provided by the divider/developer, and any other
requirements to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to
accomplish the purposes of this chapter which the Village Board
believes to be reasonable under the circumstances.
E. Approval. The development agreement shall be drafted or approved as
to form by the Village Attorney and shall be approved by the Village
Board prior to final approval of the plat, certified survey map or land
development plan.
§ 395-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-16
344:662
§ 395-17. Letter of credit. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 05-59]
F. Memorandum of agreement. The Village Board shall require the
divider/developer to sign a recordable memorandum of the
development agreement as a condition of the Village Board's final
approval of the plat, certified survey map and/or development plan.
G. Memorandum of understanding agreement. The Village Board may
require the divider/developer to sign a recordable memorandum of
understanding agreement regarding the financial commitments for offsite
required public and/or private improvements as a condition of the
Village Board's final approval of the proposed plat, certified survey map
and/or development plan.
A. General requirement. As a condition to receiving final approval from
the Village Board (or from the Village Plan Commission or Village
Zoning Administrator with respect to a site and operational plan to be
approved under § 420-56 of the Village Code) of any final plat, certified
survey map, or land development plan approval relating to land located
within the Village, the divider/developer shall file with the Village Board
an irrevocable letter of credit or an irrevocable standby letter of credit
to secure the divider's/developer's obligation to pay for the design,
construction, installation, provision and completion of all required
public and/or private improvements, including but not limited to
cleaning and televising of the public and/or private improvements, field
staking, inspection and construction, administration of the public and/
or private improvements, landscaping, lighting and signage public and/
or private improvements and construction contingencies, and
engineering, legal and administrative costs. When the divider/
developer has assumed the responsibility for designing, constructing,
installing, providing and completing required public and/or private
improvements, the letter of credit shall also secure the divider's/
developer's agreement to indemnify the Village, its employees and
consulting engineers for, and hold the Village, its employees and
consulting engineers harmless against, all costs, damages and liability
resulting from defects in such public and/or private improvements. The
letter of credit shall be drafted and approved as to form by the Village
Attorney and shall be approved by the Village Board. As an alternative,
the Village Board may accept cash payments as another acceptable
means of security as determined by the Village Board and as a condition
of final plat, certified survey map or development plan approval for the
cost of public and/or private improvements. [Amended 5-7-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-20]
B. Particular requirement.
(1) Amount. The amount of the irrevocable letter of credit shall be
125% of the total estimated costs of the required public and/or
private improvements and related costs and contingencies noted
above in Subsection A.
§ 395-16 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-17
344:663
(2) Issuer. The irrevocable letter of credit shall be issued by a financial
institution satisfactory to the Village Board.
(3) Payment. The irrevocable letter of credit on the financial
institution's letterhead shall be payable to the Village at a
convenient location, at sight, upon presentment of the Village's
draft, the original letter of credit and any amendments thereto, and
the affidavit of the Village President or Village Administrator, duly
signed and sworn to before a notary public and attested by the
Village Clerk, stating that the Village Board, at a meeting duly held
on a specified date, duly approved a draft upon the letter of credit
in the specified amount. Partial drawings upon the letter of credit
shall be allowed.
(4) Expiration. The irrevocable letter of credit shall expire, by its
terms, one year after the latest date on which the last to be
completed of the required public and/or private improvements
must be completed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of the development agreement entered into by and
between the divider/developer and the Village, unless other
arrangements have been agreed upon and approved by the Village
Board.
(5) Reduction. The irrevocable letter of credit supplied by a divider/
developer who has assumed responsibility for providing the
required public and/or private improvements shall state that the
remaining balance of the letter of credit will be reduced, and the
amount of the reduction will be made available to the divider/
developer, upon presentment of the Village's written request for
such a reduction, the original letter of credit and any amendments
thereto, and the affidavit of the Village President or Village
Administrator, duly signed and sworn to before a notary public and
attested by the Village Clerk, stating that the Village Board at a
meeting duly held on a specified date duly approved a reduction in
the remaining balance of the letter of credit by a specified amount
and the release of such amount to the divider/developer.
(6) Administrative processing fee. An administrative processing fee
shall be provided by the divider/developer to the Village Treasurer
as a condition of final approval of the final plat, certified survey
map or development plan for the administration and financial
processing of the irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposits made
with the Village. The total amount of the administrative processing
fee shall be equal to 0.0075% of the total cost of the irrevocable
letter of credit, cash payment or other acceptable means of security
(a total of 0.0050% x the letter of credit for Finance administrative
processing fee and 0.0025% x the letter of credit for Community
Development administrative processing fee).
C. Supplemental letter of credit. The Village Board may require the
divider/developer to deliver to it a supplemental irrevocable letter of
§ 395-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-17
344:664
credit if it determines that the actual cost of completing any class
of required public and/or private improvements will exceed 125% of
the total amount of the estimated cost of that class of improvements
utilized in determining the amount of the existing letter of credit. If the
divider/developer has assumed responsibility for providing the required
public improvements, and/or is providing private improvements, then
the divider/developer shall promptly notify the Village Administrator
of any change order causing an increase in the estimated cost of
completing any required public and/or private improvements of which
the divider/developer has knowledge or notice.
D. Reduction.
(1) If the divider/developer has assumed responsibility for providing
required public improvements, and/or is providing required private
improvements, then upon the Village Board's acceptance by
resolution of the dedication and/or acceptance of any class of
public improvements, the Board shall promptly authorize the issuer
of the irrevocable letter of credit to reduce the remaining balance
of such letter of credit by the amount that was attributed to the cost
of the accepted class of improvements, including the associated
amounts for construction contingencies and engineering, legal and
administrative costs, in determining the amount of the existing
letter(s) of credit. For good cause shown, the Village Board may
make arrangements for periodically reducing the remaining
balance of any letter of credit in the development agreement. If the
Village has provided the public improvements, then upon the
Village's acceptance of the divider's/developer's dedication of the
last to be completed and dedicated class of public improvements,
the Village Board shall promptly authorize the issuer to cancel the
letter of credit. If the divider/developer has provided the public
and/or private improvements, however, the Board shall withhold
and not authorize the release of 15% of the original amount of the
letter(s) of credit for the period of one year after the acceptance of
the last to be completed and/or dedicated class of improvements
for the purpose of securing the divider's/developer's warranty, hold
harmless and indemnification agreement. After such one-year
period, if no defects have appeared in the public and/or private
improvements, the Village Board shall promptly authorize the
issuer to cancel the letter of credit. However, if it can be proven
that a defect had occurred in the public and/or private
improvements under the one-year warranty period, then the
developer shall be responsible for correcting the deficiency at the
divider's/developer's cost.
(2) Reduction in the letter of credit or any supplemental letter of credit
other than as a result of a draw by the Village shall be permitted
only in accordance with the following procedures:
(a) The developer may submit written requests to the Village for a
reduction in the letter of credit not more often than one per
§ 395-17 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-17
344:665
calendar month. Any such request shall be accompanied by
copies of original lien waivers from contractors,
subcontractors and suppliers. The Village Board shall review
the lien waivers and other documentation received from the
developer and reports from the Village's engineering
consultants regarding the status of the work in progress for
which such reduction in the letter of credit is claimed and the
recommendations of such consultants regarding the amount of
the letter of credit to be released based on the percentage of
work completed. The Village Board shall authorize a reduction
of the letter of credit in an amount proportionate to the
percentage of the work completed to the extent the Village
Board is satisfied that appropriate payment has been made for
such work.
(b) After the completion of a classification of the required public
and/or private improvements and the Village's inspection and
testing of such classification of improvements and conditional
approval thereof pursuant to a letter of substantial completion,
the delivery to the Village of satisfactory evidence that there is
no unpaid work with respect to the classification in question
for which a mechanic's or supplier's lien may be imposed, the
dedication by the developer of any such completed public
improvements to the Village and the formal acceptance thereof
by the Village pursuant to a resolution by the Village Board, the
Village Board shall promptly authorize a reduction in the
letter(s) of credit. The amount of any such reduction shall be
the remaining amount (including the twenty-five-percent
contingency calculated on such amount) that was attributed to
the identified itemized listing of such completed improvements
in determining the amount of the letter(s) of credit and in any
determination of the Village Board to require a supplemental
letter of credit. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
E. Treatment in development agreement. The development agreement
entered into by and between the divider/developer and the Village shall
specify the circumstances under which the Village is entitled to draw
upon the letter of credit or is required to approve the reduction or
cancellation of the letter of credit. If the Village will be responsible for
providing the required public improvements, the Village shall be
entitled to draw upon the letter of credit as needed to pay for the
design, construction, installation and provision of the improvements. If
and to the extent the divider/developer will be responsible for providing
the required public and/or private improvements, the Village shall
generally be entitled to draw upon the letter of credit only if the divider/
developer fails to discharge its obligations under this chapter and
development agreement. The Village Board shall approve each draw
upon a letter of credit, each reduction in the remaining balance of the
letter of credit and each cancellation of the letter of credit.
§ 395-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-18
344:666
§ 395-18. Dedications and reservations.
A. Sites for public purposes; open spaces. In the design and approval of
any plat, certified survey map, or development plan, due consideration
shall be given to the establishment or preservation of appropriate sites
for necessary or desirable streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm
sewers, drainageways, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public
improvements, facilities or uses, and the preservation of scenic and
historic sites, stands of fine trees, wetlands, floodplains, lakes, ponds,
watercourses or other desirable, unusual or environmentally sensitive
natural features or archaeologically significant areas.
B. Mandatory dedications.
(1) Dedication of streets. The divider/developer of any proposed land
division or development within the Village shall dedicate to the
Village, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances (except as may
be approved in the development agreement entered into by and
between the divider/developer and the Village), and without
compensation, appropriate dedications for public streets or alleys
required or proposed to serve such land division or development
and for all sanitary sewerage system facilities, water system
facilities, storm sewer and drainage system facilities, sidewalks or
pedestrian walkways, street trees or other public improvements or
facilities to be constructed or located in such streets or alleys.
(2) Dedication for other public improvements. The divider/developer of
any proposed land division or development within the Village shall
dedicate to the Village, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances
(except as may be approved in the development agreement entered
into by and between the divider/developer and the Village) and
without compensation, appropriate dedications for all sanitary
sewerage system facilities, water system facilities, storm sewer or
drainage system facilities, sidewalks, pedestrian walkways, bridges
or other public improvements or facilities required or proposed to
serve such land division or development and not located within
public streets or alleys, together with any construction or access
easements required in connection with such public improvements
or facilities.
(3) Dedication of easements for public or private utilities. The divider/
developer of any proposed land division or development within the
Village shall dedicate to the appropriate entity, without
compensation, appropriate easements for all electric power, gas,
telephone, cable and other utility or communications
improvements or facilities required or proposed to serve such land
division or development.
(4) Dedication of easements for private improvements. The divider/
developer of any proposed land division or development with the
Village shall dedicate to the Village, free and clear of all liens and
§ 395-18 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-18
344:667
encumbrances (except as may be approved in the development
agreement entered into by and between the divider/developer and
the Village) and without compensation, appropriate easements for
all private sanitary sewerage system facilities, water system
facilities, storm sewer or drainage system facilities, sidewalks,
pedestrian walkways or bridges, park areas, or other private
improvements or facilities required or purposed to serve such land
division or development and not located within dedicated public
streets or alleys, together with any construction or access
easements required in connection with such private improvements
or facilities.
C. Dedication or reservations for other public purposes. [Amended
5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
(1) Public facilities shown on a Comprehensive Plan component.
Whenever a proposed land division or development within the
Village of Pleasant Prairie encompasses all or any part of the site of
a proposed arterial or collector street, public way, park,
playground, school, sanitary sewerage system facility, water
system facility, storm sewer or drainage system facility or
drainageway or any other public improvement, facility or use, the
location of which has been designated on a Comprehensive Plan
component, a suitably located site of adequate size and shape for
the intended purpose, or an appropriate interest therein, shall be
dedicated or temporarily reserved for possible public acquisition as
a condition to final approval of any plat, certified survey map, or
development plan by the Village Board (or by the Village Plan
Commission or Village Zoning Administrator with respect to a site
and operational plan to be approved under § 420-56 of the Village
Code, subject to ratification by the Village Board) unless the Village
Board expressly waives or modifies this requirement. Whether
requiring the dedication of such a site necessitates the payment of
just compensation shall be determined by the Village Board prior to
final approval of the plat, certified survey map, or development
plan.
(2) Other public facilities. The Village Board (or the Village Plan
Commission or Village Administrator with respect to approval of a
site and operational plan under § 420-56 of the Village Code,
subject to Village Board ratification) may require, as a condition to
final approval of any proposed plat, certified survey map, or
development plan within the Village, the dedication or temporary
reservation for possible public acquisition of a suitably located site
of adequate size and shape for any public improvement, facility or
use, or an appropriate interest therein. Whether requiring the
dedication of such site requires the payment of just compensation
shall be determined by the Village Board prior to final approval of
the plat, certified survey map, or development plan.
§ 395-18 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-18
344:668
(3) Preservation easements; restrictive covenants. The Village Board
(or the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning Administrator
with respect to a site and operational plan to be approved under
§ 420-56 of the Village Code, subject to Village Board ratification)
may require, as a condition to final approval of any proposed plat,
certified survey map, or development plan within the Village, the
dedication or temporary reservation for possible public acquisition
of preservation or scenic easements, or the imposition of restrictive
covenants running with the land, to preserve and protect scenic
and historic sites, stands of fine trees, wetlands, floodplains, lakes,
ponds, watercourses or other desirable, unusual or
environmentally sensitive natural features or archaeologically
significant areas or otherwise to accomplish the purposes and
intent of this chapter. Whether the requirement of such dedications
or covenants necessitates the payment of just compensation shall
be determined by the Village Board prior to final approval of the
plat, certified survey map, or development plan.
D. Temporary reservations for possible public acquisition.
(1) Significance. The significance of land or an interest in land being
temporarily reserved for possible acquisition for a public purpose
or use on a plat, certified survey map, or development plan is that
the divider's/developer's proposed use or development of the area
in question is inconsistent with a possible public use of such area,
which is under active consideration, and approval of the divider's/
developer's proposed use or development is temporarily rejected
pending the outcome of the planning process relating to the
possible public use of the area.
(2) Statement of reservation. Whenever any land or an interest in land
is temporarily reserved on a plat, certified survey map, or
development plan for possible acquisition for a public purpose or
use, the plat, certified survey map, or other recorded document
shall show the boundaries of the land affected by such temporary
reservation and shall contain a statement of the purpose of the
reservation, the interest reserved and the conditions upon which
the reservation will terminate and upon which the land will be
released from such reservation.
(3) Duration of reservation. Any temporary reservation for possible
acquisition for a public purpose or use on an approved plat,
certified survey map, or other recordable document shall
automatically terminate one year after the last required approval of
the plat or certified survey map or development plan, unless the
reserved land or the reserved interest therein shall have been
acquired and an appropriate conveyance shall have been recorded
in the office of the Register of Deeds for Kenosha County, prior to
the end of such period, or unless a jurisdictional offer to acquire
such land or interest shall have been made and a lis pendens shall
have been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for
§ 395-18 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-18
344:669
Kenosha County pursuant to § 32.05, Wis. Stats., prior to the end
of such period, or unless a petition for condemnation proceedings
shall have been filed in the Circuit Court for Kenosha County and
a lis pendens shall have been recorded pursuant to § 32.06, Wis.
Stats., prior to the end of such period, or unless the reservation
period shall have been extended by written agreement signed by
the divider/developer and owner, if the owner and divider/
developer are not the same, and recorded prior to the end of such
period. A statement to this effect shall be made on the final plat,
certified survey map or other recordable document. If the Village
Board determines not to acquire the reserved land or interest in
land, or receives an official communication from the public body
having authority to acquire the reserved land or interest therein
for the contemplated purpose stating that it has determined not to
acquire such land or interest, prior to the automatic termination
of the temporary reservation, the Village Board shall promptly
cause an appropriate document to be recorded evidencing the
termination or removal of the temporary reservation.
(4) Conditional approval. To reduce any potential hardship imposed on
a divider/developer by a temporary reservation of land or an
interest in land for possible public acquisition, the Village Board (or
the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning Administrator with
respect to a site and operational plan under § 420-56 of the Village
Code) shall permit the plat, certified survey map, or development
plan to show the ultimate treatment of the land affected by such
reservation in the event that the reserved land or interest therein is
not acquired for a public purpose. Such approved ultimate
treatment shall be expressly conditioned, on the face of the plat,
certified survey map, or development plan, upon the termination or
removal of the reservation. Such conditional approval shall not be
effective until the termination or removal of the reservation.
[Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
E. Compensation.
(1) Amount of compensation. Whenever an interest in land is to be
dedicated or acquired after a temporary reservation for possible
public acquisition, under circumstances requiring the payment of
just compensation, the amount of compensation shall be
determined in accordance with the provisions of Ch. 32, Wis. Stats.,
as amended from time to time.
(2) Disagreement on amount of compensation. Whenever the Village
Board shall have determined that the payment of just compensation
is required in connection with the acquisition of land or an interest
in land, but the amount of compensation to be paid cannot be
agreed upon by the Village Board and the divider/developer (and
the owner, if the divider/developer is not the owner) prior to the
Village Board's final approval of the plat, certified survey map, or
development plan, the interest in the land in question shall be
§ 395-18 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-18
344:670
temporarily reserved for possible public acquisition, and any
acquisition shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Ch.
32, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time.
F. Statement of dedications and restrictions.
(1) Dedications. Whenever an interest in land is dedicated on a plat or
certified survey map, the plat or certified survey map shall show
and describe the boundaries of the land affected by the dedication
and shall contain a statement of the purpose of the dedication and
the interest dedicated.
(2) Restrictions. Whenever land included in a plat, certified survey
map, or development plan is subject to restrictions running with
the land, the plat, certified survey map, or other recordable
document shall contain a statement of such restrictions and a
description of the area to which they apply. Alternatively, such
restrictions may be included in a separate, recordable document,
but such restrictions shall be referred to on the face of the plat,
certified survey map or development plan and shall be recorded by
the divider/developer with the plat or map. Any restrictions
required by the Village Board shall expressly state that they are
intended to benefit the Village, that they are enforceable by the
Village and that they shall not be modified without the express
written consent of the Village Board.
G. Acceptance of dedications. Dedications of interest in land shown on any
final plat or certified survey map shall be deemed to be accepted by the
Village Board upon granting final approval of such plat or map.
H. Environmental investigations. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No.
07-20]
(1) Investigations; tests. The Village Board (or the Village Plan
Commission or Village Zoning Administrator with respect to
approval of a site and operational plan under § 420-56 of the Village
Code) may, as a condition to approval of any proposed plat,
developer's certified survey map, or development plan, make or
cause to be made, at the divider's/developer's cost, such
investigations or tests regarding possible environmental
contamination or pollution of land that is affected by dedications
for public improvements, facilities or uses to serve the proposed
land division or development as the Board deems to be reasonable
and prudent under the circumstances.
(2) Remedial action. If such investigations or tests demonstrate that
the land is contaminated or polluted, the Board (or the Village Plan
Commission or Village Zoning Administrator with respect to
approval of a site and operational plan under § 420-56 of the Village
Code) may require the divider/developer, as a condition to final
approval of the plat, certified survey map, or development plan, to
§ 395-18 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-18
344:671
§ 395-19. Public improvements.
take reasonable and appropriate remedial action to protect the
public health, safety and welfare and to protect the Village from
potential liability.
(3) Representations; warranties. The Village Board (or the Village Plan
Commission or Village Zoning Administrator with respect to
approval of a site and operational plan under § 420-56 of the Village
Code) may also, as a condition to approval of any proposed plat,
certified survey map, or development plan, require the divider/
developer to make such representations and warranties regarding
possible contamination or pollution of land affected by proposed
dedications for public improvements, facilities or use as the Board
(or the Plan Commission or Zoning Administrator) deems to be
reasonable and prudent under the circumstances.
(4) Indemnity; hold harmless. In circumstances where the Board
concludes that there is risk of liability to the Village, the Board (or
the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning Administrator,
having made such a conclusion with respect to approval of a site
and operational plan under § 420-56 of the Village Code) may
require the divider/developer to agree to indemnify the Village for,
and hold the Village harmless against, all costs, damages and
liability potentially resulting from contamination or pollution of
land affected by dedications for public improvements, facilities or
use.
A. Approval of contracts, contractors, performance and payment bonds
and certificates of insurance. All proposed contracts for the
construction, installation or provision of required public improvements,
and all contractors proposed to do such work, shall be subject to the
approval of the Village Board. The divider/developer shall provide to the
Village copies of adequate and appropriate contractor payment and
performance bonds for such work, and certificates of insurance with the
Village listed as an insured party to protect the Village, prior to the
Village's final review and approval of such contracts and approval of the
contractors. Only prequalified and preapproved contractors shall be
allowed to perform public improvement work in the Village.
B. Design. All public improvements shall be designed by a licensed
professional engineer, registered in the State of Wisconsin, in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and sound
engineering practices. The design of all public and private
improvements shall be based upon actual field topographic data.
C. Construction; installation. All public improvements shall be
constructed, installed and provided in a workmanlike manner, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the development
agreement entered into by and between the divider/developer and the
Village, and the plans and specifications approved by the Village Board,
§ 395-18 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-19
344:672
at the cost of the divider/developer, except as is otherwise expressly
provided by this chapter, and only after the Village Board has granted
final approval of the final plat, certified survey map, or development
plan and engineering plans, profiles and specifications (and, if
applicable, only after the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning
Administrator has granted final approval to a site and operational plan
under § 420-56 of the Village Code) and, if the divider/developer is
responsible for providing the improvements, only after the Village has
issued written authorization to proceed with specified improvements.
[Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
D. Completion. All public improvements shall be completed, to the
satisfaction of the Village, within the times prescribed in §§ 395-66
through 395-79 (unless otherwise specifically provided in a planned
development zoning ordinance) of this chapter or in the development
agreement entered by and between the divider/developer and the
Village. Upon completion of the required public improvements and
prior to the Village acceptance of said required public improvements,
as-built plans and record drawings of all required public improvements
shall be completed pursuant to § 395-82C and D of this chapter.
[Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20; 5-18-2009 by Ord. No.
09-35]
E. Staging.
(1) Staging authority. The Village Board may permit the construction
and installation of public improvements in subdivisions or large lot
subdivisions or developments in stages corresponding to the stages
of final plat, certified survey map, or development plan approval.
(2) Staging plan. If a divider/developer wishes to construct or install
public improvements in phases, the divider/developer shall file a
staging plan with the preliminary or final plat, certified survey map,
or development plan. The staging plan shall number, describe and
depict the boundaries of each proposed stage and shall state the
deadline for submission of a final plat or development plan for each
such stage. The staging plan shall generally provide for the orderly
extension of streets, sanitary sewerage system facilities, water
system facilities, storm sewer and drainage system facilities and
utilities from existing streets and facilities, unless a different
staging pattern is specifically approved by the Village Board
because of unusual facts and circumstances. All staging plans shall
be subject to approval by the Village Board.
F. Staking and engineering field inspection. All construction staking,
engineering field inspection and related coordination or administration
shall be conducted by the Village or the Village's consulting engineer,
without regard as to whether the divider/developer or the Village is
responsible for providing the public improvements. In addition, the
Village or the Village’s consulting engineer shall prepare as-built plans
and record drawings of all required public improvements shall be
§ 395-19 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-19
344:673
completed pursuant to § 395-82C and D of this chapter. [Amended
5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
G. Stop-work orders. The Village Administrator, Village Engineer, Village
Community Development Director and Village Chief Building Inspector
shall have the authority to issue stop-work orders with respect to
noncompliance with the installation of any required public
improvements whenever the location, materials, workmanship or
manner of performance is not in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, the Village Code and ordinances, the development agreement
entered into by and between the divider/developer and the Village, or
the plans, specifications and profiles approved by the Village Board.
H. Dedication and acceptance.
(1) Dedication requirement. Subject to the provisions of this chapter,
the divider/developer shall, upon completion of each phase of the
public improvements (e.g., all first phase of public improvements),
unconditionally give, grant, convey and dedicate all required public
improvements to the Village, its successors and assigns forever,
free of charge to the Village, and free and clear of any
encumbrances whatsoever. Such dedication shall include, without
limitation, all buildings, structures, mains, pipes, conduits, lines,
machinery, equipment and appurtenances which in any way form a
part of or pertain to such improvements, together with any
easements necessary for access or maintenance.
(2) Form of dedication documents. The form of the dedication
documents shall be subject to approval by the Village Attorney.
(3) Acceptance of dedications. The dedication of each phase of public
improvements shall be specifically accepted by the Village Board,
and such acceptance shall be recorded in the minutes at such time
as such phase of public improvements is completed to the
satisfaction of the Village and in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, the approved plans and specifications and the
development agreement entered into by and between the divider/
developer and the Village and the improvements are determined to
be free and clear of liens or encumbrances. A letter of substantial
completion shall be forwarded by the Village to the divider/
developer which identifies the phase of improvements that has
been completed and that the warranty period has commenced.
(4) Title evidence. When the Village is not awarding and administering
the construction contracts, the divider/developer shall provide to
the Village, at the divider's/developer's cost, satisfactory evidence
that each phase of public improvements dedicated to the Village is
owned by the divider/developer free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances, including, without limitation, appropriate lien
waivers with respect to all work or materials supplied in connection
with each class of public improvements.
§ 395-19 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-19
344:674
§ 395-20. Land suitability.
(5) After acceptance. After the Village Board's acceptance of the
dedication of a phase of public improvements, the Village shall
have the duty to maintain such improvements, except as is
specifically provided by warranty in this chapter, and shall have the
right to connect to or to integrate with such improvements other
facilities or improvements with no payment or award to the divider/
developer and without the divider's/developer's consent.
I. Warranty, indemnification and hold harmless. If the divider/developer
assumes the responsibility of designing, constructing, installing and
providing the public improvements, the divider/developer shall warrant
all such improvements against defects due to faulty design, materials or
workmanship, or due to any failure to comply with the requirements of
this chapter or with the requirements of the development agreement
entered into by and between the divider/developer and the Village,
which appear and of which the divider/developer is notified in writing at
the divider's/developer's last known address within one year from the
date of the Village's acceptance of the dedication of such
improvements, or within one year after, or if it is proven by the Village
that the defect occurred during the warranty period, if the work or
materials in question are not incorporated into an improvement
dedicated to the Village. The divider/developer shall, at its cost,
promptly make any repairs or replacements necessary to correct any
such defects in a workmanlike manner and to the satisfaction of the
Village. The divider/developer shall agree to indemnify the Village for
and hold the Village harmless against the costs of any repairs or
replacements required by such defects, any resulting damage to Village
property, the costs and expenses of any resulting litigation (including
the Village's reasonable attorney fees) and any resulting liability
incurred by the Village. Additionally, the divider/developer shall, at its
cost, promptly replace any vegetative landscaping elements, not
planted by the Village, which die or are removed for any reason within
one year after the date of planting and of which the divider/developer is
notified by the Village in writing within such one-year period. Also,
street trees and grassy terraced areas in the right-of-way shall be
forever maintained and/or replanted by the abutting landowner.
A. Determination of unsuitability. No land shall be divided or developed for
residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, institutional or any
other urban land use if the land is determined to be unsuitable for such
use by the Village Board, after receiving the recommendation of the
Village Plan Commission and any other Village officials or consultants
as may be deemed appropriate by the Board, for reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock conditions, unfavorable
topography, contamination or any other feature, characteristic or
condition likely to be harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or
to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents or users of the
land in question.
§ 395-19 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-20
344:675
B. Filled lands/on-site sewage disposal.
(1) Filled lands shall not be divided/developed into building sites which
are proposed to be served by on-site soil absorption sewage
disposal systems, except where soil borings, soil percolation tests,
and any other appropriate tests or investigations conducted by a
certified soil tester demonstrate that such soils are suited to the
use of such systems. Such testing shall be conducted at a minimum
of one appropriate location per building site. The Village Board or
Village Plan Commission may require additional testing or
information.
(2) Lands covered by soils having a percolation rate slower than 60
minutes per inch or faster than 10 minutes per inch shall not be
divided into building sites to be served by on-site soil absorption
sewerage disposal systems.
C. Filled lands/structural characteristics. Lands filled within 20 years shall
not be divided/developed into building sites except where soil borings,
other appropriate tests or investigations and the opinion of a
recognized expert demonstrate that the compaction, bearing capacity
and other relevant characteristics of the fill material makes it
structurally suitable for the proposed use. Such testing and expert
investigation shall be conducted at a minimum of one appropriate
location per building site. The Village Engineer may require additional
testing or information.
D. Slope. Lands having a slope of 12% or more shall be maintained in
permanent open space use. No lot shall have more than 50% of its
minimum required area in slopes of 10% or greater.
E. Bedrock. Lands having bedrock within six feet of the natural
undisturbed surface shall not be divided into building sites to be served
by on-site soil absorption sewage disposal systems.
F. Groundwater. Lands having groundwater (constant water table) within
five feet of the natural undisturbed surface shall not be divided into
building sites to be served by on-site soil absorption sewage disposal
systems. Lands having the seasonal high water table within two feet of
the natural undisturbed surface shall not be divided into building sites
to be served by a mound system.
G. Drainage tiles; ditches. Lands drained by farm drainage tile or farm
ditch systems shall not be divided into building sites to be served by onsite
soil absorption sewage disposal systems.
H. Findings, conditions and rebuttal. The Village Board shall make express
findings with respect to the particular facts upon which it bases its
conclusion that the land is unsuitable for a particular use or uses, which
findings shall be recorded in the minutes. The Village Board may
prescribe conditions or remedial actions, if appropriate. The Village
Board shall afford the divider/developer a reasonable opportunity to
§ 395-20 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-20
344:676
§ 395-21. Variances.
present evidence to rebut the Board's findings of unsuitability if the
divider/developer so desires. Thereafter, the Village Board may affirm,
modify, or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
A. Grounds. The Village Board shall have authority in specific cases, upon
application by a divider/developer/property owner and after a public
hearing noticed by a Class 1 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., and
notice of such public hearing being mailed by first class mail, not less
than 10 days prior to the public hearing, to the last known address of
the applicant, the owners of the subject lot or site, the owners of all real
property located within 300 feet of the subject lot or site and to all other
parties of interest as defined in this chapter, to grant such variances
from the requirements of this chapter as will not be contrary to the
public interest, where, owing to special conditions which are not
generally applicable to other properties or the use thereof and which
are not of such a recurrent nature as to suggest that this chapter should
be amended, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will
result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit
of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and
substantial justice done. For purposes of this section, the requirement
of "special conditions" and "practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship" shall be interpreted so as to take into account all of the
relevant facts relating to the variance request. Such facts shall include,
among others, the nature and scope of the variance being sought, the
reasons for requesting the variance, and the reasonableness of
requiring strict compliance in light of the resulting difficulty or
hardship and the purposes of this chapter and of the particular
provisions of this chapter from which the variance is sought. The
Wisconsin case law relating to statutorily controlled variances from
zoning ordinance requirements, which are often quite different in
nature and purpose from the requirements of this chapter, shall not be
construed to be binding with respect to the interpretation of this
section, and, specifically, lack of any reasonable use of the subject real
property in the absence of the requested variance or any need for the
"special conditions" or the "practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship" to relate uniquely to some physical condition or
characteristic of the subject real property, shall not be required.
B. Findings; vote. The Village Board shall grant such variance only after
making express findings, which shall be recorded in the minutes, that
each requirement of Subsection A of this section is satisfied, and only
upon the affirmative vote of four members of the Village Board.
C. When variance unnecessary. The granting of a variance under this
section shall be unnecessary if specific authority is granted elsewhere
in this chapter to waive or modify a requirement of this chapter.
§ 395-20 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-22
344:677
§ 395-22. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an objecting authority's objection to a subdivision
plat, or by a failure to approve a plat or certified survey map, or by a
discretionary condition imposed upon the approval of a plat or certified
survey map, may appeal such objection, failure to approve, or condition as
provided in § 236.13(5), Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time, within
30 days of notification of such objection, failure to approve or condition.
When the appeal is from an objecting authority's objection to a subdivision
plat, or from a failure to approve a subdivision plat based on an unsatisfied
objection of an objecting authority to a subdivision plat, the agency making
the objection shall be made a party to the appeal.
§ 395-23. Remedies; violations and penalties.
A. Legal actions. The Village may institute any appropriate legal actions or
proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter by means of
injunction, forfeitures or penalties or otherwise as provided by law.
B. Forfeitures; penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $25 nor more than
$645 for each violation, plus the cost of prosecution. The penalty for
default of payment of any such forfeiture and costs shall be
imprisonment in the Kenosha County Jail until payment thereof, but not
exceeding six months. Each day a violation exists or continues shall
constitute a separate violation. In addition, forfeitures, fines or
penalties provided for in Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., including the following,
without limitation, shall be applicable:
(1) Recordation of a subdivision plat without submitting such plat for
approval, or failure to present such plat for recording within the
time prescribed after approval: a forfeiture of not less than $100
nor more than $1,000, pursuant to § 236.30, Wis. Stats.
(2) Violations of § 236.31(1), Wis. Stats., relating to conveyances, or
offers or contracts to convey subdivisions or lots in subdivisions,
with knowledge that the final plat has not been recorded: a fine of
not more than $500 or imprisonment in the Kenosha County Jail for
not more than six months, or both.
(3) Violations of § 236.32, Wis. Stats., relating to disturbing or failure
to place monuments as required, or the knowing removal or
disturbance of monuments, or the failure to replace monuments
properly when ordered to do so: a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment in the Kenosha County Jail for not more than one
year.
C. Assessor's plat. An assessor's plat, made under § 70.27, Wis. Stats., may
be ordered as a remedy by the Village Board, at the expense of the
divider, when a subdivision is created by successive land divisions.
§ 395-22 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-24
344:678
§ 395-24. Private improvements. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
05-59]
A. Approval of contracts, contractors, performance and payment bonds
and certificates of insurance. All proposed contracts for the
construction, installation or provision of required private
improvements, and all contractors proposed to do such work, shall be
subject to the approval of the Village Board. The divider/developer shall
provide to the Village copies of adequate and appropriate contractor
payment and performance bonds for such work, and certificates of
insurance with the Village listed as an insured party to protect the
Village, prior to the Village's final review and approval of such contracts
and approval of the contractors. Only prequalified and preapproved
contractors shall be allowed to perform private improvement work in
the Village.
B. Design. All private improvements shall be designed by a licensed,
professional engineer, registered in the State of Wisconsin, in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, specifically §§ 395-58
through 395-79, and sound engineering practice. The design of all
improvements shall be based upon actual field topographic data. All
private improvements shall be designed and constructed pursuant to
the standards for public improvements.
C. Construction; installation. All private improvements shall be
constructed, installed and provided in a workmanlike manner, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the development
agreement entered into by and between the divider/developer and the
Village, and the plans and specifications approved by the Village Board,
at the cost of the divider/developer, except as is otherwise expressly
provided by this chapter, and only after the Village Board has granted
final approval of the final plat, certified survey map or development
plan (and, if applicable, only after the Village Plan Commission or
Village Zoning Administrator has granted final approval to a site and
operational plan under § 420-56 of the Village Code), and, if the divider/
developer is responsible for providing the improvements, only after the
Village has issued written authorization to proceed with specified
improvements. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
D. Completion. All private improvements shall be completed, to the
satisfaction of the Village, within the times prescribed in §§ 395-66
through 395-79 (unless otherwise specifically provided in a planned
development zoning ordinance) of this chapter or in the development
agreement entered by and between the divider/developer and the
Village. Upon completion of the required private improvements and
prior to the Village approving of said private improvements, the Village
Engineer may require as-built record drawings of all the private
improvements pursuant to § 395-82C of this chapter. [Amended
5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20; 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
E. Staging.
§ 395-24 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-24
344:679
(1) Staging authority. The Village Board may permit the construction
and installation of private improvements in the developments,
subdivisions or large lot subdivisions in phases corresponding to
the stages of final approval.
(2) Staging plan. If a divider/developer wishes to construct or install
private improvements in stages, the divider/developer shall file a
staging plan with the preliminary or final plat, certified survey map,
or the development plans. The staging plan shall number, describe
and depict the boundaries of each proposed stage and shall state
the deadline for submission of a final plat, certified survey map, or
development plans for each such stage. The staging plan shall
generally provide for the orderly extension of streets, sanitary
sewerage system facilities, water system facilities, storm sewer and
drainage system facilities and utilities from existing streets and
facilities, unless a different staging pattern is specifically approved
by the Village Board because of unusual facts and circumstances.
All staging plans shall be subject to approval by the Village Board.
F. Staking and engineering field inspection. All construction staking,
engineering field inspection and related coordination or administration
shall be conducted by the Village or the Village's consulting engineer,
without regard as to whether the divider/developer or the Village is
responsible for providing the private improvements. In addition, the
Village or the Village’s consulting engineer shall prepare as-built plans
and record drawings of any private improvements required by the
Village Engineer pursuant to § 395-82C and D of this chapter.
[Amended 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
G. Stop-work orders. The Village Administrator, Village Engineer, Village
Community Development Director and Village Chief Building Inspector
shall have the authority to issue stop-work orders with respect to
noncompliance with the installation of any required private
improvements whenever the location, materials, workmanship or
manner of performance is not in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, other Village ordinances or codes, the development agreement
entered into by and between the divider/developer and the Village, or
the plans and specifications approved by the Village Board.
H. Acceptance of private improvements.
(1) Each phase of private improvements shall be specifically accepted
by the Village Board, and such acceptance shall be recorded in the
minutes at such time as such phase of private improvements is
completed to the satisfaction of the Village and in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, the approved plans and
specifications and the development agreement entered into by and
between the divider/developer and the Village. A letter of
substantial completion shall be forwarded by the Village to the
divider/developer which identifies the phase of improvements that
has been completed and that the warranty period has commenced.
§ 395-24 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-24
344:680
(2) After acceptance. After the Village Boards accepts the phase of
private improvements, the divider/developer or designated
association/property owners shall have the duty to maintain such
improvements, except as is specifically provided by warranty in this
chapter.
I. Warranty, indemnification and hold harmless. The divider/developer
shall assume the responsibility of designing, constructing, installing
and providing the private improvements, and the divider/developer
shall warrant all such improvements against defects due to faulty
design, materials or workmanship, or due to any failure to comply with
the requirements of this chapter or with the requirements of the
development agreement entered into by and between the divider/
developer and the Village, which appear, and of which the divider/
developer is notified in writing at the divider's/developer's last known
address within one year from the date of the Village's acceptance of or
within one year after, or if it is proven by the Village that the defect
occurred during the warranty period, if the work or materials in
question are not incorporated into an improvement accepted by the
Village. The divider/developer shall, at its cost, promptly make any
repairs or replacements necessary to correct any such defects in a
workmanlike manner and to the satisfaction of the Village. The divider/
developer shall agree to indemnify the Village, its employees and
consulting engineers for and hold the Village, its employees and
consulting engineers harmless against the costs of any repairs or
replacements required by such defects, any resulting damage to Village
property, the costs and expenses of any resulting litigation (including
the Village's reasonable attorney fees) and any resulting liability
incurred by the Village. Additionally, the divider/developer shall, at its
cost, promptly replace any vegetative landscaping elements which die
or are removed for any reason within one year after the date of planting
and of which the divider/developer is notified by the Village in writing
within such one-year period.
§ 395-24 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-24
344:681

ARTICLE III
Land Division Procedures
§ 395-25. Preapplication staff conference.
Prior to the filing of an application for the approval of a preliminary plat,
certified survey map, or a development plan, the divider/developer shall
meet and confer with the Village staff. The purposes of this preapplication
staff conference are to inform the divider/developer of the purposes,
objectives, and requirements of this chapter and of the various components
of the Village Comprehensive Plan; to identify, at the earliest possible time,
any significant policy issues that may suggest the need for neighborhood
sketch planning, conceptual plan review; budgetary review, or site and
operational plan review; to identify any problems or potential adverse
impacts that will need to be addressed in the planning and approval
process; and otherwise to assist the divider/developer and the Village in
making sound land division or development decisions.
§ 395-26. Neighborhood sketch plan.
A. When required. If the Village staff determines at the preapplication
staff conference that no detailed neighborhood development planning
exists for the area in which the proposed land division or development
will be located, then, prior to filing any conceptual plan, preliminary
plat, certified survey map, or development plan, the divider/developer
shall pay to the Treasurer the required neighborhood sketch plan fee
for the Village to prepare an appropriate neighborhood sketch plan, or
shall participate with the Village in the preparation of an appropriate
neighborhood sketch plan, or shall have a neighborhood sketch plan
prepared by a qualified land use planner in cooperation with the Village
staff for the area which shows how the proposed land division/
development will relate to the surrounding area, particularly in terms of
required municipal facilities and services and compatibility of land
uses.
B. Purpose. The neighborhood sketch plan is intended to provide the
Village staff, the Village Plan Commission and the Village Board with
the means of reviewing the pattern of existing and probable future
development in and around the area proposed for land division, access
to such land division and the practicability of providing municipal
facilities and services to serve such area.
C. Information required. The neighborhood sketch plan, which shall be
drawn to a recognized engineering scale of one inch equals 200 feet,
shall include the following information:
(1) Topographic contours at a minimum of two-foot intervals;
(2) Public street layout, existing and proposed;
(3) Proposed lot or parcel layout;
§ 395-25 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-26
344:683
§ 395-27. Conceptual plan review.
(4) Zoning, existing and proposed;
(5) Land uses, existing and proposed;
(6) Sanitary sewerage system, storm sewer and drainage system and
water system facilities, existing and proposed, and related existing
or proposed easements;
(7) Lands reserved or dedicated for streets, parks, playgrounds,
schools and other public purposes, existing or proposed;
(8) Existing cadastral information and property boundaries; and
(9) Any other information that the divider, the Village staff, the Village
Plan Commission or the Village Board believes will be helpful in
reviewing, approving or using the neighborhood sketch plan.
D. Approval. Approval of a neighborhood plan, which is a component of the
Village Comprehensive Plan, is subject to the requirements of Chapter
390. In addition, notice of such public hearing shall be mailed by firstclass
mail, not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing, to the last
known address of the applicant, the owners of the subject lot or site, the
owners of all real property located within 300 feet of the subject lot or
site and to all other parties of interest as defined in this chapter. For any
amendment to a portion of an adopted neighborhood plan, a notice of
said public hearing shall be mailed by first-class mail, not less than 10
days prior to the public hearing, to the last known address of the
applicant and the owners of the properties located within the
neighborhood plan amended area and property owners within 300 feet
of said amended area. Failure of any person to receive actual notice of
the request shall not invalidate any action taken by the Village Plan
Commission or the Village Board. [Amended 12-21-2009 by Ord. No.
09-62]
A. When required. If the Village staff determines in the preapplication staff
conference, or as a result of reviewing the neighborhood sketch plan,
that any proposed land division or development raises significant policy
issues, then, prior to filing a preliminary plat or certified survey map or
development plan with the Village, the divider/developer shall pay to
the Village Treasurer the required conceptual plan review fee and shall
file a conceptual plan of the proposed land division or development for
review and comment by the staff, the Village Plan Commission and the
Village Board. Without limitation, conceptual plan review shall be
required if the proposed land division or development will create five or
more buildable lots, or will require a rezoning or conditional use permit
to implement, or will require a significant extension of public or private
improvements, or will require other significant budgetary decisions, or
if there is a lack of agreement between the divider/developer and the
staff regarding appropriate dedications or reservations for public
§ 395-26 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-27
344:684
acquisition, or regarding appropriate waivers of or variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. Purpose. The conceptual plan is intended to provide the Village staff,
the Village Plan Commission and the Village Board with an early
opportunity to review policy issues relating to the proposed land
division and its development or any development plan and its possible
adverse effects on adjacent properties of the Village.
C. Information required. The conceptual plan, which shall be drawn to a
recognized engineering scale, shall include the following information:
(1) Neighborhood sketch plan, if required;
(2) Graphic scale and North arrow;
(3) Project name;
(4) Name, address and telephone number of divider, owner, engineer
and architect;
(5) Topographic contours at one-foot intervals;
(6) Public street layout;
(7) Existing and proposed lot or parcel layout, including the
dimensions and area of each;
(8) Existing and proposed uses;
(9) Lands to be dedicated or reserved for streets, parks, schools, or
other public purposes;
(10) Proposed conceptual landscaping;
(11) Number of dwelling units per acre;
(12) Proposed techniques for handling stormwater and retention/
detention facilities;
(13) Conceptual building layouts and parking areas for all uses, other
than single-family residential uses;
(14) Location of existing and proposed streets, existing and proposed
sanitary and storm sewer and water facilities and existing and
proposed utility and drainage easements;
(15) Artist renderings of structures and facilities and floor plans, if
available;
(16) Identification of existing and proposed zoning districts;
(17) Significant environmental features, including, without limitation,
navigable waters, wetlands, floodplains, and woodlands;
(18) Lands to be vacated or structures to be razed;
§ 395-27 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-27
344:685
§ 395-28. Preliminary plat review.
(19) Declaration of restrictions, covenants and easements; and
(20) Any other information that the divider/developer, the Village staff,
the Village Plan Commission or the Village Board believes will be
helpful in reviewing the conceptual plan.
D. Effect of review. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing and
make recommendations to the Village Board for consideration. The
public hearing shall be noticed by a Class 1 notice under Ch. 985, Wis.
Stats., and notice of such public hearing shall be mailed by first class
mail, not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing, to the last known
address of the applicant, the owners of the subject lot or site, the
owners of all real property located within 300 feet of the subject lot or
site and to all other parties of interest as defined in this chapter. Failure
of any person to receive actual notice of the request shall not invalidate
any action taken by the Village Plan Commission or the Village Board.
The conceptual plan completed for a land division or development plan
shall be valid for a one-year time period from the date of Village Board
conditional approval. During this one-year approval, the divider/
developer shall satisfy the conditions of the conceptual plan and file a
preliminary plat, certified survey map or development plan.
A. Preconditions to filing.
(1) No preliminary plat of any proposed subdivision or large lot
subdivision shall be submitted for approval until after a conceptual
plan of such subdivision or large lot subdivision shall have been
duly approved and all conditions have been timely satisfied
pursuant to §§ 395-25, 395-26 and 395-27 of this chapter.
(2) No preliminary plat of any proposed subdivision or large lot
subdivision shall be submitted for approval until after all of the
required preliminary plat related documents have been submitted
to the Village for review and approval. The preliminary plat related
documents as referred in this chapter shall include, but not be
limited to, the preliminary engineering plans, profiles and
specifications, preliminary landscape and planting plan,
preliminary lighting plan, declaration of restrictions, covenants and
easements, incorporation documents, organization documents,
copies of easement documents, listing of required county, state and
federal permits, traffic impact analysis, if applicable, and other
documents as may be necessary to assist in the review of the
preliminary plat.
B. Filing. Before filing a final plat of any proposed subdivision or large lot
subdivision for approval, the divider shall prepare and file with the
Village Planner a preliminary plat of such proposed subdivision or large
lot subdivision, together with sufficient copies of the plat for
distribution in accordance with this section, a list of the applicable
§ 395-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-28
344:686
approving authorities under § 236.10, Wis. Stats., and of the applicable
objecting authorities under § 236.12, Wis. Stats., and a letter of
application and shall pay the preliminary plat review fee to the Village
Treasurer. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with
this chapter, and the divider shall file the plat, the list of approving and
objecting authorities and the application with the Village at least 40
days prior to the public hearing held by the Village Plan Commission at
which consideration is desired. The public hearing shall be noticed by
a Class 1 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., and notice of such public
hearing shall be mailed by first class mail, not less than 10 days prior
to the public hearing, to the last known address of the applicant, the
owners of the subject lot or site, the owners of all real property located
within 300 feet of the subject lot or site and to all other parties of
interest as defined in this chapter. Failure of any person to receive
actual notice of the request shall not invalidate any action taken by the
Village Plan Commission or the Village Board.
C. Copies to objecting and approving authorities. The Village staff shall,
within two normal working days after the filing of the application and
the preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision, transmit four copies of
the plat to the Kenosha County Planning and Development Office; two
copies to the Wisconsin Department of Administration, two copies to
the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, if the subdivision abuts or
adjoins a state trunk highway or a connecting street; two copies to the
Wisconsin Department of Commerce if the subdivision is not served by
public sewer and provision for such sewer has not been made; and two
copies to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources if shorelands,
floodplains or any lands within 500 feet of the ordinary high-water mark
of any navigable waterways are included in the preliminary plat. The
Village staff may, but shall not be required to, transmit copies of a
preliminary plat of a proposed large lot subdivision to the objecting
authorities for such informal comment as they may choose to make.
D. Alternate procedure/subdivisions. In lieu of the procedure set forth in
Subsection B above, the divider of any proposed subdivision may,
pursuant to § 236.12(6), Wis. Stats., submit the original drawing of a
preliminary plat directly to the Wisconsin Department of
Administration, which will prepare and forward copies of the plat, at
the divider's expense, to the objecting authorities. When the divider
elects to use this alternative procedure, the divider shall submit to the
Village the additional copies of the preliminary plat provided for by this
section and shall otherwise comply with Subsection B above.
E. Copies to the Village authorities. The Village staff shall promptly
transmit nine full-size copies of the preliminary plat of any proposed
subdivision or large lot subdivision to the Village Plan Commission, five
copies to the Village Board and seven copies to the Village departments:
one each to Community Development, Fire & Rescue, Engineering,
Public Works, Inspection, Police and Administration. Upon receipt of
the preliminary plat, these Village Departments shall have 20 days to
§ 395-28 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-28
344:687
review the plat and transmit comments concerning matters within their
jurisdiction to the Village Plan Commission.
F. Copies to advisory authorities. The Village staff shall also transmit one
copy each of the preliminary plat of any proposed subdivision or large
lot subdivision to the Kenosha County Land Conservation Committee,
the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission, Ameritech,
We Energies, Electric and Gas Divisions, SBC or General Telephone and
Electronics (GTE), Time Warner Cable, or their successors, the Kenosha
Unified School District, and to the Kenosha County Highway
Department, when the proposed subdivision or large lot subdivision
abuts a county trunk highway, for their review and recommendation
concerning matters within their jurisdiction.
G. Objections of objecting authorities. The objecting authorities shall,
within 20 days of the date of receiving their copies of the preliminary
plat, notify the Village and all other approving and objecting authorities
of any objections or informal comments. If there are no objections to the
preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision, the objecting authority shall
so certify on the face of a copy of the plat and shall return that copy to
the Village. If an objecting authority fails to act within such 20 days, it
shall be deemed to have no objection to the plat. If it is unclear from the
face of any objection received by the Village when the objecting
authority received a copy of the preliminary plat and when it acted, any
objection received by the Village within 30 days of the date of original
transmission of copies of the preliminary plat to or for such authority
shall be deemed timely.
H. Comments by advisory authorities. Upon the receipt of the preliminary
plat, the advisory authorities shall have 20 days to review the plat and
transmit comments to the Village Plan Commission.
I. Certifications regarding objections. The Village staff shall certify on the
preliminary plat the date on which it was filed, the date on which the
copies were transmitted to the objecting authorities, the date on which
any timely objections were received from the objecting authorities or
that none were received, and whether the objections were satisfied.
J. Plan Commission review and recommendation. The Village Plan
Commission shall promptly review the proposed preliminary plat, after
the appropriate objections or comments have been received, for
conformance with this chapter and all applicable statutes, ordinances,
rules, regulations, intergovernmental agreements, and Comprehensive
Plan components, and shall comment on and recommend action on the
proposed preliminary plat. The Plan Commission shall promptly
transmit the plat and its comments and recommendations to the Village
Board.
K. Notification. The Village Plan Commission, pursuant to § 236.11(2),
Wis. Stats., shall provide notice to the clerk of any incorporated
municipality within 1,000 feet of the boundary of the land included
§ 395-28 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-28
344:688
§ 395-29. Preliminary plat approval.
§ 395-30. Final plat review.
within the land division. (Failure to give such notice shall not, however,
invalidate any action taken pursuant to this chapter.)
A. Approval. The Village Board shall, within 90 days of the date of filing of
a preliminary plat, unless the time has been extended by agreement
with the divider, approve, approve conditionally, or reject such plat.
B. Written statement. If the preliminary plat is approved conditionally or
rejected, the conditions of approval or reasons for rejection shall be
stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement of the
conditions of approval or reasons for rejection shall be promptly
forwarded to the divider.
C. Satisfaction of objections. No plat of subdivision shall be approved or
deemed to be approved until any timely objections from objecting
authorities shall have been satisfied.
D. File copies. One copy each of the preliminary plat, as acted on by the
Village Board, and of the written statement of the conditions of
approval or reasons for rejection, if any, shall be placed in the Village
Community Development Department's permanent file.
E. Failure to act timely. Failure of the Village Board to approve, approve
conditionally or reject the preliminary plat within 90 days from the date
of filing of the complete application for a preliminary plat shall
constitute an approval of the plat as filed, unless the review period is
extended by agreement with the divider, or unless timely objections of
objecting authorities to a subdivision plat have not been satisfied.
F. Effect on approval. Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary
plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final plat, but if the
final plat is submitted within 36 months of the last required preliminary
plat approval under § 236.25(2)(b), Wis. Stats., and conforms
substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, including any
conditions of preliminary plat approval, and to local plans and
ordinances adopted at the time the preliminary plat was approved as
authorized by law, the final plat shall be entitled to approval. In
addition, the Village Board may extend the time frame of such approval,
prior to the expiration. [Amended 8-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-47]
A. Preconditions to filing.
(1) No final plat of any proposed subdivision or large lot subdivision
shall be submitted for approval until after a preliminary plat of such
subdivision or large lot subdivision shall have been duly approved
and all conditions have been timely satisfied pursuant to the
conditional preliminary plat approval in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 395-28 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-30
344:689
(2) No final plat of any proposed subdivision or large lot subdivision
shall be submitted for approval until after all of the required final
plat related documents have been submitted to the Village for
review and approval. The final plat related documents as referred
in this chapter shall include, but not be limited to, the engineering
plans, profiles and specifications, landscape and planting plan and
related cost estimates and contractor's certificate of insurance,
signage plan (prepared by the Village), lighting plan and related
cost estimates and contractor's certificate of insurance, signed
contracts, contractor's performance and payment bonds,
contractor's certificates of insurance, declaration of restrictions,
covenants and easements, association incorporation documents,
bylaws, title commitment policy, organization documents, financial
commitment from the lending institution, copies of easement
documents, county, state and federal permit approvals, etc.
B. Filing. The divider shall prepare and file with the Village a final plat of
any proposed subdivision or large lot subdivision, together with
sufficient copies for distribution in accordance with this section, a list of
the applicable approving authorities under § 236.10, Wis. Stats., and of
the applicable objecting authorities under § 236.12, Wis. Stats., and a
letter of application and shall pay the final plat review fee to the Village
Treasurer. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with this
chapter, and the divider shall file the plat, the list of approving and
objecting authorities and the application with the Village at least 40
days prior to the public hearing held by the Village Plan Commission at
which consideration is desired. The public hearing shall be noticed by a
Class 1 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., and notice of such public
hearing shall be mailed by first class mail, not less than 10 days prior to
the public hearing, to the last known address of the applicant, the
owners of the subject lot or site, the owners of all real property located
within 300 feet of the subject lot or site and to all other parties of
interest as defined in this chapter. Failure of any person to receive
actual notice of the request shall not invalidate any action taken by the
Village Plan Commission or Village Board.
C. Copies to objecting and approving authorities. The Village staff shall,
within two normal working days after the filing of the application and
the final plat of a proposed subdivision, transmit four copies of the plat
to the Kenosha County Planning and Development Office, two copies to
the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, if the subdivision abuts or
adjoins a state trunk highway or a connecting street; two copies to the
Wisconsin Department of Commerce if the subdivision is not served by
a public sewer and provision for such service has not been made, and
two copies to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources if
shorelands, wetlands, floodplains or lands within 500 feet of the
ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waterway are included in
the final plat. The divider shall transmit the original final plat and
related fees directly to the Wisconsin Department of Administration for
approval. The Village may, but shall not be required to, transmit copies
§ 395-30 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-30
344:690
of the final plat for a proposed large lot subdivision to the objecting
authorities for such informal comment as they choose to make.
D. Alternate procedure/subdivisions. In lieu of the procedure set forth in
Subsection B above, the divider of any proposed subdivision may,
pursuant to § 236.12(6), Wis. Stats., submit the original drawing of the
final plat directly to the Wisconsin Department of Administration, which
will prepare and forward copies of the plat, at the divider's expense, to
the objecting authorities. When the divider elects to use this alternative
procedure, the divider shall submit to the Village the additional copies
of the final plat provided for by this section and shall otherwise fully
comply with Subsection B above.
E. Copies to the Village authorities. The Village staff shall promptly
transmit nine copies of the final plat of any proposed subdivision or
large lot subdivision to the Village Plan Commission, five copies to the
Village Board and seven copies to the Village departments: one each to
Community Development, Fire & Rescue, Engineering, Public Works,
Inspection, Police and Administration. Upon receipt of the final plat,
these Village departments shall have 20 days to review the plat and
transmit comments concerning matters within their jurisdiction to the
Village Plan Commission.
F. Copies to advisory authorities. The Village staff shall also transmit one
copy each of the final plat of any proposed subdivision or large lot
subdivision to the Kenosha County Land Conservation Committee, the
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission, WE Energies,
Electric and Gas Divisions, SBC or GTE, Time Warner Cable, the
Kenosha Unified School District and the Kenosha County Highway
Department, when the proposed subdivision or large lot subdivision
abuts a county trunk highway, for their review and recommendation
concerning matters within their jurisdiction.
G. Objections of objecting authorities. The objecting authorities shall,
within 20 days of the date of receiving their copies of the final plat,
notify the Village, the divider and all other approving and objecting
authorities of any objections or informal comments. If there are no
objections to the final plat of proposed subdivision, the objecting
authority shall so certify on the face of a copy of the plat and shall
return that copy to the Village. If an objecting authority fails to act
within 20 days, it shall be deemed to have no objection to the plat. If it is
unclear from the face of any objection received by the Village when the
objecting authority received a copy of the final plat and when it acted,
any objection received by the Village within 30 days of the date of
original transmission of copies of the final plat to or for such authority
shall be deemed timely.
H. Comments by advisory authorities. Upon receipt of the final plat, the
advisory authorities shall have 20 days to review the plat and transmit
comments to the Village Plan Commission.
§ 395-30 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-30
344:691
§ 395-31. Final plat approval.
I. Certification of objections. The Village staff shall certify on the final plat
the date on which it was filed, the date on which the copies were
transmitted to the objecting authorities, the date on which any timely
objections were received from the objecting authorities or that none
were received, and whether the objections were satisfied.
J. Plan Commission review and recommendation. The Village Plan
Commission shall, within 40 days of the date of the filing of a complete
application of the proposed final plat, review the proposed final plat as
to its conformance with the approved preliminary plat, any conditions
of the approval of the preliminary plat, this chapter and other
applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, intergovernmental
agreements and Comprehensive Plan components and shall comment
and recommend action on the proposed final plat. The Plan Commission
shall promptly transmit the plat and its comments and
recommendations to the Village Board.
K. Staged final platting. If permitted by the Village Board, the approved
preliminary plat may be final platted in stages, with each stage
encompassing only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which
the divider proposes to record at one time and with respect to which the
divider proposes to install all required public improvements in one
stage. Each such stage shall be designated as a stage of the approved
preliminary plat. Timely compliance by a divider with an approved
staging plan (see § 395-19E of this chapter) shall extend the six-month
period within which a final plat is entitled to approval if it conforms
substantially to the approved preliminary plat, including any conditions
of that approval, and to the local plans and ordinances authorized by
law.
A. Time of filing. If a complete application for the final plat and related
documents as noted in § 395-30A(2) are not filed for approval within
two years of the last required approval of the preliminary plat, the
Village Board may refuse to approve the final plat, unless the divider
shall have timely complied with an approved staging plan. (See
§§ 395-30K and 395-19E of this chapter.)
B. Village Board action. The Village Board shall, within 60 days of the date
of filling of a final plat, unless the time has been extended by agreement
with the divider, approve, approve conditionally or reject the plat. Ten
days prior, written notice shall be given to the clerk of any incorporated
municipality whose boundary is within 1,000 feet of any land included
within a proposed final plat of the Village Board's intention to consider
approval of such a plat, but failure to give such notice shall not
invalidate any action taken under this chapter.
C. Written statement. If the final plat is approved conditionally or rejected,
the conditions of approval or reasons for rejection shall be stated in the
§ 395-30 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-31
344:692
minutes of the meeting and a written statement shall be promptly
mailed to the divider.
D. Failure to act timely. Failure of the Village Board to approve, approve
conditionally or reject a final plat within 60 days of the filing of a
complete application of a final plat, the time having not been extended
by agreement with the divider and no unsatisfied objections from
objecting authorities having been filed, the final plat shall be deemed
approved, and, upon demand, a certificate to that effect shall be made
on the face of the plat by the Village Clerk.
E. Satisfaction of conditions. The divider shall submit to the Village Board
proof of satisfaction of all conditions imposed by the Board within six
months, or such other time period as the Board may prescribe, after the
Board's conditional approval. The Village Board shall grant final
approval when all such conditions are satisfied. Until all such conditions
are satisfied and the Board has granted final approval, the final plat
shall not be certified as approved and shall not be recorded.
F. Final approval. Upon granting final approval and satisfaction of all of
the conditions of this chapter, the Village Board shall cause the Village
President and Clerk to certify the final approval on the face of the
original plat and promptly return the plat to the divider for recording.
G. Final approval upon conditions. To facilitate the signing of the
development agreement entered into by and between the divider/
developer and the Village, the Village Board may grant final approval
conditioned upon satisfaction of specified ministerial conditions and the
filing of proof of such satisfaction within a short period of time, not to
exceed seven business days following the Village Board conditional
approval. The Board shall specify the date and time by which such
conditions shall be satisfied and shall designate the Village official(s) to
whom proof of satisfaction shall be delivered. The Village Board or the
Village Treasurer may require that any payments made to satisfy a
condition imposed under this subsection be made in cash or by certified
or cashier's check. Upon the timely satisfaction of all such conditions,
and the timely filing of proof of such satisfaction, the Board's final
approval shall be effective, and the Village President and Clerk shall
promptly certify the Board's final approval upon the face of the original
plat. The plat shall then be promptly returned to the divider/developer
for recording. If the specified conditions are not timely satisfied, or if
proof of satisfaction of the specified conditions is not timely filed, the
Board's approval shall be automatically suspended. In such event, the
Village President and Clerk shall not certify the Board's final approval
upon the final plat, and the final plat shall be returned to the Board for
further action.
H. Recordation. The divider/developer shall record the finally approved
final plat with the Kenosha County Register of Deeds within 12 months
after the last required approval and 36 months from the first
(preliminary plat) approval. The developer shall not commence
§ 395-31 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-31
344:693
§ 395-32. Certified survey map review and approval.
construction on the required public or private improvements until such
time as the final plat is recorded and file copies as specified in § 395-31I
are provided to the Village. [Amended 8-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-47]
I. File copies. The divider/developer shall promptly file three copies of the
recorded final plat with the Village for the permanent records of the
Village Community Development Department. If the final plat is not
recorded within the time frame as specified in § 395-31H above, the
final plat shall be resubmitted to the Village Plan Commission and the
Village Board for reapproval. [Amended 8-16-2010 by Ord. No.
10-47]
A. Filing.
(1) For land divisions not requiring the installation of required public
improvements, the divider shall prepare a certified survey map of
any proposed minor land division, a list of approving authorities
and a letter of application, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, and shall file the original and three copies of the certified
survey map, the list and the letter of application with the Village,
and shall pay to the Village Treasurer the required certified survey
map fee, at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the Plan
Commission at which the recommending action is desired.
(2) For land divisions requiring the installation of required public
improvements, the divider shall submit a draft certified survey map
of any proposed minor land division, the required fees and an
application, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and
shall file the draft and 10 copies of the certified survey map, the fee
and application with the Village and shall pay to the Village
Treasurer the required certified survey map and development
agreement fee and certified survey map related documents for
review. The certified survey map documents referred to in this
chapter shall include, but not be limited to, the engineering plans,
profiles and specifications; landscape and planting plans, cost
estimates and certificates of insurance; signage plans and cost
estimates; lighting plan, cost estimates and certificates of
insurance; signed contracts; performance and payment bonds and
certificates of insurance; declaration of restrictions, covenants and
easements; bylaws; title commitment policy; organization
documents; financial commitment from the lending institution;
copies of easement documents; and county, state and federal
permits and approvals, etc.
B. Preconditions to filing. No certified survey map shall be filed for
approval until after the divider shall have fully complied with §§ 395-25,
395-26 and 395-27 of this chapter and until after any required
neighborhood sketch plan review and approval or conceptual plan
§ 395-31 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-32
344:694
review and approval have been completed and all conditions have been
satisfied.
C. Land to be included. The certified survey map shall include all of the
contiguous land which is owned or controlled by the divider (or by the
owner if the divider and the owner are not the same).
D. Copies to approving authorities. The Village staff shall transmit nine
copies of the certified survey map, list of approving authorities and
letter of application to the Village Plan Commission and five copies to
the Village Board, as well as two copies each to any approving authority
other than the Village Board.
E. Copies to miscellaneous authorities. The Village staff shall promptly
transmit copies of the certified survey map to all affected Village
departments and agencies for their comments and recommendations
concerning matters within their jurisdiction. Copies may also be
transmitted to the Kenosha County Land Conservation Committee and
to the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission for
review and comment or any other advisory authorities. Comments and
recommendations shall be transmitted to the Village Plan Commission
within 20 days from the date the final certified survey map is filed and
all final documents are submitted.
F. Copies to county planning. The Village staff shall promptly transmit two
copies of the certified survey map to the Kenosha County Planning and
Development Office to verify and/or complete an affidavit of verification
of holding tank rights for the property, when applicable.
G. Plan Commission review. The certified survey map shall be reviewed by
the Village Plan Commission for conformance with this chapter and
with all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations,
intergovernmental agreements, and Comprehensive Plan components.
H. Plan Commission recommendation. The Village Plan Commission shall,
within 40 days from the date of filing of the final certified survey map,
recommend approval, conditional approval or rejection of the certified
survey map and shall promptly transmit the map along with its
recommendations to the Village Board.
I. Village Board action. The Village Board shall approve, approve
conditionally or reject the final certified survey map within 60 days
from the date of filing of the final map unless the time is extended by
agreement with the divider/developer.
J. Deferral of improvements, dedications or fees.
(1) Deferral authority. The Village Board may defer until the
occurrence of a specified event (e.g., the filing of an application for
a building permit with respect to a specified lot, or the filing of a
certified survey map to further divide a specified lot) any
requirement in this chapter to provide and pay for required public
§ 395-32 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-32
344:695
improvements, or any requirements to make dedications of land
or interests in land, or any requirement to pay fees regarding
items such as school sites, park sites or stormwater management
projects, with respect to any lot of a minor land division that is not
intended to be developed, improved or further divided.
(2) Required findings. Such a deferral shall only be allowed, however,
if the Board expressly finds that there are special circumstances
justifying the extraordinary act of deferral, the deferral will not
adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare, substantial
unnecessary hardship will be avoided, and, with respect to any
deferral of required public improvements or of required
dedications, that a conveyance of any lot(s) in the minor land
division prior to the occurrence of the specified event will not make
satisfaction of existing or anticipated public improvement or
dedication requirements impossible or difficult to achieve.
(3) Required condition/recorded restriction. Whenever the Board
permits the deferral of any requirement under this subsection, it
shall require that a statement of restrictions similar to the
following statement, but appropriately modified to fit the particular
circumstances and approved as to form by the Village Attorney,
appear on the face of the recorded certified survey map as a
condition to final approval of the certified survey map:
Lot(s) _____ shall not be developed or improved in any way, and
no zoning, building or occupancy permit shall be issued by the
Village with respect to any such lot(s), until such time as [specified
public improvements] are constructed and installed in accordance
with the then-current provisions of the Village of Pleasant Prairie's
Land Division and Development Control Ordinance, free of charge
to the Village and free of any liens or encumbrances, and/or until
such time as dedications of [specified interests in land for
specified purposes] are made to the Village in accordance with
the then-current provisions of such ordinance, free of charge to
the Village and free of any liens or encumbrances, and/or until
such time as [specified fees] are paid to the Village Treasurer in
accordance with then-current provisions of such ordinance. This
restriction shall run with the land, shall benefit and be enforceable
by the Village of Pleasant Prairie, and shall be removed or
modified only upon the express approval of the Village Board and
the recording of an affidavit evidencing such approval, signed by
the Village President and attested by the Village Clerk.
K. Removal of restrictions. At such time as all conditions to the removal of
any restrictions imposed pursuant to Subsection J have been satisfied,
the Village Board shall promptly approve the removal of such
restrictions and cause an affidavit evidencing such approval to be
signed by the Village President and attested by the Village Clerk and
recorded with the Register of Deeds for Kenosha County, Wisconsin.
§ 395-32 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-32
344:696
L. Written statement. If the certified survey map is approved conditionally
or rejected, the conditions of approval or reasons for rejection shall be
stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement shall be
promptly mailed to the divider.
M. Satisfaction of conditions. The divider shall submit to the Village Board
proof of satisfaction of all conditions imposed by the Board within six
months, or within such other period of time as the Board may prescribe,
after notification of the conditional approval. The Village Board shall
grant final approval when all such conditions are satisfied. Until all such
conditions are satisfied, the certified survey map shall not be certified
as approved by the Village Clerk and shall not be recorded.
N. Certification of approval. Upon granting final approval of the certified
survey map, the Village Board shall cause the Village Clerk to certify
the Board's approval on the face of the original map and promptly
return the map to the divider for recording.
O. Final approval upon conditions. To facilitate the signing of the
development agreement entered into by and between the divider and
the Village, the Village Board may grant final approval conditioned
upon satisfaction of specified ministerial conditions and the filing of
proof of such satisfaction within a short period of time, not to exceed
seven business days. The Board shall specify the date and time by which
such conditions shall be satisfied and designate the Village official(s) to
whom proof of such satisfaction shall be delivered. Upon the timely
satisfaction of all such conditions, and the timely filing of proof of such
satisfaction, the Village Board's final approval shall be effective, and the
Village President and Clerk shall promptly certify the Board's final
approval upon the face of the original map. The certified survey map
shall then be promptly returned to the divider for recording. If the
specified conditions are not timely satisfied, or if proof of satisfaction of
the specified conditions is not timely filed, the Board's approval shall be
automatically suspended. In such event, the Village President and Clerk
shall not certify the Board's final approval upon the map, and the map
shall be returned to the Board for further action.
P. Recordation. The divider shall record the finally approved certified
survey map with the Kenosha County Register of Deeds within 30 days
after the last required approval.
Q. File copies. The divider shall promptly file one copy of the recorded
certified survey map with the Village for the permanent records of the
Village Community Development Department.
R. Failure to act. Upon failure of the Village Board to approve, approve
conditionally or reject a proposed certified survey map within 60 days
of the filing of the map, the time having not been extended by
agreement with the divider, the map shall be deemed approved, and,
upon demand, a certificate to that effect shall be made on the face of
the map by the Village Clerk.
§ 395-32 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-33
344:697
§ 395-33. Replat.
When a divider proposes to replat or vacate a recorded plat or certified
survey map, or part thereof, the divider shall first comply with §§ 236.36
through 236.44, Wis. Stats., to the extent applicable. The divider shall then
proceed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A replat fee shall
be charged to the divider/developer to defer the administrative processing
costs of the replat review.
§ 395-33 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-33
344:698
ARTICLE IV
Preliminary Plat
§ 395-34. General requirements.
A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions and large lot
subdivisions. The preliminary plat shall be based upon a survey by a
Wisconsin registered land surveyor and shall be prepared on tracing cloth,
reproducible drafting film, or paper of good quality at a map scale of not
more than 100 feet to the inch.
§ 395-35. Plat data.
All preliminary plats shall show each of the following:
A. Title or name under which the proposed subdivision or large lot
subdivision is to be recorded. Such title shall not be the same as or
similar to a previously approved and recorded plat, unless it is an
addition to a previously recorded plat and is so stated on the plat.
B. Location of the proposed subdivision or large lot subdivision by:
government lot, quarter-section, township, range, county and state.
C. General location sketch showing the location of the subdivision or large
lot subdivision within the United States Public Land Survey section.
D. Date, graphic scale and North arrow.
E. Names and addresses of the owner, divider and Wisconsin registered
land surveyor preparing the plat.
F. All contiguous land owned or controlled by the divider (or the owner, if
the divider and the owner are not the same) shall be included in the
land division.
G. Exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed
subdivision or large lot subdivision referenced to a corner established
in United States Public Land Survey and the total acreage encompassed
thereby.
H. Existing and proposed contours at vertical intervals of not more than
two feet where the slope of the ground surface is less than 10% and of
not more than five feet where the slope of the ground surface is 10% or
more. Elevations shall be marked on such contours based on National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (mean sea level).
I. Water elevations of lakes and streams at the date of the survey and
approximate high and low water elevations, all referenced to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (mean sea level).
J. Floodplain limits as a contour line showing the elevation of the onehundred-
year recurrence interval flood or, where such data is not
available, of the maximum flood of record.
§ 395-34 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-35
344:699
K. Location, width and name, if applicable, of all existing streets, alleys or
other public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, as well
as all section and quarter-section lines within the exterior boundaries of
the plat or immediately adjacent thereto.
L. Type, width and elevation of any existing street roadways within the
exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto,
together with any legally established center-line elevations, all
referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (mean sea
level).
M. Location and names of all adjacent subdivisions or large lot
subdivisions, parks or cemeteries, and owners of record of abutting
unplatted lands.
N. Location, size, and invert elevation of any existing sanitary or storm
sewers, culverts or drain pipes and lines, the location of manholes,
catch basins, hydrants, power and telephone poles and lines, and the
location and size of any existing water and gas mains within the exterior
boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto. If no sanitary or
storm sewers or water mains are located on or immediately adjacent to
the lands being platted, the nearest such sewers or water mains which
might be extended to serve such lands shall be indicated by their
direction and distance from the nearest exterior boundary of the plat
and their size and invert elevations.
O. Proposed lot (building site) evaluations shall be shown on the
preliminary plat or grading plan. Lot (building site) elevations shall be
one to two feet above the elevation of the roadway crown in the
adjacent public street or as otherwise recommended by the Village
Administrator.
P. Locations of all existing real property boundary lines, structures,
streams and watercourses, wetlands, shorelands, rock outcrops,
wooded areas, railroad tracks and other similar significant natural or
man-made features within the tract being divided or immediately
adjacent thereto.
Q. Location, width and names of all proposed streets and public rights-ofway.
R. Location and approximate width of utility easements, including those to
be located in public streets.
S. Approximate dimensions of all lots together with proposed lot and block
numbers.
T. Location and approximate dimensions of any sites to be reserved or
dedicated for streets, schools, parks, playgrounds, drainageways, or
other public purposes or uses.
U. Approximate radii of all curves.
§ 395-35 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-35
344:700
§ 395-36. Street plans and profiles.
The divider/developer shall provide, with the preliminary plat, the first draft
of final engineering plans, including street plans, profiles and specifications
showing existing ground surface and proposed and established street
grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits
of the proposed subdivision or large lot subdivision. All elevations shall
be based upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (mean sea
level), and plans and profiles shall be designed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter and any applicable supplemental engineering
design or construction standards or specifications.
§ 395-37. Testing.
The Village Engineer, after determining from a review of the existing
engineering studies or previous soil borings completed for the preliminary
plat that the soil, slope, vegetation, or drainage characteristics of the site
are such that the installation of public improvements will require additional
engineering design studies or investigations, shall require that borings and
soundings be made in specified areas to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and
water conditions. Where the subdivision or large lot subdivision will not be
V. Existing and proposed zoning in the proposed subdivision or large lot
subdivision.
W. Any proposed lake or stream access with a small drawing clearly
indicating the location of the proposed subdivision or large lot
subdivision in relation to the access.
X. Any proposed lake and stream improvement or relocation.
Y. Soil type, slope, and boundaries as shown on the detailed operational
soil survey maps prepared by the United States Soil Conservation
Service.
Z. Location of soil boring tests, where required by § COMM 85.06, Wis.
Adm. Code, made to a depth of six feet, unless bedrock is at a lesser
depth. The number of such tests shall be adequate to portray the
character of the soil and the depths of the bedrock and groundwater
from the natural undisturbed surface. To accomplish this purpose, a
minimum of one test per three acres shall be made initially. The results
of such tests shall be submitted along with the preliminary plat.
AA. Location of soil percolation tests where required by § COMM 85.06,
Wis. Adm. Code, taken at the location and depth in which soil
absorption waste disposal systems are to be installed. The number of
such tests initially made shall not be fewer than one test per three acres
or one test per lot, whichever is greater. The results of such tests shall
be submitted along with the preliminary plat.
BB. Any other information required by the Village staff, Village Plan
Commission or Village Board.
§ 395-35 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-37
344:701
served by public sanitary sewer service, the provisions of Ch. COMM 85,
Wis. Adm. Code, shall be complied with, and the appropriate data shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat.
§ 395-38. Soil and water conservation.
The Village Engineer, after determining from a review of the draft
preliminary plat that the soil, slope, vegetation, and drainage
characteristics of the site are such as to require substantial cutting,
clearing, grading, or other earthmoving operations in the development
of the land division or otherwise entail a severe erosion hazard, shall
require the divider to provide soil erosion and sedimentation control plans
and specifications. Such plans shall generally follow the guidelines and
standards set forth in the United States Department of Agriculture
Conservation Technical Guide, prepared by the United States Department
of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, and the Wisconsin Construction
Site Best Management Practice Handbook, prepared by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources, and shall be in accordance with
standards set forth in § 395-83 of this chapter.
§ 395-39. Restrictions.
§ 395-40. Surveyor's certificate.
The surveyor preparing the preliminary plat shall certify on the face of the
plat that it is a correct representation of all existing land divisions and
features and that the surveyor has fully complied with the provisions of this
chapter.
A. Filing; approval. Whenever the divider/developer proposes to regulate
land use, density, environmental protection, street tree and planting
maintenance, retention/detention basin maintenance, signage
maintenance, street access, landscaping, building materials, or other
matters in the proposed land division or development plan by means of
restrictive covenants running with the land, the divider/developer shall
file all such proposed restrictive covenants with the conceptual plan. All
such restrictive covenants shall be subject to approval of the Village
Board. Such covenants shall not conflict with and shall not be less
restrictive than any applicable Village, county, state or federal statutes,
ordinances, rules or regulations.
B. Maintenance. The divider/developer shall be required to create
appropriate and satisfactory mechanisms to ensure that common areas,
street trees and landscaped areas, outlots, retention and detention
facilities and other similar areas are properly maintained. The Village of
Pleasant Prairie shall be granted appropriate easements and authority
to enforce the maintenance of such areas, or perform such maintenance
itself, and to recover the costs of performing such maintenance or
enforcing the restrictions, including its reasonable attorney fees.
§ 395-37 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-40
344:702
ARTICLE V
Final Plat
§ 395-41. General requirements.
A final plat prepared by a Wisconsin registered land surveyor shall be
required for all subdivisions and large lot subdivisions. Such plat shall
comply in all respects with the requirements of § 236.20, Wis. Stats., as
amended from time to time, and the provisions of this chapter. The final plat
shall be submitted in an electronic media format acceptable to the Village
and compatible with the Village's Geographic Information System format.
§ 395-42. Additional information.
The final plat shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information
required by § 236.20, Wis. Stats., each of the following:
§ 395-43. Recorded restrictions.
The Village Board shall require that dedications and easement restrictions,
running with the land and enforceable by the Village, be recorded with the
final plat to accomplish the purposes and intent of this chapter. A draft of
the final plat shall first be submitted to the Village staff for review, comment
and addition of the dedications and easements language prior to submittal
to the Village Plan Commission and Village Board for final approval.
§ 395-44. Survey accuracy.
A. Exact length and bearing of the center line of all streets.
B. Exact street width along the line of any obliquely intersecting street.
C. Setbacks or building lines required by the Village Board in accordance
with the guidelines set forth in § 395-64 of this chapter.
D. Utility and drainage easements.
E. All lands to be dedicated or reserved for future public acquisition or
reserved for the common use of property owners within the plat.
F. All lands affected by special restrictions required by the Village Board,
such as those relating to access control along public ways, the provision
of planting strips or detention or retention facilities.
G. A copy of the final plat on an electronic media compatible with the
Village's Geographic Information System pursuant to § 395-82A of this
chapter shall be filed with the Village.
H. Any other information required by the Village staff, Village Plan
Commission or Village Board.
A. Examination; field checks. The Village staff shall examine all final plats
within the Village and may make, or cause to be made by a Wisconsin
§ 395-41 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-44
344:703
§ 395-45. Surveying and monumenting.
All final plats shall satisfy all the surveying and monumenting requirements
of § 236.15, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time.
§ 395-46. State plane coordinate system.
When the final plat is located within a United States Public Land Survey
quarter-section, the corners of which have been relocated, monumented
and coordinated by the Village of Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County or
the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission, the plat shall
be tied directly to one of the section or quarter corners so relocated,
monumented and coordinated. The exact grid bearings and distances of
such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and the material and
Wisconsin state plane coordinates of the monument marking the relocated
section or quarter corner to which the plat is tied shall be indicated on
the plat. All distances and bearings shall be referenced to the Wisconsin
Coordinate System, South Zone, and adjusted to the Kenosha County
control survey.
registered land surveyor under the supervision or direction of the
Village Administrator, field checks for the accuracy and closure of
survey, the proper kind and location of monuments and the legibility
and completeness of the drawing.
B. Exterior boundaries. Maximum error of closure before adjustment of
the survey of the exterior boundaries shall not exceed, in horizontal
distance or position, the ratio of one part in 10,000 or, in azimuth, of
four seconds of arc per interior angle. If field measurements exceed this
maximum, new field measurements shall be made until a satisfactory
closure is obtained. When a satisfactory closure of the field
measurements has been obtained, the survey of the exterior boundary
shall be adjusted to form a closed geometric figure.
C. Interior boundaries. All street, block and lot dimensions shall be
computed as closed geometric figures based upon the control provided
by the closed exterior boundary survey. If field checks disclose an error
for any interior line of the plat greater than the ratio of one part in
5,000 or an error in measured angle greater than one minute of arc for
any angle where the shorter side forming the angle is 300 feet or
longer, necessary corrections shall be made. Where the shorter side of a
measured angle is less than 300 feet in length, the error shall not
exceed the value of one minute multiplied by the quotient of 300 divided
by the length of the shorter side; however, such error shall not in any
case exceed five minutes of arc.
D. Engineer's examination. The Village Board shall receive the results of
the Village Engineer's examination prior to approving the final plat.
§ 395-44 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-47
344:704
§ 395-47. Certificates.
All final plats shall provide all the certificates required by § 236.21, Wis.
Stats., and, in connection with the owner's or mortgagee's certificate, the
owner shall submit, as a condition of the Village Board's final approval of the
final plat, an appropriately updated abstract of title, commitment to issue
a policy of title insurance from a title insurance company, policy of title
insurance equal to the total amount of the letter of credit, or a certificate
of title from an abstracting company. In addition, the surveyor shall certify
that he has fully complied with all of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 395-48. Recordation.
The final plat shall only be recorded with the Kenosha County Register of
Deeds after final approval by the Village Board, after verification is provided
that all outstanding taxes and special assessments are paid in full, and after
all required certificates are attached to or inscribed thereon. The approved
final plat shall be recorded by the divider within 30 days after the last
required approval of such plat.
§ 395-49. Correction instruments.
A. Types. Correction instruments relating to recorded final plats may be
recorded in the Kenosha County Register of Deeds office and may
include:
(1) Affidavits to correct distances, angles, directions, bearings, chords,
block or lot numbers, street names or other similar details shown
on a recorded final plat, which shall be approved by the Village
Board, prior to recording, after review and recommendation of the
Plan Commission.
(2) Ratifications of a recorded final plat, signed and acknowledged in
accordance with § 706.07, Wis. Stats.
(3) Certificates of owners and mortgagees of record at the time of
recording.
B. Limitation on use. Correction instruments shall create neither new
buildable lots nor nonconforming lots.
§ 395-47 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-49
344:705

ARTICLE VI
Certified Survey Map
§ 395-50. General provisions.
§ 395-51. Required information.
The certified survey map shall show correctly on its face, in addition to
all information required by § 236.34, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to
time, the following:
A. Requirement. A certified survey map prepared by a Wisconsin
registered land surveyor shall be required for all minor land divisions. It
shall comply in all respects with the requirements of § 236.34, Wis.
Stats., as amended from time to time, and with all applicable
requirements of this chapter. Without limitation, the certified survey
map shall comply with the design standards and public improvement
requirements set forth in Articles VII and VIII of this chapter.
B. Uses and limitations. In addition to the use specified in Subsection A
above, a certified survey map may be used to change the boundaries of
lots, blocks and outlots within a recorded final plat or certified survey
map if the redivision does not result in a subdivision and does not
violate any provisions of this chapter. A certified survey map shall not
alter the exterior boundaries of a recorded plat, alter areas previously
dedicated to the public by any plat or certified survey map or alter any
restriction placed on platted or mapped land by covenant, by grant of
easement or by any other means.
A. All existing structures and driveways (and all related setbacks),
watercourses, wetlands, shorelands, drainage ditches and other
features pertinent to proper land division.
B. Setbacks or building lines if required by the Village Board in
accordance with the guidelines set forth in § 395-64 of this chapter.
C. Utility and railway easements, including those to be located in public
streets, and stormwater and drainage easements.
D. All lands dedicated to public use, temporarily reserved for possible
public acquisition, subject to a required restriction, or reserved for the
common use of property owners within the certified survey map.
E. Date of the map.
F. Floodplain limits and the contour line representing the elevation of the
one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood or, where such data is not
available, a contour line showing the elevation of the maximum flood of
record.
G. Graphic scale and North arrow.
§ 395-50 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-51
344:707
§ 395-52. Additional information.
The following additional information shall be provided by the divider, unless
the Village Board decides that such information is not necessary for the
proper review and consideration of the certified survey map:
H. Names and addresses of the owner(s), divider and Wisconsin registered
land surveyor.
I. Location of the proposed certified survey map, government lot, quartersection,
township, range, county, and state.
J. General location sketch showing the location of the certified survey
map within the United States Public Land Survey section.
K. Elevations shall be based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929
(mean sea level).
L. Water elevations of lakes and streams at the date of the survey and
approximate high and low water elevations, all referenced to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (mean sea level).
M. Type, width and elevation of any existing street roadways within the
exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto,
together with any legally established center-line elevations, all
referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (mean sea
level).
N. Any other information required by the Village staff, the Village Plan
Commission or the Village Board.
A. Existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than one foot where
the slope of the ground surface is less than 10% and of not more than
five feet where the slope of the ground surface is 10% or more.
Elevations shall be marked on such contours based on National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (mean sea level). The requirement to
provide topographic data may be waived if the parcel(s) created is fully
developed.
B. Soil type, slope and boundaries as shown on the detailed operational
soil survey maps prepared by the United States Soil Conservation
Service.
C. Location of soil boring tests, where required by § COMM 85.06, Wis.
Adm. Code. The number of such tests shall be adequate to portray the
character of the soil and the depth of bedrock and groundwater from
the natural undisturbed surface. To accomplish this purpose, a
minimum of one test per three acres shall be made initially. The results
of such tests shall be submitted with the certified survey map.
D. Location of soil percolation tests where required by § COMM 85.06,
Wis. Adm. Code, taken at the location and depth in which soil
absorption waste disposal systems are to be installed. The number of
§ 395-51 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-52
344:708
§ 395-53. State plane coordinate system.
When the certified survey map is located within a United States Public
Land Survey quarter-section, the corners of which have been relocated,
monumented and coordinated by the Village, Kenosha County or the
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission, the map shall be
tied directly to one of the section or quarter corners so relocated,
monumented and coordinated. The exact grid bearings and distances of
such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and the material and
Wisconsin state plane coordinates of the monument marking the relocated
section or quarter corner to which the map is tied shall be indicated on
the map. All distances and bearings shall be referenced to the Wisconsin
Coordinate System, South Zone, and adjusted to Kenosha County's control
survey.
§ 395-54. Certificates.
The surveyor shall certify on the face of the certified survey map that he has
fully complied with all of the provisions of § 236.34, Wis. Stats., and of this
chapter. In addition, if streets or other public areas are to be dedicated or
reserved, an owner's certificate and a mortgagee's certificate, if applicable,
shall be required and shall be in substantially the same form as required
by § 236.21(2)(a), Wis. Stats. In connection with the owner's or mortgagee's
certificate, the owner shall submit, as a condition of the Village Board's final
approval of the certified survey map, an appropriately updated abstract of
title, commitment to issue a policy of title insurance from a title insurance
company, policy of title insurance or a certificate of title from an abstracting
company.
such tests initially made shall not be fewer than one test per three acres
or one test per lot, whichever is greater. The results of such tests shall
be submitted with the certified survey map.
E. Location of the ordinary high-water mark as defined by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
F. Detailed grading and drainage plans. The plans should include grid spot
elevations, drainage flow directions, drainage swales, high points,
drainage easement locations and other drainage information as
determined to be necessary. Elevations shall be marked on such
contours based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (mean sea
level).
G. A copy of the certified survey map on an electronic media compatible
with the Village's Geographic Information System pursuant to
§ 395-82A of this chapter shall be filed with the Village.
H. Any other information required by the Village staff, the Village Plan
Commission or the Village Board.
§ 395-52 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-55
344:709
§ 395-55. Recordation.
The certified survey map shall only be recorded with the Kenosha County
Register of Deeds after final approval by the Village Board and after all
required certificates are attached to or inscribed thereon. The approved
map shall be recorded by the divider within 30 days after its last required
approval and a recorded copy provided to the Village.
§ 395-56. Frequency of divisions.
No more than four lots or parcels, each 1 1/2 acres or less in area, shall be
created from a single lot, parcel or tract of land by the owner thereof or
by the owner's agent for the purpose of sale or development by successive
certified survey maps within a period of five years.
§ 395-57. Correction instruments.
A. Types. Correction instruments relating to certified survey maps may be
recorded in the Kenosha County Register of Deeds office and may
include:
(1) Affidavits to correct distances, angles, directions, bearings, chords,
block or lot numbers, street names or other similar details shown
on a recorded certified survey map, which shall be approved by the
Village Board, prior to recording, after review and recommendation
by the Plan Commission.
(2) Ratifications of a recorded certified survey map signed and
acknowledged in accordance with § 706.07, Wis. Stats.
(3) Certificates of owners and mortgagees of record at the time of
recording.
B. Limitations on use. Correction instruments shall neither create new
buildable lots nor create nonconforming lots.
§ 395-55 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-57
344:710
ARTICLE VII
Design Standards
§ 395-58. Street arrangement.
A. General. The type, location and arrangement of public streets in any
proposed land division or development shall generally conform to the
type, location and arrangement of public streets shown on the Kenosha
County Jurisdictional Highway System Plan, the neighborhood sketch
plan, or any other Comprehensive Plan component of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie. When such plans have not been completed or are
insufficiently detailed or are outdated, decisions regarding the type,
location and arrangement of public streets shall take into account the
following factors, among others: the type, location, arrangement and
connectivity of existing and proposed streets; the topography; natural
features, such as streams, wetlands, floodplains and woodlands; the
proposed use of the land to be served by such streets; the needs of
adjoining areas; municipal services' efficiency for snow plowing and
garbage; accessibility for police, fire and rescue vehicles/personnel;
and traffic safety. Public streets shall be located and arranged so as to
provide each proposed buildable lot with the required frontage on a
public street. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
B. Arterial streets. Arterial streets shall be arranged to provide ready
access to centers of employment, governmental activity, shopping and
recreation and to arterial streets with which they connect, both within
and outside the Village. Arterial streets shall be appropriately related to
existing and proposed collector streets. Insofar as practicable, they
shall be continuous and in alignment with existing or planned streets
with which they are to connect in linear fashion.
C. Collector streets. Collector streets shall be arranged to collect traffic
from residential areas and to convey such traffic smoothly and
efficiently to existing and proposed arterial streets. Collector streets
shall be appropriately related to the existing or future mass
transportation system, to special traffic generators, such as schools,
churches and shopping centers, to concentrations of population and to
the arterial and collector streets with which they connect.
D. Minor streets. Minor streets shall be arranged to serve residential
areas and other areas of dispersed development. The arrangement of
minor streets shall conform to the topography, discourage use by
through traffic, permit the design of efficient sanitary sewerage system
facilities, water system facilities and storm sewer and drainage system
facilities and require the minimum street area necessary to provide safe
and convenient access to abutting properties.
E. Extension to boundary. Public streets shall generally extend to the
boundary lines of the parcel or tract being divided, unless the
topography or other physical conditions prevent such extension, or
unless such extension is not necessary or desirable for the appropriate
§ 395-58 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-58
344:711
§ 395-59. Limited access highway and railroad treatment.
[Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
Whenever a proposed land division or development contains or is adjacent
to a limited access highway or railroad, the design shall be in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
layout of the particular land division or for the appropriate development
of adjacent parcels or tracts.
F. Arterial street protection. Whenever an existing or proposed arterial
street is located adjacent to or within a proposed land division,
adequate protection of residential lots, limitation of access and
separation of through traffic from local traffic shall be provided.
Permanent screening or landscape plantings in a restricted nonaccess
area along any property line adjacent to an arterial street shall be
required.
G. Stream and lake shores. A minimum of 60 feet of public access to the
low-water mark of navigable streams or lakes shall be provided on all
plats and certified survey maps at intervals of not more than 1/2 mile, as
required by § 236.16(3), Wis. Stats.
H. Nonaccess areas. The Village shall be granted control, under conditions
approved by the Village Board, of all nonaccess areas as required by
Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, of the Village Code provided on any
plat or certified survey map.
I. Off-street parking, loading and service areas. Off-street parking,
loading and service areas shall be provided in park and recreational,
institutional, commercial and industrial areas as required by Chapter
420, Zoning Ordinance, of the Village Code unless specifically waived
by the Village Board.
J. Street names. Street names shall be assigned or approved by the
Village. Such names shall not duplicate or be confusingly similar to the
names of existing streets in the Village, and numerical street names
shall be utilized whenever possible.
A. Planting strip. When a proposed development abuts, or when lots within
a proposed land division abut the right-of-way of an existing or
proposed limited-access highway or railroad, a planting strip at least 35
feet in depth shall be provided adjacent to the highway and 50 feet in
depth adjacent to a railroad. This strip shall be a part of the platted lots,
and the following restriction language or similar shall appear on the
face of the plat or map with respect to such strip: "This strip is reserved
for the construction of a berm and planting of trees and shrubs, and the
building of structures hereon is prohibited." Only the Village Board has
the authority to release the easement requirement of a planting strip.
B. Parallel streets. Commercial and industrial properties adjacent to an
existing or proposed limited access highway or railroad shall be
§ 395-58 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-59
344:712
§ 395-60. Street and pedestrianway design standards.
provided with access to a street located approximately parallel to and
at a suitable distance from such highway or railroad right-of-way, not
less than 150 feet, or as identified in Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance,
of the Village Code, to permit the appropriate use of the land between
such street and the highway or railroad.
C. Intersection of parallel streets. A street which is parallel to an existing
or proposed limited access highway or railroad shall not intersect a
street that crosses such highway or railroad within a distance of 250
feet from such highway or railroad right-of-way. In determining the
distance of such an intersection from the highway or railroad right-ofway,
due consideration shall be given to the minimum distance required
for the desirable approach gradients.
D. Minor streets. The location of minor streets adjacent and parallel to
existing or proposed arterial streets or railroad rights-of-way shall be
avoided in residential areas.
A. Minimum width. The minimum width of all proposed public street
rights-of-way and roadways shall be as specified in applicable
Comprehensive Plan components, such as neighborhood sketch plans
or the Kenosha County Jurisdictional Highway System Plan, or as
specified in Chapter 405, Public Improvement Projects, whichever is
greater.
B. Cross sections. Public street cross sections shall be in accordance with
the minimum requirements of Chapter 405, Public Improvement
Projects. Cross sections for freeways, expressway, boulevards, and
parkways shall be based upon detailed engineering studies. (See
Chapter 405 for illustrations of typical urban street cross sections,
which are incorporated by reference.)
C. Culs-de-sac. Cul-de-sac streets that are designed to have one end
permanently closed shall not exceed 800 feet in length. (The length of a
cul-de-sac street shall be measured along its center lines, from the
center line of the intersecting street to the end of the cul-de-sac rightof-
way.) (See Chapter 405 for an illustration of a typical urban cul-desac
with center island design.)
D. Temporary termination. The temporary termination of a public street
that is intended to be extended at a later date shall be accomplished by
constructing a temporary cul-de-sac as outlined below: [Amended
3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-16]
(1) The divider/developer shall dedicate the required public right-ofway
areas to the Village for the future public streets within a
development. For temporary, dead-ended streets, the divider/
developer shall also dedicate a temporary public street, access and
maintenance easement to the Village and construct the temporary
§ 395-59 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-60
344:713
street cul-de-sac. Land for the temporary cul-de-sac shall come
from within the development property or by acquiring an off-site
easement from an adjacent property owner.
(2) Temporary public street areas shall be constructed to meet the
Village specifications for a typical urban cross-section profile as
illustrated in Chapter 405, with following exceptions:
(a) Temporary cul-de-sac rights-of-way may be reduced to 100 feet
in diameter;
(b) Temporary culs-de-sac shall not have a cul-de-sac planting
island;
(c) Temporary culs-de-sac shall not have curb and gutter installed
along the cul-de-sac bulb; and
(d) Temporary culs-de-sac shall not have street trees installed
along the cul-de-sac bulb.
(3) Temporary culs-de-sac shall comply with the required public
improvement paving schedule, unless the Village Administrator
allows for the temporary cul(s)-de-sac to remain gravel while the
project is between construction stages of the development.
(4) Temporary cul-de-sac street improvements shall be removed and
the required street improvements shall be installed by the adjacent
off-site divider/developer/owner at the time of the future street
extension.
(5) Temporary easement areas relating to the temporary cul-de-sacs
shall be vacated by the Village Board when future off-site
development completes its second phase of required public street
improvements or the second stage of the next stage of the
development is completed, inspected, accepted and dedicated to
the Village.
(6) The owner/developer shall be responsible for the Village's costs to
install street signs that indicate that the dead-ended street is
temporary and that the street is intended to be extended in the
future to serve additional vacant lands.
E. Street grades.
(1) Maximum. Unless necessitated by exceptional topography, and
subject to approval of the Village Board, the vertical center-line
grade of any public street or public way shall not exceed the
following:
(a) Arterial streets: 5%.
(b) Collector streets: 7%.
(c) Minor streets and alleys: 10%.
§ 395-60 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-60
344:714
(d) Pedestrianways: 10% unless steps or stairs of acceptable
design are provided.
(e) In no case shall the grade of any street exceed 10%.
(2) Minimum. In no case shall the vertical center-line grade of any
public street or public way be less than 4/10 of 1%.
(3) Relationship to grading. Within the limits established by
Subsection E(1) above, street grades shall be established so as to
avoid unnecessary grading.
F. Centering of pavement. All residential public street roadways shall be
centered within the street right-of-way.
G. Radius of curves.
(1) Deflection of center line. Whenever a street center line deflects by
more than 2°, it shall follow a circular curve having a radius of not
less than the following:
(a) Arterial streets and highways: 500 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(c) Minor streets: 150 feet.
(2) Tangent between reverse curves. A tangent of at least 100 feet in
length shall be provided between reverse circular curves on all
streets.
(3) Culs-de-sac. Cud-de-sac turnarounds shall be connected to the
approach street by reverse circular curves having a radius of not
less than 30 feet.
H. Center-line profile.
(1) Vertical curves. Whenever there is a change in street center-line
profile of more than 1%, a vertical curve shall be provided. Vertical
curve requirements shall be in accordance with Wisconsin
Department of Transportation requirements. Minimum vertical
curve lengths shall provide a sight distance of not less than 300
feet, measured from an eye level of four feet high, with a clear view
of an obstacle not over two feet high.
(2) Crowns. Unless otherwise approved, public residential streets shall
have a center-line crown. Offset crowns or continuous cross-slopes
will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
I. Roadway elevations/floodplains. Elevations of public street roadways
passing through floodplain areas shall be designed in the following
manner:
§ 395-60 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-60
344:715
§ 395-61. Street intersections.
(1) Arterial streets and collector streets shall be designed so that they
will not be overtopped by the fifty-year recurrence interval flood.
(2) Minor streets shall be designed so that they will not be overtopped
by the ten-year recurrence interval flood.
J. Bridges and culverts. In addition to meeting other applicable
requirements, all new and replacement bridges and culverts over
navigable waterways, including pedestrian and other minor bridges,
shall be designed to accommodate the one-hundred-year recurrence
interval flood event, as established in the applicable federal flood
insurance study, SEWRPC report or Village stormwater management
plan, without raising the peak stage by more than 0.01 foot. Larger
permissible flood stage increases may be allowed by the Village Board
where topographic and land use conditions can accommodate the
increased flood stage without additional flood damage, provided that
flood easements have been secured from all property owners affected
by such excess stage increases or other appropriate measures have
been taken to protect the Village from possible liability. Such bridges
and culverts shall be so designed and constructed as to facilitate the
passage of ice flows and other debris. All new and replacement bridges
shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable statutes and state
and federal rules and regulations, and plans shall be submitted to the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources to assure compliance
therewith.
K. Half streets. Where an existing dedicated or platted half street is
adjacent to the tract or parcel being divided, the other half of the street
shall be dedicated and improved at the cost of the divider. The platting
of new half streets shall not be permitted.
L. Alleys. Alleys shall not be allowed in residential subdivisions or large lot
subdivisions.
A. Right angle. Streets shall intersect one another at angles as close to 90°
as topography and other limiting factors of good engineering design
permit.
B. Maximum number of streets. The maximum number of streets
converging at one intersection shall be two.
C. Arterial streets. The number of intersections on arterial streets shall be
held to a minimum. Location of intersections shall be pursuant to
§ 420-45 of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance.
D. Property line curves. Property lines at street intersections shall be
rounded and shall follow a circular curve with a minimum radius of 15
feet. Radii of 20 feet are desirable. Radii at intersections of minor or
collector streets with arterial streets shall be determined on a case-bycase
basis, with a radius of 20 feet being the minimum. Radii at
§ 395-60 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-61
344:716
§ 395-62. Blocks.
§ 395-63. Lots.
driveway intersections of minor or collector streets for commercial or
industrial access shall be at a radius of 40 feet being the minimum.
E. Continuation of minor streets. If the center lines of minor streets
approaching an arterial or collector street from opposite sides would be
within 250 feet on one another, measured along the center line of the
arterial or collector street, then the location of one or both of such
streets shall be adjusted so that a single intersection is formed.
A. General requirements. The widths, lengths and shapes of blocks shall
be suited to the planned use of the land, zoning requirements, need for
convenient access, control and safety of street traffic and the
limitations and opportunities of topography.
B. Length. The length of blocks in residential areas shall not generally be
less than 600 feet nor more than 1,500 feet unless otherwise dictated
by exceptional topography or other limiting factors of good engineering
design.
C. Width. Blocks shall generally be wide enough to provide for two tiers of
lots of appropriate depth except where an alternative configuration is
required to separate residential development from through traffic or a
railroad or where good urban planning design provides other
acceptable alternatives. The width of lots or parcels which are proposed
to be developed for commercial or industrial purposes shall be
adequate to provide for off-street service and parking required by the
contemplated use and to satisfy the applicable zoning restrictions for
such use.
D. Pedestrianways. Pedestrianways/bicycle paths of not less than 10 feet
or sidewalks of not less than five feet in width may be required near the
center of and entirely across any block over 900 feet in length where
deemed essential by the Village Board to provide adequate pedestrian
circulation or access to schools, parks, churches, transportation
facilities or similar places used by the public. Sidewalks of not less than
10 feet in width may be required near shopping centers or other
commercial uses.
E. Utility easements. Utility easements for electric power, gas, telephone
and other communications facilities shall be located along rear lot lines
and along side lot lines at mid-block locations, whenever practicable.
A. General. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for
the location of the land division and for the type of development and use
contemplated. The lots shall generally be designed to provide
aesthetically pleasing building sites and a proper architectural setting
for the buildings contemplated.
§ 395-61 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-63
344:717
B. Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall generally be at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved street lines on which the lots face. Lot
lines shall follow municipal boundary lines rather than cross them.
C. Double and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage
lots shall generally be prohibited except where necessary to provide
separation of residential or commercial development from through
traffic or railroads or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography
and orientation.
D. Public street frontage. Every buildable lot shall front on or abut a public
street for a distance of at least 60 feet or such lesser distance as
specifically allowed by Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, of the Village
Code; provided, however, that not withstanding the foregoing language,
nothing in this subsection shall require that a buildable lot have any
public street frontage if and to the extent that the regulations of a
planned development zoning district under Chapter 420 of the Village
Code provide for development supported by an approved system of
private roads. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
E. Area and dimensions. The area and dimensions of all lots shall satisfy all
applicable requirements of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, of the
Village Code. Buildable lots that will not be served by public sanitary
sewerage system facilities shall be of sufficient size to permit the use of
an on-site soil absorption sewage disposal system designed in
accordance with Ch. COMM 83, Wis. Adm. Code.
F. Depth. The depth of lots shall be a minimum of 125 feet. Excessive
depth in relation to width shall be avoided, and a proportion of two to
one shall be considered a desirable ratio of depth to width under normal
conditions. The depth of lots proposed to be developed for park and
recreational, institutional, commercial or industrial uses shall be
adequate to provide for the off-street parking, loading and service areas
required by the use contemplated.
G. Width. The width of lots shall satisfy the requirements of Chapter 420,
Zoning Ordinance, of the Village Code. (See also Subsection E above.)
H. Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a width at least 20 feet greater than
the minimum required width of interior lots to permit adequate building
setbacks from side streets.
I. Shape. The shape of lots shall generally be rectangular, but lots located
on curves or culs-de-sac shall be an exception. The creation of flag lots
shall not be permitted.
J. Cul-de-sac lots. The street frontage of cul-de-sac lots shall satisfy the
applicable regulations of Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, of the Village
Code.
K. Water's edge. Lands lying between the mean line and the water's edge,
and any otherwise unplattable lands which lie between a proposed land
§ 395-63 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-63
344:718
§ 395-64. Building setback lines.
Building setback lines appropriate to the location and type of development
contemplated, which are more restrictive than the regulations of the zoning
district in which the land division is located, may be required by the Village
Board to provide aesthetically consistent site lines for structures and shall
be shown on the final plat or certified survey map. Examples of the
application of this provision might include requiring greater setbacks on
cul-de-sac lots to achieve the necessary lot width at the setback line,
requiring greater setbacks to conform to setbacks of existing adjacent
development, or setting special yard requirements to protect natural
resource elements.
§ 395-65. Easements. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
The Village Board shall require the dedication of easements to allow
construction, operation, maintenance, repair and reconstruction of and
access to sanitary sewerage system facilities and improvements, water
system facilities and improvements and storm sewer and drainage system
facilities and improvements which cannot conveniently be located in public
streets, and private roads, and all electric power, gas, telephone, cable
division and the water's edge, shall be included as part of lots, outlots
or public dedications in any plat or certified survey map abutting a
navigable lake or stream.
L. Principal buildings. No more than one principal building shall be
permitted on a lot, except in an approved planned development or as
specifically allowed by Chapter 420, Zoning Ordinance, of the Village
Code.
M. Restrictions prohibiting development. Whenever a lot appearing on a
final plat or certified survey map is not intended to be buildable, or is
intended to be buildable only upon certain conditions, an express
restriction to that effect, running with the land and enforceable by the
Village, shall appear on the face of the plat or certified survey map.
N. Shoreland areas. All lots created by a plat or certified survey map shall
be located a minimum of 75 feet from the ordinary high-water mark of a
navigable waterway. Outlots shall be designated on the plat or certified
survey map for open space, conservancy lands and shoreland
jurisdictional areas.
O. Number of lots per access connection. Each residential subdivision or
large lot subdivision should generally have roadway access or provide
access onto an arterial, collector or minor street as outlined below:
(1) One to 20 lots require a minimum of one access point;
(2) Twenty-one to 80 lots require a minimum of two access points; and
(3) Eighty-one or more lots require a minimum of three access points.
§ 395-63 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-65
344:719
television or other utility or communications lines or other related facilities.
Such easements shall be of adequate width and appropriate alignment to
serve the intended purpose. They shall be located along rear lot lines, and
along side lot lines or across lots where necessary or advisable. When a
land division is traversed by a watercourse or drainageway, a drainageway,
access and maintenance easement of adequate width and appropriate
alignment to accommodate the maximum potential volume of flow shall
generally be required, and parallel streets or parkways may be required in
connection therewith.
§ 395-65 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-65
344:720
ARTICLE VIII
Required Public Improvements
§ 395-66. General requirements. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No.
07-20]
All public improvements required pursuant to this chapter shall be
designed, located, constructed, installed, provided and completed in a
workmanlike manner, to the satisfaction of the Village, at the divider's/
developer's cost (except as is otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter), and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, Chapter
405, Public Improvement Projects, all other applicable ordinances, the
development agreement entered into by and between the divider/developer
and the Village, the final plat, certified survey map, or development plan
approved by the Village Board (or approved by the Village Plan Commission
or Village Zoning Administrator with respect to a site and operational
plan under § 420-56 of the Village Code) and the plans and specifications
approved by the Village Board.
§ 395-67. Survey monuments.
§ 395-68. Inspection requirements and procedures.
See Village Administrative Rules for inspection requirements and
procedures.
§ 395-69. Grading.
A. Installation. The divider/developer, at the divider's/developer's cost,
shall cause survey monuments to be located and installed in accordance
with the requirements of § 236.15, Wis. Stats., the provisions of this
chapter, the development agreement entered into by and between the
divider/developer and the Village and the final plat or certified survey
map approved by the Village Board.
B. Completion. Unless installation of survey monuments is deferred
pursuant to Subsection C below, all required monuments shall be
installed prior to the filing of the final plat or certified survey map.
C. Deferral. The Village Board may permit the installation of monuments
under § 236.15(1)(b), (c) and (d), Wis. Stats., to be deferred for a
reasonable time, not to exceed one year, on condition that the
development agreement entered into by and between the divider and
the Village and the irrevocable letter of credit filed by the divider
adequately provide for the placement of and payment for the required
monuments. Additional time may be granted by the Board upon a
showing of good cause, provided that the development agreement and
letter of credit are appropriately modified or supplemented if necessary.
A. General requirements. Subject to this chapter and Chapter 405, Public
Improvement Projects, grading and drainage improvements and
§ 395-66 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-69
344:721
facilities shall be required in all subdivisions and large lot subdivisions,
and in all minor land divisions and developments proposed to be
developed for residential, manufactured housing community,
institutional, park and recreational, commercial, industrial, and other
uses. Such facilities shall be provided in such a manner as to make
adequate grading and drainage facilities available to each buildable lot
within the land division or development. All grading, cutting and filling
shall be designed, conducted and completed in a workmanlike manner,
to the satisfaction of the Village, at the divider's/developer's cost, and in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, all other applicable
ordinances, the development agreement entered into by and between
the divider/developer and the Village, the final plat, certified survey
map or development plan approved by the Village Board (or by the
Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning Administrator with respect
to a site and operational plan approved under § 420-56 of the Village
Code) and the plans, specifications and profiles approved by the Village
Board. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
B. Public streets.
(1) First phase. When the Village Board has deferred the requirement
to install survey monuments prior to final approval of the final plat,
certified survey map, or development plan, temporary street rightof-
way monuments shall be installed. After the installation of such
temporary monuments, and during the first phase following the last
required approval of the final plat or certified survey map, all public
streets shall be graded to subgrade. During this same period, the
shoulders and ditches of all rural streets without curbs and gutters
shall be finish graded and all necessary culverts shall be installed.
If required to prevent erosion, surface ditch inverts shall be
installed in conjunction with the grading of the ditches.
(2) Second phase. After the installation of curbs and gutters, and
during the second phase following the last required approval of the
final plat or certified survey map, the area between the curbs and
the street right-of-way lines shall be filled with topsoil and leveled.
If the schedule for installing pavement of public street roadways is
expedited, pursuant to § 395-70F(4) of this chapter, then
notwithstanding the foregoing language of this subsection, such
work shall be completed during the first phase, but the sequence
shall not be altered.
C. Lots. Buildable lots shall be graded so that the elevation of each
building site shall be at least one to two feet above the elevation of the
paved roadway crown in the adjacent public street, unless otherwise
approved by the Village Engineer.
D. Cut or filled land. Cut or filled land shall be graded to a maximum slope
of four horizontal to one vertical, unless it is in a landscaped area, in
which case the maximum slope of three horizontal to one vertical is
acceptable.
§ 395-69 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-69
344:722
E. Completion.
(1) General. All grading, cutting, filling and related work shall be
completed during the first phase and within 12 months after the
last required approval of the final plat or certified survey map,
except as is provided in Subsection B(2) above, unless otherwise
approved by the Village.
(2) Alteration of timing. Notwithstanding any other language in this
section, the Village Board, upon a showing of good cause and upon
whatever conditions the Board deems appropriate in the interests
of public health, safety and welfare, may alter any of the timing or
sequencing requirements stated in this section.
F. Plans. Grading plans for the proposed land division or development
plan shall be prepared by a professional licensed engineer registered in
the State of Wisconsin. The scale of such plans shall be determined by
the Village staff, on a case-by-case basis, based on the size and
complexity of the proposed land division. Reproducible mylars and
electronic media of the plans compatible with the Village's Geographic
Information System (GIS) format pursuant to § 395-82A of this chapter
shall be submitted to the Village.
G. Inspection requirements. The Village shall be contacted to inspect and
approve the grading and related work.
H. Additional general grading requirements. The following subsections set
forth other grading-related requirements for the engineering design of
public improvements:
(1) Engineering plans for public improvements and private on-site
grading and drainage shall be based upon actual field surveying or
aerial mapping techniques or procedures. Mapping accuracy shall
be plus or minus 1/2 of a foot. The Kenosha County topographic
maps as base information for detailed engineering plan shall not be
permitted.
(2) Detailed engineering grading and drainage plans shall identify
existing and finished yard grades and top of foundation elevations
for proposed lots and all surrounding properties, developed and
undeveloped.
(3) Perimeter slopes of the new development shall have a maximum
slope of 1:3 and desirable slope of 1:4 to match the adjacent
existing development.
(4) Sump pump laterals shall be provided for all residential
developments. Storm laterals shall be four inches minimum and
extended to the property line as approved by the Village Engineer.
All single-family and multiple-family units shall interconnect the
sump pumps to the laterals. At the property line, six-inch storm
sewer pipe shall be provided parallel to and behind the proposed
§ 395-69 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-69
344:723
curb/gutter to collect water from the sump pump laterals. Also,
for all multiple-family, commercial, industrial, and institutional land
uses, the downspouts may be required by the Village Board to be
interconnected to the storm sewer system.
(5) Earthwork balancing computations shall be provided. Any
earthwork shortage or surplus must be addressed prior to
engineering plan approval.
(6) Every effort shall be made to minimize earth movement and work
with the existing topography in site design.
(7) In developments where final grading is based upon use of basement
spoils, all rear yard swales shall be provided as a part of the initial
grading operation. Side yard swales that serve more than the
adjacent two lots must also be constructed as a part of the initial
grading operations. Drainage and maintenance easements shall be
provided along such side and rear yard swales.
(8) The divider/developer shall submit both a mass grading/drainage
plan for the subdivision, large lot subdivision or planned
development zoning district and a lot grading or site-andoperational-
plan site and drainage plan which details grading,
drainage flows (swales) and high points of each individual lot. The
grading and drainage plans shall include topographic contours at
one-half-foot contour intervals. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No.
07-20]
(9) The divider/developer shall provide copies of a field-verified survey
and as-built grading plan of the rough-graded development to the
Village showing contours or spot elevations and datum of
elevations for the development for review and approval in order to
verify that the development site, including the retention or
detention basins, has been graded in accordance with the approved
grading and drainage plans as provided in the construction plans
for the development. Said grading survey shall identify the
proposed and existing graded elevations for all property corners,
building pads, finished yard grades and high point elevations,
elevations for all topographic contours within the lots, drainage
swale locations, stormwater drainage easements, basins and utility
easement areas. The elevations within the development shall be
graded to within four inches of the proposed elevations along all
property lines and within all drainage and utility easement areas
prior to the installation of utilities and prior to the Village's
acceptance of the grading and drainage plan. In completing the
grading for the single-family lots, the proposed building area
determined by the building setbacks may be kept between 18
inches and 30 inches low to minimize the amount of fill removal
from excavated basements. The grading survey shall be completed
by a Wisconsin-registered land surveyor and verified by the
developer's engineer and shall be submitted to the Village for
§ 395-69 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-69
344:724
§ 395-70. Streets.
review, verification and approval prior to the commencement of
installation of any required private utilities and the acceptance of
any of the required public improvements. No building or zoning
permits shall be issued prior to the Village's approval of this
grading survey and the installation of the required private utilities
and the erosion control site stabilization. The required as-built
grading plans shall be provided to the Village pursuant to
§ 395-82C of this chapter. [Amended 5-18-2009 by Ord. No.
09-35]
A. General requirements. Subject to this chapter and Chapter 405, Public
Improvement Projects, public streets shall be required in all
subdivisions and large lot subdivisions, and in all minor land divisions
and developments proposed to be developed for residential,
manufactured housing community, commercial, industrial, or other
uses, unless the Village Board determines that, in the public's interest,
the streets should be privately owned and maintained. Public street
access to lands adjacent to a proposed land division or development
shall be required if development of such land division or development
without access would make development of the adjacent land difficult
or would result in an undesirable street pattern.
B. Design and construction. All public streets shall be designed, located,
constructed, installed, provided and completed in a workmanlike
manner, to the satisfaction of the Village, at the divider's cost, and in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 405,
Public Improvement Projects, all other applicable ordinances, the
development agreement entered into by and between the divider and
the Village, the final plat or certified survey map approved by the
Village Board and the plans and specification approved by the Village
Board.
C. Rural street cross sections. Permanent public streets constructed in
accordance with the Village's rural street cross sections (see Chapter
405) shall not be permitted in subdivisions or large lot subdivisions, or
in minor land divisions proposed to be developed for residential,
manufactured housing community, commercial, industrial or other
uses. The Village Board may approve the use of rural street cross
sections for minor land divisions proposed to be developed only for
rural uses.
D. Urban street cross sections. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
(1) All public streets in subdivisions and large lot subdivisions, and in
minor land divisions or developments proposed to be developed for
residential, manufactured housing communities, commercial,
industrial or other nonrural uses, shall be constructed in
accordance with the Village's urban street cross sections. (See
Chapter 405.)
§ 395-69 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-70
344:725
(2) Except as may be otherwise specifically required by the Village
Board in a development agreement relating to a planned
development zoning district, all private streets in subdivisions and
large lot subdivisions, and in minor land divisions proposed to be
developed for residential, manufactured housing communities,
commercial, industrial or other uses, which were permitted by the
Village Board to be constructed as privately owned and maintained
shall be constructed at the same urban cross section standards of a
minor Village road with curb and gutter and storm sewer and shall
provide sufficient access and cul-de-sac turnaround location per all
applicable Village and state ordinances and codes.
E. Surfacing and timing of improvements. After completion and the
Village's inspection and approval of all underground sanitary sewerage
system, water system, storm sewer and drainage system, and utility and
communication improvements and facilities that are to be located
within the public street, all public street roadways shall be paved in
accordance with the requirements of this section, § 395-60 of this
chapter, and Chapter 405 of the Village Code.
(1) The base and surface course standards provided are considered
minimum standards. Upon the evaluation of the soil borings and
projected traffic volumes, the minimum roadway profile standards
may be adjusted or increased by the Village Engineer.
(2) Binder course. The binder course of paving (hereinafter referred to
as the "Phase 2 public improvements") shall be commenced by the
divider/developer as soon as practicable but not until the
construction of the Phase 1 improvements has been completed by
the divider/developer, inspected and conditionally approved by the
Village pursuant to a letter of substantial completion, and such
improvements have been dedicated to and formally accepted by the
Village by resolution of the Village Board, and at least 50% of the
residential units in the development are constructed. Prior to
installation of the binder course of paving on public street
roadways, the base course shall be finish graded and compacted.
(3) Surface course.
(a) As soon as practicable but not until construction of the Phase 2
improvements has been completed by the divider/developer,
such improvements have been inspected and conditionally
approved by the Village pursuant to a letter of substantial
completion, and the developer had dedicated such
improvements and the Village has formally accepted them by
resolution of the Village Board, and at least 75% of the
residential units in the development are constructed, the
developer shall raise storm inlet frames and water main valve
boxes, remove and replace all areas of the damaged binder
course, sweep and tack coat the binder course on all streets in
the development, and, after completion by the developer and
§ 395-70 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-70
344:726
inspection and approval by the Village of the foregoing
improvements, install the binder course of bituminous
pavement (the "surface course") on all streets in the
development. The required public street improvements
described shall be collectively referred to as the "Phase 3
street improvements."
(b) Notwithstanding anything to contrary in Subsection E(3)(a)
above, if fewer than 75% of the residential units in the
development have been constructed within 36 months after the
effective date, then, at the developer's request, in order to
protect the surface course from excessive wear and tear
resulting from activities associated with building construction
within the development, the Village Administrator shall elect to
either:
[1] Waive the requirement that 75% of the units are to be
constructed and permit the divider/developer to construct
the Phase 3 street improvements; or
[2] Defer the installation of the Phase 3 street improvements
until the earlier of the construction of 75% of the
residential units or five years after the effective date. If the
Village Administrator elects to require the divider/
developer to defer the installation of the Phase 3 street
improvements, then, at the divider's/developer's request,
the Village shall draw upon the letter of credit in an
amount equal to the maximum estimated amount of the
cost of providing, installing and constructing the Phase 3
street improvements (or such greater sum as the parties
may agree upon, based on the condition of the Phase 2
required public improvements).
(c) Repair, sweeping and coat. Prior to installation of the surface
course of paving on public street roadways, all damaged
portions of the binder course shall be swept clean, and a tack
coat shall be applied to all roadway surfaces.
(d) Residential streets. A one-inch surface course of compacted
and rolled bituminous concrete pavement shall be installed on
the binder course of all residential and commercial collector
and minor street roadways.
(e) Commercial and industrial streets. A surface course of 1 1/2
inches of compacted and rolled bituminous concrete paving
shall be installed on the binder course of all public street
roadways.
(f) Arterial streets. A surface course consisting of a minimum of
1 1/2 inches of compacted and rolled bituminous concrete
paving shall be installed on the binder course of all public
street roadways. The actual thickness of the surface course
§ 395-70 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-70
344:727
shall be determined in connection with the review and
approval of the engineering design documents.
(4) Specifications. The specifications of all base course, concrete,
bituminous concrete, tack coat and other material used for public
street paving shall be subject to Village Board approval and shall be
prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of
Wisconsin and shall be subject to Chapter 405 of the Village Code.
F. Paving sequence and timing. The paving of public street roadways shall
proceed in phases as follows:
(1) Phase 1. The base course shall be installed on the graded and
prepared beds of all public street roadways during Phase 1, within
12 months following the last required approval of the final plat or
certified survey map. Installation of the base course shall occur
only after completion and the Village's inspection and approval of
all roadway grading and all underground public improvements and
facilities that are to be located in the public streets. It shall be the
divider's/developer's expense to maintain, repair, reshape, and
regravel the base course whenever it has been determined by the
Village that said base course has become a health or safety
concern.
(2) Phase 2. During Phase 2, approximately 24 months following the
last required approval of the final plat or certified survey map or
development plan, the base course on all public streets shall be
finish graded and compacted and the binder course of pavement
shall be installed on the base course. The binder course shall not be
installed until after completion, inspection and approval by the
Village of Phase 1 improvements and at least 50% of the residential
units in the development have been constructed. The Phase 2
improvements shall not be commenced until after June 1 of any
given year, unless approved by the Village Administrator.
(3) Phase 3. During Phase 3, approximately 36 months following the
last required approval of the final plat, certified survey map, or
development plan, the inlet frames and water main valve boxes
shall be adjusted as necessary, damaged areas of the binder course
of pavement and curbs and gutters shall be repaired, all roadway
surfaces shall be swept clean, a tack coat shall be applied to all
roadway surfaces, and the surface course of pavement shall be
installed on all public street roadways. The surface course shall not
be installed until after the completion, inspection and approval by
the Village of the Phase 2 improvements and at least 75% of the
residential units in the development have been constructed.
(4) Expedited schedule. Notwithstanding Subsection F(2) and (3)
above, if compacted granular material has been approved by the
Village Administrator to be used for backfilling the trenches in
which sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, utilities and
§ 395-70 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-70
344:728
other underground public improvements and facilities are
constructed in the public streets, the Village Administrator may
allow the improvements usually during Phase 2 to be made during
Phase 1, and the improvements usually made during Phase 3 to be
made during Phase 2, but without any alteration of the required
sequence. This will permit the completion of public street
improvements within two phases, subject to Subsection F(5) below.
(5) Deferral of surface course. Upon written notice to the divider/
developer during Phase 2 following the last required approval of
the final plat or certified survey map, installation of the surface
course of pavement on all public street roadways, and other street
improvements usually made during the Phase 3 period, may be
deferred to protect the surface course of pavement from excessive
wear and tear in connection with the construction of residences or
other buildings in the land division. The development agreement
entered into by and between the divider/developer and the Village
shall provide that, in the event of such a deferral, the Village shall
be entitled to draw upon the irrevocable letter of credit provided by
the divider/developer to the extent of the estimated cost of
installing the surface course and any other street improvements
usually installed during the third phase. Upon receipt of such funds
by the Village, the divider/developer shall dedicate to the Village
the remainder of the street improvements, and the Village shall
assume all responsibility for maintenance of the streets. Such funds
shall be kept in a special fund separate from the Village general
fund and shall be used exclusively for construction and installation
of the surface course of paving and other third phase street
improvements in the particular land division or development with
respect to which the funds were received.
(6) Alteration of timing. Notwithstanding any other language in this
section, the Village Board, upon a showing of good cause and upon
whatever conditions the Board deems appropriate in the interests
of public health, safety, and welfare, may alter any of the timing or
sequencing requirements stated in this section.
G. Plans. Plans for public streets shall be prepared by a professional
engineer, registered in the State of Wisconsin, at a scale of no greater
than one inch equals 40 feet horizontal and one inch equals four feet
vertical. Reproducible mylars and electronic media of all such plans
compatible with the Village's Geographic Information System format
pursuant to § 395-92A of this chapter shall be submitted to the Village
as a condition of final plat, certified survey map, or development plan
approval.
H. Inspection requirements. The Village shall be contacted to inspect and
approve work on the paving of public street roadways during
construction, and no further work shall be done on the roadways until
the prior work is approved.
§ 395-70 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-70
344:729
I. Cost of extension.
(1) Divider's/developer's fair share. The divider/developer shall be
required to pay, as a condition to final approval of a proposed final
plat or certified survey map or development plan, the divider's/
developer's fair share of the costs of extending any required public
street to the site of the proposed land division or development,
unless the divider/developer will be required to pay its fair share of
such costs through some other mechanism, or unless the Village
Board specifically waives this requirement for good cause shown.
(2) Basis for rejection. The Village Board may reject a plat, certified
survey map or development plan requiring the extension to the site
of a public street if the costs to the Village of such extensions will
be too great. In making such determination, the Village Board shall
consider, among other factors, the advantages and disadvantages
to the Village and the affected areas of installing the required
street improvements, the Village's ability to recover such costs by
special assessment or otherwise, the financial status of the Village,
the borrowing capacity of the Village, and applicable development,
special assessment and resource allocation policies of the Board.
(3) Alternative conditional approval. When the Village Board would
otherwise reject a proposed preliminary plat, final plat, certified
survey map or development plan because of the cost of extending a
required public street to the site of the proposed land division or
development plan, the Village Board may approve the plat, map or
plan upon the condition that the divider/developer will pay, in the
first instance, and as a condition to final approval of the proposed
final plat, certified survey map or development plan, all or some
portion in excess of the divider's fair share of the costs of designing
and extending such public streets to the site of the proposed land
division or development. In such situations, the development
agreement entered into by and between the divider/developer and
the Village shall include an agreement by the Village to pay to the
divider/developer certain specified moneys which may be
subsequently recovered by the Village with respect to such
extended street improvements. Such right of recovery may be
made contingent upon the Village first recovering specified costs
incurred by it in connection with such improvements and upon such
other reasonable conditions as the Board may impose, but in any
event such right of recovery shall only address payments made by
the divider/developer in excess of the divider's/developer's fair
share of the total costs of designing and installing the public street
improvements.
(4) Other contributions. The Village Board may require the divider/
developer of a subsequently approved land division or development
which benefits from such extended public street improvements to
pay the divider's/developer's fair share of the total coats of such
improvements as a condition to final approval of the final plat or
§ 395-70 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-70
344:730
§ 395-71. Curbs and gutters.
certified survey map or development plan, but due credit shall
be given for any payments made toward the cost of such
improvements by the divider/developer or the divider's/developer's
predecessors in title, with respect to the land involved in the
divider's/developer's proposed land division or development.
J. Cost of upgrading. The divider/developer shall be required to pay, as a
condition to the Village Board's final approval of a proposed final plat,
certified survey map, or development plan, a fair share of the cost of
upgrading any existing public streets in or adjacent to the proposed
land division, in accordance with applicable Village Comprehensive
Plan components, unless the need for such upgrading is unrelated to
the proposed land division or its contemplated development.
A. General requirement. Subject to this chapter and Chapter 405, Public
Improvement Projects, concrete curbs and gutters shall be required in
all subdivisions and large lot subdivisions, and in all minor land
divisions or developments proposed to be developed for residential,
manufactured housing community, commercial, industrial or other
uses, and in all minor land divisions and developments which are
adjacent to land divisions or developments which contain curbs and
gutters which can be continued into the new land division or
development. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
B. Design and construction. All concrete curbs and gutters shall be
designed, constructed, installed, provided and completed in a
workmanlike manner, to the satisfaction of the Village, at the divider's/
developer's cost, and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
all other applicable ordinances, the development agreement entered
into by and between the divider/developer and the Village, the final
plat, certified survey map, or development plan approved by the Village
Board (or by the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning
Administrator with respect to a site and operational plan to be approved
under § 420-56 of the Village Code) and plans and specifications
approved by the Village Board. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No.
07-20]
C. Type. In new residential streets where the location of curb openings for
driveways cannot be determined, concrete thirty-inch-wide mountabletype
curbs and gutters shall be installed in accordance with the typical
minor or collector street cross sections, unless another curb detail is
otherwise approved by the Village Engineer. (See Chapter 405, Public
Improvement Projects.) In existing residential areas, or where the
location of curb openings can be determined prior to construction,
thirty-inch-wide Wisconsin Department of Transportation Type D
concrete curbs and gutters shall be installed in nonresidential streets.
D. Handicap ramps. Curb openings at all intersections shall be provided
for handicap accessibility ramps where sidewalks are required.
§ 395-70 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-71
344:731
§ 395-72. Sanitary sewerage system facilities.
E. Completion.
(1) General. Curbs and gutters shall be installed and completed during
the Phase 2 period following the last required approval of the final
plat, certified survey map, or development plan. Curbs and gutters
shall only be installed after the base course on all public street
roadways has been completed and inspected and approved by the
Village and at least 50% of the residential units in the development
have been constructed.
(2) Expedited schedule. If granular material is approved by the Village
Administrator and used to backfill the trenches in which sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm sewers and other underground
improvements and facilities are located in the public streets and
the Village Administrator permits expedited installation under
§ 395-70F(4) of this chapter, then the curbs and gutters may be
installed and completed during Phase 1 after the last required
approval of the final plat, certified survey map, or development
plan but without any alteration in sequence.
(3) Alteration of timing. Notwithstanding any other language in this
section, the Village Board, upon a showing of good cause, and upon
whatever conditions the Board deems appropriate in the interests
of public health, safety and welfare, may alter any of the timing or
sequencing requirements stated in this section.
F. Plans. Curb and gutter plans shall be prepared as a detail of the public
street plans prepared in accordance with § 395-70G of this chapter.
Reproducible mylars and electronic media of the plans compatible with
the Village's Geographic Information System (GIS) format pursuant to
§ 395-82A of this chapter shall be submitted.
G. Inspection requirements. The Village shall be contacted and shall
inspect and approve all concrete curbs and gutters before the binder
course of pavement is installed on any public street roadways.
A. General requirement. Subject to this chapter and Chapter 405, Public
Improvement Projects, public sanitary sewerage system improvements
and facilities shall be required in all subdivisions and large lot
subdivisions, in all minor land divisions and all developments proposed
to be developed for residential, manufactured housing community,
commercial, industrial or other uses. Such facilities shall be provided in
such a manner as to make adequate sanitary sewerage service available
to each buildable lot within the land division.
B. Design and construction. All public sanitary sewerage system facilities
shall be designed, located, constructed, installed, provided and
completed in a workmanlike manner, to the satisfaction of the Village,
at the divider's/developer's cost (except as provided in Subsection H
§ 395-71 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-72
344:732
below), and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, all other
applicable ordinances, the development agreement entered into by and
between the divider/developer and the Village, the final plat or certified
survey map or development plan approved by the Village Board (or
by the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning Administrator with
respect to a site and operational plan to be approved under § 420-56
of the Village Code) and the plans and specifications approved by the
Village Board. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
C. Specifications. The size, type, design, location, and manner of
installation of all sanitary sewerage system facilities shall be in
accordance with the rules of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources set out in Ch. NR 110, Wis. Adm. Code, as amended from
time to time, and Chapter 405, Public Improvement Projects. Project
specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered
and licensed in the State of Wisconsin.
D. Laterals. Sewer laterals shall be installed to the street lot line or to the
private road easement line. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
E. Plans. Plans for public sanitary sewerage system facilities and
improvements shall be prepared by a professional engineer, registered
in the State of Wisconsin, at a scale of no greater that one inch equals
40 feet horizontal and one inch equals four feet vertical. Reproducible
mylars and electronic media of such plans compatible with the Village's
Geographic Information System format pursuant to § 395-82A of this
chapter shall be submitted to the Village.
F. Backfill. All sanitary sewer trenches and all sanitary sewer lateral
trenches within public streets shall be backfilled with excavated or
granular material meeting the requirements of Chapter 405, Public
Improvement Projects. All backfill shall be compacted by mechanical
methods.
G. Basement level service. All new public or private sanitary sewer mains
shall be designed and constructed to provide for gravity services to all
basements. All new residential homes/units shall be connected with
gravity basement sewer service, unless otherwise approved by the
Village Engineer due to practicable difficulty or unnecessary hardship.
[Amended 2-4-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04]
H. Cost; oversizing. The divider/developer shall bear the cost of all
sanitary sewerage system improvements and facilities within the land
division or development, including the cost of any required boundary or
cross land division/development sewer main, except for the added
material cost of installing oversized sewers greater than 15 inches in
diameter which are necessary to serve tributary areas lying outside of
the proposed land division/development. The Village shall credit or
reimburse the divider, as appropriate, and as the Village's budget
allows, for the reasonable material costs of such required oversizing.
The Village Board may determine, on a case-by-case basis, to credit or
§ 395-72 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-72
344:733
reimburse the divider/developer, as appropriate, for the material costs
of oversizing other sanitary sewerage system improvements and
facilities, such as lift stations, relating to the land division or
development.
I. Completion.
(1) General. Construction and installation of all sanitary sewerage
system facilities shall be completed within 12 months after the last
required approval of the final plat, certified survey map, or
development plan.
(2) Alteration of timing. The Village Board, upon a showing of good
cause and upon whatever conditions the Board deems appropriate
in the interests of public health, safety, and welfare, may alter any
of the timing or sequencing requirements stated in this section.
J. Inspection requirements.
(1) Inspection. The Village shall be contacted and shall inspect and
approve all public sewerage system improvements and facilities.
(2) Televising of the sanitary sewer. The Village shall televise the
sanitary sewer mains at the divider's/developer's cost. Any cleaning
of the sanitary sewer mains to facilitate the televising is also an
expense of the divider/developer.
(3) As-built sanitary sewer plans. Upon installation, inspection and
televising of the sanitary sewer main, the Village's consulting
engineer shall prepare the required as-built plans, at the divider's/
developer's cost, pursuant to § 395-82C of this chapter. [Added
5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
K. Cost of extension.
(1) Divider's/developer's fair share. The divider/developer shall be
required to pay, as a condition to final approval of a proposed final
plat, certified survey map, or development plan, the divider's/
developer's fair share of the costs of extending any required public
sanitary sewerage system improvements to the site of the proposed
land division or development, unless the divider/developer will be
required to pay its fair share of such costs through some other
mechanism, or unless the Village Board specifically waives this
requirement for good cause shown.
(2) Basis for rejection. The Village Board (or the Village Plan
Commission or Village Zoning Administrator with respect to a site
and operational plan to be approved under § 420-56 of the Village
Code, subject to ratification by the Village Board) may reject a plat,
certified survey map or development plan requiring the extension
of public sanitary sewerage system improvements to the site if the
costs to the Village's sewer utility districts of such extension will be
§ 395-72 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-72
344:734
too great. In making such determination, the Village Board (or
the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning Administrator) shall
consider, among other factors, the advantages and disadvantages
to the Village and the affected areas of installing the required
improvements, the Village's ability to recover such costs by special
assessment or otherwise, the financial status of the Village, the
borrowing capacity of the Village, and applicable development,
special assessment and resource allocation policies of the Board.
[Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
(3) Alternative conditional approval. When the Village Board would
otherwise reject a proposed preliminary or final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan because of the cost of extending
required public sanitary sewerage system improvements to the site
of the proposed land division or development, the Village Board
may approve the plat, certified survey map or development plan
upon the condition that the divider/developer will pay, in the first
instance, and as a condition to final approval of the proposed final
plat, certified survey map, or development plan, all or some portion
in excess of the divider's/developer's fair share of the cost of
extending such improvements to the site of the proposed land
division or development . In such situations, the development
agreement entered into by and between the divider/developer and
the Village shall include an agreement by the Village to pay to the
divider/developer certain specified moneys which may be
subsequently recovered by the Village with respect to designing
and extending public sanitary sewerage system improvements.
Such right of recovery may be made contingent upon the Village
first recovering specified costs incurred by it in connection with
such improvements and upon such other reasonable conditions as
the Board may impose, but in any event such right of recovery shall
only address payments made by the divider in excess of the
divider's fair share of the total cost of designing and installing such
improvements and facilities.
(4) Other contributions. The Village Board may require the divider of a
subsequently approved land division which benefits from such
extended public sanitary sewerage system improvements to pay
the divider's fair share of the total cost of such improvements as a
condition to final approval of the final plat, certified survey map or
development plan, but due credit shall be given for any payments
made toward the cost of such improvements by the divider/
developer, or the divider's/developer's predecessors in title, with
respect to the land involved in the divider's/developer's proposed
land division or development.
L. Cost of upgrading. The divider/developer shall be required to pay, as a
condition to final approval of any proposed final plat, certified survey
map or development plan, a fair share of the cost of upgrading any
existing public sanitary sewerage system facilities and improvements in
§ 395-72 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-72
344:735
§ 395-73. Storm sewer and drainage system facilities. [Amended
5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20; 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-34]
or adjacent to the proposed land division or development, in accordance
with applicable Village Comprehensive Plan components, unless the
need for such upgrading is unrelated to the proposed land division or
development plan or its contemplated development.
A. General requirements.
(1) Storm sewers. Storm sewers, subject to this chapter, Chapter 298,
Stormwater Management and Stormwater Drainage System
Facilities, and Chapter 405, Public Improvement Projects, shall be
required in all public and private streets in all subdivisions and
large lot subdivisions, in all minor land divisions, and developments
proposed to be developed for residential, manufactured housing
community, commercial, industrial or other uses.
(2) Other drainage system improvements. Stormwater drainage
system improvements and facilities other than storm sewers in
public and private streets shall be required as needed to deal
effectively with stormwater. Such facilities may include, as
appropriate and without limitations, storm sewers other than in
public streets, catch basins, ditches, open channels, inlets, water
detention and retention basins and structures and settling basins.
(3) Sizing of storm sewers. All storm sewers shall be adequate to serve
the proposed land division/development and all upstream tributary
areas. All such facilities shall be of adequate size and grade to
hydraulically accommodate runoff from the ten-year recurrence
interval storm, except as is otherwise specifically required by this
section, and shall be so designed to prevent and control soil erosion
and sedimentation and to present no hazards to life or property.
(4) Storm sewer sump pump laterals. All residential units shall have a
four-inch PVC pipe or other size and materials as required by the
Village Engineer. The lateral shall discharge to an approved
location pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 298, Stormwater
Management and Stormwater Drainage System Facilities. The
lateral shall be installed by the divider/developer.
B. Design; construction. All storm sewer and drainage system
improvements and facilities shall be designed, located, constructed,
installed, provided, and completed in a workmanlike manner, to the
satisfaction of the Village, at the divider's/developer's cost (except as
provided in Subsection K below), and in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, all other applicable ordinances, the development
agreement entered into by and between the divider/developer and the
Village, the final plat, certified survey map, or development plan
approved by the Village Board (or a site and operational plan approved
by the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning Administrator under
§ 395-72 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-73
344:736
§ 420-56 of the Village Code) and the plans and specifications approved
by the Village Board.
C. Specifications. All storm sewer and drainage system improvements and
facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Chapter
298, Stormwater Management and Stormwater Drainage System
Facilities, and Chapter 405, Public Improvement Projects. Project
specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered
and licensed in the State of Wisconsin.
D. Plans. Plans for all storm sewer and drainage system improvements and
facilities shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the
State of Wisconsin at a scale no greater than one inch equals 40 feet
horizontal and one inch equals four feet vertical. Reproducible Mylars
and electronic media of the plans compatible with the Village's
Geographic Information System format pursuant to § 395-82A of this
chapter shall be submitted to the Village.
E. (Reserved)
F. (Reserved)
G. (Reserved)
H. (Reserved)
I. (Reserved)
J. Backfill. All storm sewer trenches shall be backfilled with excavated or
compacted granular material meeting the requirements of Chapter 405,
Public Improvement Projects. All backfill shall be compacted by
mechanical means.
K. Cost; oversizing. The divider/developer shall bear the cost of installing
all storm sewer and drainage system facilities within the proposed land
division or development, except for the added material costs of
installing oversized storm sewers or related facilities greater than 36
inches in diameter which are necessary to serve tributary drainage
areas lying outside of the proposed land division or development. The
Village shall credit or reimburse the divider/developer, as appropriate,
for the reasonable material costs of such required oversizing.
L. Completion.
(1) General. Installation of all storm sewer and drainage system
facilities and improvements shall be completed within 12 months
after the last required approval of the final plat or certified survey
map, except as is provided in Subsection L(2) below.
(2) Alteration of timing. Notwithstanding any other provision in this
section, the Village Board, upon a showing of good cause and upon
whatever conditions the Board deems appropriate in the interests
§ 395-73 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-73
344:737
§ 395-74. Water system facilities.
of the public health, safety and welfare, may alter any of the timing
or sequencing requirements stated in this section.
M. Inspection requirements. The Village shall be contacted and shall
inspect and approve all storm sewer and drainage system
improvements and facilities. The Village shall televise the storm sewer
mains at the divider's/developer's cost. Any cleaning of the catch basins
by the Village to facilitate the televising is also an expense of the
divider/developer.
N. Divider/developer responsibilities. As a condition to receiving final
approval from the Village Board of any final plat, certified survey map
or development plan (or from the Village Plan Commission or Village
Zoning Administrator with respect to a site and operational plan to be
approved under § 420-56 of the Village Code) related to land located
with the Village, the divider/developer shall agree to assume
responsibility for designing, constructing, installing, and providing the
drainage and grading improvements. The divider/developer shall
warrant grading and drainage work against defects due to faulty
design, materials, or workmanship, improper or inadequate grading, or
due to any failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter or
with the requirements of the development agreement entered into by
and between the divider/developer and the Village, which appear, and
of which the divider/developer is notified in writing at the divider's/
developer's last known address, within one year from the date of the
Village's acceptance of the dedication of such improvements, or within
one year after the completion of the grading for each lot, if the work or
materials in question are not incorporated into an improvement
dedicated to the Village. The divider/developer shall, at its cost,
promptly make any repairs or replacements necessary to correct any
such defects, in a workmanlike manner, and to the satisfaction of the
Village. The divider/developer shall agree to indemnify the Village for
and hold the Village harmless against the costs of any repairs or
replacements required by such defects or grading and drainage
problems, any resulting damage to Village property, the costs and
expenses of any resulting litigation (including the Village's reasonable
attorney's fees) and any resulting liability incurred by the Village.
A. General requirement. Subject to this chapter and Chapter 405, Public
Improvement Projects, public or private water supply and distribution
system improvements and facilities shall be required in all subdivisions
and large lot subdivisions, in all minor land divisions and in all
developments proposed to be developed for residential, manufactured
housing community, commercial, industrial or other uses, except in a
minor land division for single-family residential lots wherein public
water system facilities are readily available as determined by the
Village Administrator. Such facilities shall be provided in such a manner
§ 395-73 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-74
344:738
as to make adequate water service available to each buildable lot within
the land division or development.
B. Design and construction. All public or private water distribution system
facilities shall be designed, located, and completed in a workmanlike
manner, to the satisfaction of the Village, at the divider's/developer's
cost (except as provided in Subsection G below), and in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, all other applicable ordinances, the
development agreement entered into by and between the divider/
developer and the Village, the final plat, certified survey map, or
development plan approved by the Village Board (or a site and
operational plan approved by the Village Plan Commission or Village
Zoning Administrator under § 420-56 of the Village Code) and the plans
and specifications approved by the Village Board. [Amended 5-7-2007
by Ord. No. 07-20]
C. Specifications.
(1) Public improvement specifications. The size, type, design, location
and manner of installation of all public water system improvements
and facilities shall be in accordance with the rules of the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources set out in Ch. NR 111, Wis. Adm.
Code,105 and Chapter 405, Public Improvement Projects, of the
Village Code. Project specifications shall be prepared by a
professional engineer registered and licensed in the State of
Wisconsin.
(2) Private improvement specifications. The size, type, design, location
and manner of installation of all private water distribution system
improvements and facilities shall be in accordance with the rules of
the Wisconsin Department of Commerce set out in the Plumbing
Code, as amended from time to time, and Chapter 405 of the
Village Code. Project specifications shall be prepared by a
professional engineer registered and licensed in the State of
Wisconsin.
D. Laterals. Water laterals shall be installed to the street lot line.
E. Plans. Plans for all public or private water system facilities and
improvements shall be prepared by a professional engineer, registered
and licensed in the State of Wisconsin, at a scale of no greater than one
inch equals 40 feet horizontal and one inch equals four feet vertical.
Reproducible mylars and electronic media of the plans compatible with
the Village's Geographic Information System format pursuant to
§ 395-82A of this chapter shall be submitted to the Village.
F. Backfill. All water main trenches and all water lateral trenches within
public streets shall be backfilled with excavated or granular material
meeting the requirements of Chapter 405, Public Improvement
105. Editor's Note: Ch. NR 111, Wis. Adm. Code, was repealed 4-30-1992 and replaced by Ch.
NR 811, created eff. 5-1-1992.
§ 395-74 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-74
344:739
Projects, of the Village Code. All backfill shall be compacted by
mechanical methods.
G. Cost; oversizing. The divider shall bear the cost of all water system
improvements and facilities within the land division or development,
including the cost of any required boundary water main, except for the
added material cost of installing oversized water mains greater than 12
inches in diameter which are necessary to serve areas lying outside of
the proposed land division. The Village shall credit or reimburse the
divider/developer, as appropriate, for the reasonable material costs of
such required oversizing. The Village Board may, on a case-by-case
basis, credit or reimburse the divider/developer, as appropriate, for the
material costs of oversizing other required water system improvements
and facilities within the land division.
H. Completion.
(1) General. Construction and installation of all public or private water
system improvements and facilities shall be completed within 12
months after the last required approval of the final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan.
(2) Alteration of timing. Notwithstanding any other provision in this
section, the Village Board, upon a showing of good cause and upon
whatever conditions the Board deems appropriate in the interests
of public health, safety, and welfare, may alter any of the timing or
sequencing requirements stated in this section.
I. Inspection requirements.
(1) The Village shall be contacted by the divider/developer and shall
inspect and approve all public water system distribution
improvements and facilities. No backfilling shall take place until
after the completed water system facilities have successfully
produced the required number of safe potable water samples.
(2) A qualified and licensed professional engineer registered in the
State of Wisconsin shall be contacted by the divider/developer and
shall inspect and approve all private water system distribution
improvements and facilities. No backfilling shall take place until
after the completed water facilities have successfully provided the
required number of safe potable water samples.
(3) As-built water plans. Upon installation and inspection of the water
main, the Village's consulting engineer shall prepare the required
as-built plans, at the divider's/developer's cost, pursuant to
§ 395-82C of this chapter. [Added 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
J. Cost of extension.
(1) Divider's/developer's fair share. The divider/developer shall be
required to pay, as a condition to final approval of a proposed final
§ 395-74 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-74
344:740
plat, certified survey map, or development plan, the divider's/
developer's fair share of the costs of extending any required public
water system improvements and facilities to the site of the
proposed land division or development, unless the divider/
developer will be required to pay its fair share of such costs
through some other mechanism or unless the Village Board
specifically waives this requirement for good cause shown.
(2) Basis for rejection. The Village Board may reject a plat, certified
survey map, or development plan (or the Village Plan Commission
or Village Zoning Administrator may reject a site and operational
plan to be approved under § 420-56 of the Village Code, subject to
Village Board ratification) requiring the extension to the site of
public water system improvements if the costs to the Village of
such extension will be too great. In making such determination, the
Village Board (or the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning
Administrator with respect to a site and operational plan) shall
consider, among other factors, the advantages and disadvantages
to the Village and the affected areas of installing the required
improvements, the Village's ability to recover such costs by special
assessment or otherwise, the financial status of the Village, the
borrowing capacity of the Village, and applicable development,
special assessment and resource allocation policies of the Board.
[Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
(3) Alternative conditional approval. When the Village Board would
otherwise reject a proposed preliminary or final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan because of the cost of extending
required public water system improvements to the site of the
proposed land division or development, the Village Board may
approve the plat or map upon the condition that the divider/
developer will pay, in the first instance, and as a condition to final
approval of the proposed final plat, certified survey map, or
development agreement, all or some portion in excess of the
divider's/developer's fair share of the costs of extending such
improvements and facilities to the site of the proposed land division
or development. In such situations, the development agreement
entered into by and between the divider/developer and the Village
shall include an agreement by the Village to pay to the divider/
developer certain specified moneys which may be subsequently
recovered by the Village with respect to designing and extending
public water system improvements. Such right of recovery may be
made contingent upon the Village first recovering specified costs
incurred by it in connection with such improvements and upon such
other reasonable conditions as the Board may impose, but in any
event such right of recovery shall only address payments made by
the divider/developer in excess of the divider's/developer's fair
share of the total cost of designing and installing such
improvements.
§ 395-74 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-74
344:741
§ 395-75. Sidewalks.
(4) Other contributions. The Village Board may require the divider/
developer of a subsequently approved land division or development
plan which benefits from such extended public water system
improvements to pay the divider's/developer's fair share of the total
cost of such improvements as a condition to final approval of the
final plat, certified survey map, or development plan, but due credit
shall be given for any such improvements by the divider, or the
divider's/developer's predecessors in title, with respect to the land
involved in the divider's/developer's proposed land division or
development plan.
K. Cost of upgrading. The divider shall be required to pay, as a condition to
the Village Board's final approval of a proposed land division or
development plan, a fair share of the cost of upgrading any existing
public water system facilities and improvements in or adjacent to the
proposed land division, in accordance with applicable Village
Comprehensive Plan components, unless the need for such upgrading is
unrelated to the proposed land division or its contemplated
development.
A. General requirement. Subject to this chapter and Chapter 405, Public
Improvement Projects, concrete sidewalks shall be required on a caseby-
case basis wherein the Village Board determines (or the Village Plan
Commission or Village Zoning Administrator determines with respect to
a site and operational plan approved under § 420-56 of the Village
Code) that the amount of pedestrian traffic and the risks to pedestrian
safety justify the installation of sidewalks. [Amended 6-19-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-29; 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
B. Design and construction. All sidewalks shall be designed, located,
constructed, installed, provided, and completed in a workmanlike
manner, to the satisfaction of the Village, at the divider's/developer's
cost, and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, all other
applicable ordinances, the development agreement entered into by and
between the divider/developer and the Village, the final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan approved by the Village Board (or by
the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning Administrator with
respect to a site and operational plan approved under § 420-56 of the
Village Code) and the plans and specifications approved by the Village
Board.
C. Specifications. The size and location of required sidewalks shall be in
accordance with this chapter and Chapter 405, Public Improvement
Projects.
D. Plans. Sidewalk plans shall be prepared as a detail of the public street
plans prepared in accordance with § 395-70G of this chapter.
§ 395-74 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-75
344:742
§ 395-76. Utility and communications facilities. [Amended 5-7-2007
by Ord. No. 07-20]
The divider/developer shall, at the divider's/developer's cost, cause
proposed gas, electric power, telephone, cable television or other utility
or communications facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make
adequate service available to each buildable lot or structure in the land
division or development. To the extent practicable, all such facilities shall
be located underground in all subdivisions and large lot subdivisions, in
all minor land divisions or in developments proposed to be developed for
residential, manufactured housing community, commercial, industrial or
other uses. Such utility and communications facilities shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
ordinances, the development agreement entered into by and between the
divider/developer and the Village, the final plat or certified survey map or
development plan approved by the Village Board (or a site and operational
plan approved by the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning
Administrator under § 420-56 of the Village Code). It shall be divider's/
developer's responsibility to regrade and vegetatively stabilize all trenches
created by the utility companies in the event that the utility companies do
not restore the easements.
§ 395-77. Streetlights. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
The divider/developer of a subdivision or large lot subdivision, a certified
survey map or other development to be developed for residential,
manufactured housing community, commercial, industrial or other uses
shall install streetlights at the entrances of the subdivision or development,
at intersections of streets or in such locations as determined necessary by
the Village Board as a condition of final approval of the final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan (or by the Village Plan Commission or
Village Zoning Administrator as a condition of final approval of a site
and operational plan approved under § 420-56 of the Village Code). The
divider/developer shall provide the total cost of said improvements in the
irrevocable letter of credit. The streetlight types or designs shall be
approved by the Village Board (or by the Village Plan Commission or Village
Zoning Administrator with respect to a site and operational plan). The
divider's/developer's prequalified and Village-licensed electrical contractor
E. Completion. Sidewalks shall be installed and completed with curbs and
gutters in accordance with § 395-71E of this chapter.
F. Inspection requirements. The Village shall be contacted and shall
inspect and approve all sidewalks before the binder course of pavement
is installed on any public street roadways.
G. Maintenance. Maintenance and snow removal responsibilities for the
sidewalks are set forth in the Village Code.106
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 305, Streets and Sidewalks, § 305-11, Snow and ice removal.
§ 395-75 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-77
344:743
shall install streetlights or cause such lights to be installed as a Phase 1
required public improvement.
§ 395-78. Street signs. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
The divider/developer of a subdivision or large lot subdivision, certified
survey map or other development to be developed for residential,
manufactured housing community, commercial, industrial or other uses
shall, as a condition of final approval of a final plat, certified survey map, or
development plan by the Village Board (or by the Village Plan Commission
or Village Zoning Administrator as a condition of final approval of a site
and operational plan under § 420-56 of the Village Code), pay the Village's
estimated cost of purchasing and installing street signs, of a design
approved by the Village Board, at all intersections of public streets and
midblock locations as approved by the Village Board (or by the Village
Plan Commission or Village Zoning Administrator with respect to a site and
operational plan). The divider/developer shall provide the total cost of said
improvements in the irrevocable letter of credit. The Village shall install
public street signs or cause such signs to be installed, or its prequalified
contractor designee shall install street signs, as a Phase 1 required public
improvement. The Village shall have the option of installing the signs on
temporary signposts if the construction traffic and safety concerns warrant
the early installation of the signs.
§ 395-79. Street trees and public plantings.
A. General requirements.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in a planned development
zoning ordinance, in all residential or commercial land divisions or
developments with public or private roadway frontage, the divider/
developer shall have planted a street tree of an approved species
for each 50 feet of frontage on each public or private street. Such
trees shall be planted within the curb lawn following the
installation of curbs and gutters as approved by the Village. Each
such tree shall be at least two inches in diameter and shall measure
a minimum of six feet above the ground when planted. Said trees
shall be staked, placed in mulched beds and protected. [Amended
5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
(2) In all land divisions or developments with public or private culs-desac,
boulevards, or planting strips, the divider/developer shall plant
landscape materials, plants, and trees. The ground cover in these
planting areas shall be primarily turf, with the exception of
immediate planting area, in which case bark, mulch, stone or
similar material may be used.
B. Street tree fee. If approved by the Village Board, in lieu of planting
required street trees, the divider/developer may pay to the Village
Treasurer, as a condition of the Village Board's final approval of the
final plat or certified survey map, a street tree fee of $1,000 for each
§ 395-77 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-79
344:744
tree to be planted. Funds collected for tree planting purposes shall be
kept in a special street tree fund, separate from the Village general
fund, and shall be used exclusively for planting street trees to benefit
the land division or development with respect to which such fees were
paid.
C. Completion. The planting of street trees and other plantings in the culsde-
sac, boulevards, and planting strips shall be completed as a Phase 2
required public improvement and as soon as practicable after the
installation of curbs and gutters.
D. Approved species. A list of approved street tree species shall be
available for review from the Village's Community Development
Department.
E. Replacement of trees and landscape materials. The divider/developer
shall be responsible for the replacement of trees and plantings that
have been removed during the installation of public improvements and
until the expiration of the warranty period in all land divisions or the
development. The divider/developer shall provide, plant and warrant
equal inches of caliber and size of plant material to that which is
removed.
F. Warranty. The divider/developer shall be responsible and provide a oneyear
warranty for all landscape materials installed. Said warranty shall
begin upon completion, acceptance and dedication of said plantings to
the Village. (In the event street trees or other plantings are required
along a private road, the warranty period shall begin upon completion
of such plantings and acceptance thereof by the Village.) Upon the
expiration of the warranty period, it shall be the adjacent property
owner's responsibility to water, weed, trim, maintain and replant if
necessary said trees and grass, or, in the case of landscape materials in
outlots or easements, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner
as defined in the recorded restrictive covenants. In addition, any tree
that is damaged or destroyed shall be promptly replanted with a new,
similar tree by the adjacent property owner at the property owner's
expense. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
§ 395-79 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-79
344:745

ARTICLE IX
Construction
§ 395-80. Commencement. [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20]
No construction or installation of public or private improvements shall be
commenced in a proposed land division or development by a divider or any
contractor engaged by a divider/developer until after the final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan shall have been granted final approval by
the Village Board (or until after a site and operational plan shall have been
granted final approval by the Village Plan Commission or Village Zoning
Administrator under § 420-56 of the Village Code), all conditions of the final
approval have been satisfied, all necessary certifications have been placed
on the plat, map, or development plan and the Village has provided written
authorization to the divider/developer to commence such construction or
installation.
§ 395-81. Building, zoning and occupancy permits. [Amended
5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-20; 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
No building, zoning, or occupancy permit shall be issued for the erection,
construction or occupancy of a building or structure on any lot created as
a result of a land division or shown on any development plan (including
any site and operational plan approved under § 420-56 of the Village Code)
subject to this chapter prior to completion of the public or private
improvements required by this chapter to be completed as a part of or
with the Phase 1 required public improvements or prior to the last required
approval of the final plat, certified survey map, or development plan. In
addition, the as-built plans pursuant to §§ 395-82C and 395-69H(9) of this
chapter shall be completed, reviewed and accepted by the Village.
§ 395-82. Engineering plans and specifications.
A. The engineering plans and specifications, including cross sections and
details, set out below are required and shall be submitted for review
and approval by the Village Board, with the advice and recommendation
of the Village staff, before final approval of any proposed final plat,
certified survey map, or development plan is granted by the Village
Board (or before final approval of any site and operational plan is
granted by the Village Plan Commission or the Village Zoning
Administrator under § 420-56 of the Village Code). The plans shall be
presented in paper prints as well as on electronic media acceptable to
the Village and compatible with the Village's Geographic Information
System format as outlined below: [Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No.
07-20; 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
(1) Point, line and polygon information.
(a) Data shall be delivered in vector format. The preferred format
is ESRI Shape files. Other acceptable formats include AutoCAD
DXF, Microstation DGN, Intergraph IGDS, MapInfo MIF, ESRI
§ 395-80 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-82
344:747
Arc/Info Coverages, and ESRI Interchange files. Scanned
images and raster files shall not be submitted for this type of
data.
(b) The coordinates in the data set shall be projected to the
Wisconsin State Plane South Coordinate System based on the
NAD27 Datum.
(c) Exceptions will be considered to these rules on a case-by-case
basis. Written approval for any exceptions shall be obtained
from the Village at the start of the project.
(2) Orthophotography, satellite imagery, digital photos and other
electronic images.
(a) Images shall be delivered in an uncompressed TIFF file. If the
image is not in this format, other image types can be
considered, including MrSID and JPG files, by the Village on a
case-by-case basis.
(b) The images shall be spatially aware. In other words, the image
will know where it is located in the real world. Images shall be
projected to the Wisconsin State Plane South Coordinate
System based on the NAD27 Datum.
(c) Exceptions will be considered to these rules on a case-by-case
basis. Written approval for any exceptions shall be obtained
from the Village at the start of the project.
B. The Village shall place its certification of such approval on each of the
following plans, which shall be permanently kept on file by the Village
Community Development Department:
(1) Street plans, profiles, and specifications showing existing and
proposed grades and the location, elevation and cross sections of
all required street, curb and gutter and sidewalk improvements.
(2) Sanitary sewerage system facilities plans and specifications
showing the location, grade, size, elevation and materials of all
required sanitary sewerage system facilities and improvements.
(3) Storm sewer and drainage system plans and specifications showing
the location, grade, size, cross section, elevation, and materials of
all required stormwater management facilities and improvements.
(4) Water supply and distribution system facilities plans and
specifications showing the location, size, elevation and materials of
all required water system facilities and improvements.
(5) Grading and drainage plans showing existing and proposed
topographic contours, mass grading and detailed plans, earthwork
balance calculations, proposed top of foundation and finished yard
§ 395-82 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-82
344:748
grade elevations, and such supplemental information as is
determined on a case-by-case basis.
(6) Erosion and sedimentation control plans showing and describing in
detail the structures, methods, practices and procedures that will
be utilized to prevent or minimize erosion and sedimentation, as
well as the schedule for implementing each aspect of such plans.
Such plans shall comply with Chapter 298, Stormwater
Management and Stormwater Drainage System Facilities, and
Chapter 381, Construction Site Maintenance and Erosion Control,
of this Code. [Amended 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
(7) Landscaping plans showing and describing in detail the location,
size and species of any proposed trees, shrubs or other vegetation,
as well as any related berms or other site work, and a detailed
schedule for implementing each aspect of such plan. (See § 395-84
of this chapter regarding required tree protection.)
(8) Detailed breakdown by the divider's/developer's engineer of
specifications and quantities based upon the approved engineering
plans.
(9) Additional special plans or information as required by the Village
staff, Village Plan Commission or Village Board to clarify planning,
engineering or design aspects of the proposed land division or its
development.
C. As-built plans. [Added 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
(1) Required. Prior to the acceptance of the required Phase 1
improvements, as-built plans for all public and private
improvements for all public and/or private streets, sanitary sewers,
water mains and storm sewers, grading and drainage facilities
(pursuant to § 395-69H(9) of this chapter) shall be prepared,
reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer prior to the
dedication of public improvements and/or acceptance of public or
private improvements.
(2) The as-built plans shall be stamped and sealed by a Wisconsin
licensed professional engineer.
(3) The as-built plans shall be submitted to the Village in paper prints
as well as on electronic media acceptable to the Village and
compatible with the Village's Geographic Information System
format as required by the Public Works Department.
D. Record drawings. Upon the Village approving the as-built plans as
specified above, said plans shall become the official record drawings for
the required improvements. All record drawings shall be stamped
"record drawing" by the Village Engineer and be permanently kept by
the Village Engineering Department. [Added 5-18-2009 by Ord. No.
09-35]
§ 395-82 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-83
344:749
§ 395-83. Erosion control.107
A. General. Construction site erosion prevention and control measures
shall be provided, installed and utilized during all phases of grading and
construction to minimize erosion and to prevent sediment from
entering streets, storm sewers, watercourses or adjacent property.
B. Remedial. The Village inspectors, in response to an observed erosion
problem, may require the divider/developer to provide, install and
utilize additional erosion prevention, control and rehabilitation
measures, such as silt fencing, erosion bales, sediment ponds, sloping,
seeding, riprap, revetments, jetties, clearing, dredging, snagging, drop
structures, brush mats, willow poles, and grade stabilization structures.
C. Tree cutting. Tree cutting and shrubbery clearing shall be conducted in
such a manner as to prevent erosion and sedimentation, preserve and
improve scenic qualities and preserve natural screening of any
development from stream or lake users.
D. Paths and trails. Paths and trails in wooded and wetland areas shall not
exceed 10 feet in width unless otherwise approved by the Village Board
and shall be so designed and constructed as to result in the least
possible removal or disruption of trees and shrubs and the minimum
impairment of natural beauty.
E. Earthmoving. All earthmoving shall be conducted in such a manner as
to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to minimize the impact of
development on natural fauna, flora, watercourses, water regimen and
topography.
F. Outside review. Review of the proposed or actual conduct of any
cutting, clearing or earthmoving may be requested by the Village staff,
the Village Plan Commission, the Village Board, the Kenosha County
Land Conservation Committee, the State District Fish and Wildlife
Managers or the state, as it deems appropriate.
G. Protection of disturbed surfaces. The divider/developer shall promptly
cause all grading, excavations and other land surface disturbances to
be spread with topsoil, seeded and mulched, or sodded, or otherwise
protected in an approved manner, so that erosion is minimized and the
deposit of sediment in watercourses or drainage facilities other than
settling basins is prevented.
H. Erosion control plans. All erosion control plans prepared pursuant to
§ 395-82 of this chapter shall incorporate best management practices to
reduce soil loss and protect drainage system facilities and watercourses
from sedimentation as per Chapter 381, Construction Site Maintenance
and Erosion Control, of the Village Code and the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, as may be amended.
107. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 381, Construction Site Maintenance and Erosion Control.
§ 395-83 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-83
344:750
§ 395-84. Tree protection.
The divider/developer shall make reasonable efforts to preserve and protect
existing trees which appear on the Village's approved species list and which
are 10 inches or more in diameter six feet above the ground. Trees to be
protected shall be located on the landscaping plan required by § 395-82 of
this chapter, and a detailed description of the methods that are to be utilized
to protect such trees shall be included in such plan.
§ 395-85. Staking, inspection and related services. [Amended
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 05-59; 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-35]
Prior to commencing any work within an approved land division or
development, the divider/developer shall notify the Village to make
arrangements for construction staking, inspection and preparation of the
required record drawings pursuant to § 395-82C of this chapter. The Village
or its engineering representatives shall, at the divider's/developer's
expense, provide all necessary staking, inspection and construction-related
services for public and/or private streets, sanitary sewers, water mains
and storm sewers and drainage facilities and shall inspect and approve all
completed work prior to the reduction or release of any letter of credit or
other security or the acceptance by the Village of the dedication of public
improvements and/or acceptance of private improvements.
I. Vegetation. Temporary vegetation and mulching shall be used to protect
critical areas, and permanent vegetation shall be installed as soon as
practical.
J. Grading and excavation. Grading or excavation at any given time shall
be confined to the smallest practical area and shall leave disturbed
surfaces unprotected for the shortest practical period of time.
K. Settling or sedimentation basins. Settling or sedimentation basins shall
be installed and maintained at all drainageways to trap, remove and
prevent sediment and debris from being washed outside the areas that
are being developed or into navigable streams or lakes.
§ 395-83 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-85
344:751

ARTICLE X
Fees
§ 395-86. Final approval conditioned on payment of fees.
As a condition of the Village Board's final approval of a final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan, the divider/developer shall pay to the
Village Treasurer all required fees due at such time.
§ 395-87. Application and development review fees.
A. An initial application fee of $825 shall be paid when any of the following
applications or requests are submitted to the Village. This initial
application fee covers the costs of preapplication staff conferences with
the applicant and his representatives, site visits if necessary, providing
copies of applications and related ordinances, and telephone calls with
the applicant related to the Village requirements for the proposed
project prior to submitting the application or request. In addition, the
fees contained in Subsection C below shall also be paid for the
processing and reviewing of the application. See also Subsection E
below for additional fees, as applicable, for the following applications:
[Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-61; 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
10-51; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-35]
(1) Conceptual plan.
(2) Preliminary plat.
(3) Preliminary condominium plat.
(4) Final plat.
(5) Final condominium plat.
(6) Assessor's plat.
(7) Development agreements, memorandums or other agreements not
associated with a plat or certified survey map.
(8) Amendment to an existing development agreement or other
existing agreement.
(9) Assignment of development agreement.
B. An initial application fee of $225 shall be paid when any of the following
applications or requests are submitted to the Village. This initial
application fee covers the costs of preapplication staff conferences with
the applicant and his representatives, site visits if necessary, providing
copies of applications and related ordinances, and telephone calls with
the applicant related to the Village requirements for the proposed
project prior to submitting the application or request. In addition, the
fees contained in Subsection C below shall also be paid for the
processing and reviewing of the application. See also Subsection E
§ 395-86 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-87
344:753
below for additional fees, as applicable, for the following applications:
[Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-61; 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
10-51; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-35]
(1) Comprehensive plan amendment.
(2) Neighborhood sketch plan or amendment thereto.
(3) Certified survey map, or affidavit of correction thereto.
(4) Lot line adjustment, or affidavit of correction thereto.
(5) Variance.
(6) Street, walkway or park vacation.
(7) Vacation of a plat.
(8) Affidavit to change a plat or CSM requirement.
(9) Vacation of a Village easement.
(10) Deed restrictions/covenants/assignments or other development
documents to prepare or review.
C. Predevelopment agreement: In addition to the application fee as
specified in Subsections A and B above, the divider/developer and the
property owner shall be responsible for paying for the actual Village
staff time spent and resources required for processing and reviewing of
the application. As a condition of submitting the application or request,
the divider/developer and the property owner(s) shall enter into a
predevelopment agreement with the Village which specifies, at a
minimum, the property owner's name, address, and telephone and
facsimile numbers, the applicant's name, address, and telephone and
facsimile numbers, the type of application, current billable rates to be
used for review of the application, the address, legal description and tax
parcel number of the property, and where and to whom invoices shall be
sent. [Amended 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-02]
(1) The Village shall mail invoices on a monthly basis to the specified
person. All invoices shall be paid within 30 days. There is a penalty
of 1.5% per month on the unpaid invoice balance, and there is an
additional penalty of 10% if the outstanding invoice, interest and
penalty are placed on the tax roll (a lien against the property). The
right of the Village to assess a lien against the property shall be one
of the remedies available to the Village but shall not be the
exclusive remedy. The Village may also sue for a money judgment
for any invoices which are past due. Furthermore, if an invoice
becomes past due for more than 30 days, the Village may elect to
terminate all staff review and to terminate the Village approval
process on the application until all delinquent invoices are fully
paid.
§ 395-87 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-87
344:754
(2) The Village shall invoice and the applicant/property owner(s) shall
pay for the staff billable time and costs spent for processing and
reviewing the plans, specifications, drawings and other documents
submitted with respect to the proposed application, specific plans,
plats, and maps for the development or project; for preparing
memorandums and letters; for preparing, mailing, faxing, emailing
and publishing meeting notices and agendas; and for meetings,
telephone calls and emails with the applicant, agents, developers,
property owners, officials and neighbors. Billable time includes
preparing reports and documents for the Village Plan Commission,
Zoning Board of Appeals or the Village Board, and any other Village
staff time expended to review or analyze the application, specific
plans, plats, maps or development plans. Other charges included in
the billable hours and costs are associated with:
(a) Preparing and publishing Village municipal code text and map
amendments for the referenced application from the Village's
consultant. (Note: Invoices from the Village's General E-Code
consultant are typically sent semi-annually, which often results
in a time delay in sending final invoices from the Village to the
owner/applicant.);
(b) The Village staff seeking expert advice in meetings and
reviewing and preparing correspondence regarding the
specific plans, plats, maps, development plans or project, such
as, but not limited to the Village's Attorney, Environmental
Consultant, or Architectural Consultant expertise; and
(c) requests from the agent/developer/property owners in
gathering additional information; preparing GIS mapping;
reviewing materials; preparing meetings, letters, emails and
other correspondence; and researching information and for
existing or speculative development proposals to assure that
the proposed application, specific plans, plats, maps,
development plans or project are in compliance with the
applicable Village, county, state or federal ordinances, rules
and regulations and any approved plans or specifications.
(3) The Village shall continue to invoice the divider/developer or
property owner(s) until final consideration is made regarding said
application and all related activities related to the application have
been completed, preconstruction meetings have been held and
inspections have been completed or said application is withdrawn
in writing by the applicant/property owner. All invoices and all staff
time and resources spent prior to the date of the written request to
terminate the application shall be paid by the divider/developer or
property owner.
D. All complete applications on file with the Village as specified in
Subsections A and B above that have been received and are currently
being processed by the Village on or before January 31, 2004, will not
§ 395-87 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-87
344:755
be subject to the fees specified in Subsections A, B and C above. To
further clarify, for developments that are in the Village's land division
and development review process and require multiple applications for
final approval, the next application submitted on or after February 1,
2004, will be subject to said fees.
E. Special fees. The divider/developer and property owner shall pay to the
Village Treasurer, upon presentment of an itemized statement, a fee
equal to the actual cost incurred by the Village for all engineering,
attorney and/or other special expert consultation or review conducted
by or on behalf of the Village in connection with the review of an
application or request for information; meeting with the owner/
developer/applicant of a project or other engineering, attorney and/or
special expert consultation or review services; or review, meeting,
research of information for speculative development proposals incurred
by the Community Development Department as the Village Zoning
Administrator, Plan Commission and/or the Village Board may deem
necessary to assure that the proposed application or existing plans or
request are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
approved plans and specifications. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
10-51]
F. Other fees. [Added 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-64]
(1) An application fee of $225 shall be paid when any of the following
requests for a time extension to satisfy the requirements of
approval is requested: [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-35]
(a) Conceptual plan.
(b) Preliminary plat.
(c) Preliminary condominium plat.
(d) Final plat.
(e) Final condominium plat.
(f) Assessor's plat.
(2) An application fee of $50 shall be paid when any of the following
requests for a time extension to satisfy the requirements of
approval is requested:
(a) Certified survey map.
(b) Lot line adjustment.
(3) An application fee of $50 shall be paid when any of the following
requests are made: [Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-51]
(a) Street light (installed or removed).
§ 395-87 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-87
344:756
§ 395-88. Engineering and inspection fee. [Amended 5-7-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-20]
The divider/developer shall pay to the Village Treasurer, upon presentment
of an itemized statement, a fee equal to the actual cost incurred by the
Village for all engineering or inspection work conducted by or on behalf
of the Village in connection with the design, construction or installation of
required public or private improvements. Engineering or inspection work
shall include, without limitation, the preparation of plans and specifications,
review of plans and specifications, construction staking, inspection of
construction, preparation of estimates for letter of credit modifications and
such other engineering or inspection services as the Village Administrator
or the Village Board may deem necessary to assure that the design,
construction and installation of all required public or private improvements
are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the approved plans
and specifications.
§ 395-89. Expert assistance fee. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
10-51]
The divider/developer shall pay to the Village Treasurer, upon presentment
of an itemized statement, a fee equal to the actual cost incurred by the
Village for any legal, engineering, architectural, scientific, fiscal or other
expert or technical services required by the Village staff, the Village Plan
Commission or Village Board in connection with the review and evaluation
of any proposed site development, plat, certified survey map, or
development plans. These fees shall be paid monthly during the
development review process as well as a condition of final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan approval. There shall be no duplication
between fees charged under this section and those charged under § 395-88.
§ 395-90. Sanitary sewer extension fee.
The divider/developer shall pay to the Village Treasurer, as a condition
of the Village Board's final approval of a proposed final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan, any amounts that the divider/developer
is required to pay pursuant to § 395-72K of this chapter in connection with
the extension to the proposed land division or development plan of sanitary
sewerage system facilities or improvements.
§ 395-91. Water extension fee.
The divider/developer shall pay to the Village Treasurer, as a condition
of the Village Board's final approval of a proposed final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan, any amounts that the divider/developer
is required to pay pursuant to § 395-74J of this chapter in connection with
the extension to the proposed land division or development plan of water
system facilities or improvements.
(b) Address correction or change pursuant to Chapter 305.
§ 395-87 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-92
344:757
§ 395-92. Street extension fee.
The divider/developer shall pay to the Village Treasurer, as a condition
of the Village Board's final approval of a proposed final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan, any amounts that the divider/developer
is required to pay pursuant to § 395-70I of this chapter in connection with
the extension to the proposed land division or development plan of street
improvements.
§ 395-93. Sanitary sewer system upgrading fee.
The divider/developer shall pay to the Village Treasurer, as a condition
of the Village Board's final approval of a proposed final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan, any amounts that the divider/developer is
required to pay pursuant to § 395-72L of this chapter in connection with the
upgrading of existing sanitary sewerage system facilities or improvements.
§ 395-94. Water system upgrading fee.
The divider/developer shall pay to the Village Treasurer, as a condition
of the Village Board's final approval of a proposed final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan, any amounts that the divider/developer
is required to pay pursuant to § 395-74K of this chapter in connection with
the upgrading of existing water system facilities or improvements.
§ 395-95. Street upgrading fee.
The divider/developer shall pay to the Village Treasurer, as a condition
of the Village Board's final approval of a proposed final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan, any amounts that the divider/developer is
required to pay pursuant to § 395-70J of this chapter in connection with the
upgrading of existing street improvements.
§ 395-96. Street tree fee.
Any divider/developer who is permitted by the Village Board to pay a fee
rather than plant required street trees pursuant to § 395-79B of this chapter
shall pay such fee to the Village Treasurer as a condition of the Village
Board's final approval of the final plat, certified survey map, or development
plan.
§ 395-97. Environmental investigation fee.
The divider/developer shall pay to the Village Treasurer, as a condition
of the Village Board's final approval of a proposed final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan, any amounts that the divider/developer
is required to pay pursuant to § 395-18H of this chapter in connection with
investigations or tests regarding possible environmental contamination or
pollution.
§ 395-92 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-98
344:758
§ 395-98. Administrative processing fee.
The divider/developer shall pay to the Village Treasurer, as a condition
of the Village Board's final approval of a proposed final plat, certified
survey map, or development plan, any amounts that the divider/developer is
required to pay pursuant to § 395-17B(6) of this chapter in connection with
the administrative processing of the letter of credit, cash payments or other
security for a proposed development.
§ 395-99. Effect of nonpayment of fees.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no unconditional final
approval of any final plat, certified survey map, or development plan shall
be granted by the Village Board until such time as all fees imposed under
this chapter have been paid in full, with the exception of any engineering,
inspection and expert assistance fees provided for in § 395-91 of this
chapter which may be incurred after such final approval.
§ 395-98 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-99
344:759

ARTICLE XI
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 395-100. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words or phrases defined in § 395-101
of this chapter shall have the definitions stated therein. Words or phrases
that are not defined shall have their common, ordinary meaning unless a
particular meaning is clearly suggested by the context in which they appear.
Additionally, as used in this chapter, the word "shall" is mandatory, and the
word "may" is permissive. Singular words generally include the plural and
vice versa. Words of a particular gender generally include all genders.
§ 395-101. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVISORY AUTHORITY — Any authority or agency, other than an approving
or objecting authority, to which a plat or certified survey map may be
submitted for review and comment. An advisory authority may give advice
to the Village Board, but suggestions made by an advisory authority are not
binding.
ALLEY — A public way not designed for general travel and affording only
secondary access to the abutting properties.
APPROVAL, LAST REQUIRED — The Village Board's final approval of a final
plat, certified survey map, or development plan or the final approval of such
final plat, certified survey map, or development plan by any other approving
authority, whichever occurs last.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Each governmental body having authority to
approve or reject a particular plat or certified survey map. The approving
authorities with respect to subdivision plats are set out in § 236.10, Wis.
Stats.
ARTERIAL STREET — A street or highway used or intended to be used
primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets include freeways
and expressways, as well as standard arterial streets, highway and
parkways.
BUILDABLE LOT — A lot on which a principal building to be utilized for one
or more uses can be lawfully constructed.
CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP — A final scaled map prepared in accordance
with § 236.34, Wis. Stats., and applicable provisions of this chapter for the
purpose of dividing land into not more that four lots and which depicts a
land division resulting in not more than four lots. A certified survey map
approved by the Village Board in accordance with the provision of this
chapter is the only means by which a minor land division can be legally
created or accomplished.
§ 395-100 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-101
344:761
COLLECTOR STREET — A street designed or used to carry traffic from a
minor street to an arterial street.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN COMPONENT — Each ordinance, plan, study,
standard, agreement or other document duly adopted or approved by the
Village Board or the Village Plan Commission of the Village of Pleasant
Prairie which relates to the regulation of or the planning for land use or
development, or to the provision of public improvements or services, within
the Village or its extraterritorial jurisdiction area.
CONDOMINIUM — Property subject to a condominium declaration.
CONDOMINIUM, CONVERSION — A structure which, before the recording
of a condominium declaration, was wholly or partially occupied by persons
other than those who have contracted for the purchase of condominium
units and those who occupy with the consent of the purchasers.
CONDOMINIUM DECLARANT — The owner who subjects property to a
condominium declaration.
CONDOMINIUM DECLARATION — The instrument by which property
becomes subject to Ch. 703, Wis. Stats. The condominium declaration
relating to any condominium, other than to a conversion condominium or
a condominium involving a maximum of one principal building per lot or
parcel, must be approved by the Village Board pursuant to this chapter.
CONDOMINIUM INSTRUMENTS — The declaration, plats and plans of a
condominium, together with any attached exhibits or schedules.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT — A part of a condominium intended for any type
of independent use, including one or more cubicles of air at one or more
levels of space or one or more rooms of enclosed spaces located on one or
more floors (or parts thereof) in a building. A unit may include two or more
noncontiguous areas.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street having only one outlet and having an
appropriate turnaround for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic
movement.
DEDICATION (OF LAND AND/OR INTEREST IN LAND) — The grant and
conveyance of a geographically defined interest in land which is identified
on a plat or certified survey map as being the subject of a dedication,
grant and conveyance to the Village or some other entity, usually for public
improvements, facilities or uses; the act of making such a dedication.
DEDICATION (OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS) — The grant and conveyance
to the Village of completed public improvements in a land division by the
divider; the act of making such a dedication.
DEVELOPER — Any person(s), partnership, corporation or agency who or
which is financially responsible for the construction of public and/or private
infrastructure improvements which will serve the eventual construction of
new buildings, structures, or other urban land uses.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT — An agreement entered into by and
between a divider/developer and the Village with respect to any approved
§ 395-101 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-101
344:762
land division which provides, among other things, for the design,
construction and installation of required public improvements, the payment
for such public improvements, dedication of land or interests in land and
completed public improvements, acceptance of the dedication of public
improvements, restrictive covenants running with the land or other matters
relating to the land division, to development and use of land included in the
land division or to the administration and enforcement of the agreement.
DEVELOPMENT PLANS — A set of plans, including the neighborhood
sketch plans, conceptual plans, and the site and operational plans, prepared
by the developer, his engineer or representatives and approved by the
Village. The plans are prepared for the purpose of promoting compatible
development which stabilizes property values, prevents impairment or
depreciation of property values, and promotes and protects the health,
safety, and welfare of the community.
DIVIDER — Any person who divides, conveys or seeks to divide or convey
land or an interest in land in such a way that a land division results.
FACE OF CURB — On a nonmountable curb, the vertical portion of the
curb facing the roadway pavement. On a mountable curb, the curb face is
located six inches from the back of the curb in the direction of the roadway
pavement.
FINAL PLAT — A final scaled map prepared in accordance with the
requirements of Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., and applicable provisions of this
chapter for the purpose of dividing land into five of more lots and which
depicts a land division (either a subdivision or a large lot subdivision)
resulting in five or more lots. A final plat approved by the Village Board in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter is the only means by which a
subdivision or large lot subdivision can be legally created or accomplished.
FLOODPLAINS — Those lands, including the floodway and flood-fringe
areas, which are subject to inundation by the one-hundred-year recurrence
interval flood or, where such data is not available, by the maximum flood of
record.
FRONTAGE STREET — A minor or collector street which is auxiliary and
generally parallel to an arterial street and which is used to control access
to the arterial street and to serve the abutting properties.
HIGH GROUNDWATER ELEVATION — The highest elevation to which
subsurface water rises. This may be evidenced by the actual presence
of water during wet periods of the year or by soil mottling during drier
periods. "Mottling" is a mixture or variation of soil colors. In soils with
restricted internal drainage, gray, yellow, red and brown colors are
intermingled, giving a multicolored effect.
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT — An irrevocable agreement, entered
into by a bank, savings and loan association or other financial institution
authorized to do business in the State of Wisconsin and having a financial
standing acceptable to the Village, which secures a divider's obligation
to pay the cost of designing, constructing and installing require public
improvements and certain other obligations in connection with an approved
§ 395-101 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-101
344:763
land division. The letter of credit functions similarly to a line of credit in
that it is the primary source of funding for the public improvements. All
financial administrative processing of the letter of credit is verified through
the Village following inspections prior to approval and authorization of
payments. The Village shall authorize reductions in the letter of credit upon
presentment of payment requests, verification of quantities, inspections,
and the verification that all conditions of the development agreement and
this chapter are satisfied. The Village Board authorizes reductions and
payments to the financial institutions for work performed at regularly
scheduled meetings.
IRREVOCABLE STANDBY LETTER OF CREDIT — An irrevocable
agreement, entered into by a bank, savings and loan association or other
financial institution authorized to do business in the State of Wisconsin
and having a financial standing acceptable to the Village, which secures a
divider's obligation to pay the cost of designing, constructing and installing
required public improvements and certain other obligations in connection
with an approved land division. The standby letter of credit functions as
a backup or in addition to the line of credit that a divider/developer is
using to pay for the public improvements. The standby letter of credit
shall be reduced or released upon verification of quantities and Village
inspections and the Village Board's full acceptance of a classification of
public improvements.
KENOSHA COUNTY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT — The departmental
agency of county government in Kenosha County having preliminary and
final plat review and approval authority.
LAND DIVISION — Any division or conveyance of land or of an interest in
land that results in the creation of one or more additional lots or parcels,
including, without limitation, any subdivision, large lot subdivision or minor
land division. Notwithstanding the foregoing definition, the creation of
any condominium, other than a conversion condominium or condominium
involving a maximum of one principal building per lot or parcel, shall be
deemed to be a land division. A land division can be legally created or
accomplished only by means of a preliminary and final plat approved by the
Village Board or, in the case of a condominium, by means of condominium
instruments approved by the Village Board in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
LARGE LOT SUBDIVISION — Any land division resulting in five or more
lots, fewer than five of which are each 1 1/2 acres or less in area. A large
lot subdivision can be legally created or accomplished only by means of a
preliminary plat and final plat approved by the Village Board in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
LOT — Any parcel or land with geographically defined boundaries that is
created by or results from a land division. For purposes of this chapter, a lot
can result from a division or conveyance of a geographically defined interest
in land less than a fee simple absolute.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two street at their intersection, provided
that the corner of such intersection shall have an angle of 135° or less,
§ 395-101 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-101
344:764
measured on the street right-of-way lines. (See Appendix B-1 for an
illustration of a typical corner lot.)
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on
more than one street. Double frontage lots will normally be deemed to have
two front yards, two side yards and no rear yard. Double frontage lots are
generally not permitted unless that lot abuts an arterial street. If a double
frontage lot abuts an arterial street, direct access to the arterial street is
restricted by means of a planting buffer or some other acceptable measure.
(See Appendix B-1 for an illustration of a typical double frontage lot.)
LOT, FLAG — A lot which is without street frontage for much of its width
and which has access to a public street only by virtue of a narrow leg or
"flagstaff" where the driveway is usually located. Flag lots resemble the
shape of a flag and flagstaff. (See Appendix B-1 for an illustration of a typical
flag lot.) The creation of flag lots is prohibited.
MINOR LAND DIVISION — Any land division resulting in fewer than five
lots. A minor land division can be legally created or accomplished only
be means of a certified survey map approved by the Village Board in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
MINOR STREET — A street used or intended to be used primarily for access
to abutting properties.
MUNICIPALITY — An incorporated village or city.
NAVIGABLE STREAM — Any stream capable of floating any boat, skiff or
canoe of the shallowest draft used for recreational purposes on a regularly
recurring basis or for a duration sufficient to make it conducive to
recreational uses.
NAVIGABLE WATER — Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes, all streams,
ponds, sloughs, and flowages and any other surface waters within the
territorial limits of the State of Wisconsin which are navigable in fact by a
recreation craft of the shallowest draft on a regularly recurring basis or for
a duration sufficient to make them conducive to recreational uses.
OBJECTING AUTHORITY — An agency empowered to object to a
subdivision plat pursuant to §§ 236.12 and 236.13, Wis. Stats. The Village
Board may not finally approve any subdivision plat with respect to which
a timely objection by an objecting authority has been certified until such
objection has been satisfied.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The line on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of the water are so continuous as to leave
a distinct mark, either by erosion, destruction of terrestrial vegetation, or
other easily recognized characteristic.
OUTLOT — A parcel of land, other than a buildable lot or a block, which is
designated as such on a plat or certified survey map.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, trust,
body politic or corporate or any other legal entity.
§ 395-101 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-101
344:765
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A preliminary scaled map prepared in accordance
with the requirements of Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., and applicable provisions of
this chapter for the purpose of dividing land into five or more lots and which
depicts a land division (whether a subdivision or a large lot subdivision)
resulting in five or more lots. A preliminary plat approved by the Village
Board in accordance with the provisions of this chapter is a necessary
precondition to the filing of a final plat.
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS — Any infrastructure improvements required
for the development of property, such as but not limited to sanitary sewer
main and related appurtenants, lift stations, water main and related
appurtenants, storm sewer main and related appurtenants, grading and
drainage work, roadway, curb and gutter, street signage, street trees and
plantings, and streetlights, which are not intended to be municipally owned
and maintained.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — Any municipal infrastructure improvements
required by the Village Board for the development of property, such as but
not limited to sanitary sewer and related appurtenants, lift stations, water
and related appurtenants, storm sewer and related appurtenants, roadway,
curb and gutter, street signage, street trees and plantings, and streetlights,
which are intended to be municipally owned and maintained.
PUBLIC WAY — Any public street, highway, walkway, drainageway or any
part thereof.
RESERVATION FOR POSSIBLE FUTURE ACQUISITION — A geographically
defined area of land or interest in land identified on a plat or certified survey
map as having been temporarily set aside for possible future acquisition for
public improvements, facilities or uses. Such a reservation does not imply
public ownership. Rather, it signifies a temporary rejection of the proposed
land division and development of the reserved area because the proposal
is inconsistent with a proposed public use which is the subject of active
consideration and planning.
ROADWAY — The paved portion of a public street.
SHORELANDS — The area within 1,000 feet from the ordinary high-water
mark of a lake, pond or flowage, or the area within 300 feet from the
ordinary high-water mark of a river or stream (or the area within the
floodplain), whichever is greater.
SUBDIVISION — Any land division resulting in five or more lots, at least five
of which are each 1 1/2 acres or less in area, or any series of successive land
divisions resulting in five or more lots being created from the same parcel
of land within a period of five years, at least five of which are each 1 1/2
acres or less in area. A subdivision can be legally created or accomplished
only by means of a preliminary and final plat approved by the Village Board
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
VILLAGE — The incorporated municipality of Pleasant Prairie, Wisconsin.
§ 395-101 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 395-101
344:766
WETLANDS — Those areas where water is at, near or above the land
surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic
vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet conditions.
§ 395-101 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-101
344:767

ARTICLE XII
When Effective
§ 395-102. Adoption and posting.
Pursuant to §§ 66.0103 and 61.50, Wis. Stats., this chapter shall be effective
upon adoption by the Village Board and posting in three public places within
the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
§ 395-102 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 395-102
344:769
Chapter 405
DESIGN STANDARDS AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contractors — See Ch. 150.
Sewers — See Ch. 285.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 297.
Stormwater management and stormwater
drainage system facilities — See Ch. 298.
Stormwater storage facilities — See Ch. 300.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 305.
Water — See Ch. 355.
Building and mechanical code — See Ch. 370.
Land disturbance, construction site
maintenance and erosion control — See Ch.
381.
Land division and development control — See
Ch. 395.
§ 405-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted by the Village of Pleasant Prairie under the
authority granted by the Wisconsin Statutes, including, without limitation,
§§ 61.34, 61.345, 61.36 and 61.39, Wis. Stats.
§ 405-2. Purpose and intent.
The Purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform standards for design
and construction within the Village of Pleasant Prairie. These standards will
promote consistent design and construction practices and safeguard the
interests of the Village of Pleasant Prairie by ensuring that all public and
private improvements are designed and constructed in conformance with
sound engineering practices and accepted standards.
§ 405-3. Adoption of Design Standards and Construction
Specifications.
This chapter hereby adopts and incorporates the Design Standards and
Construction Specifications for the Village of Pleasant Prairie,108 and any
amendments that may be made by the Village Board from time to time, for
all public and private improvements.
§ 405-4. Jurisdiction; applicability.
A. This chapter applies to design and construction of public and private
improvements, land development, and grading and filling activities
within the Village of Pleasant Prairie corporate limits.
108. Editor's Note: Said Design Standards and Construction Specifications are on file in the
Village offices.
§ 395-102 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 405-4
344:770
§ 405-5. Approvals.
No improvements such as land grading, land filling, stormwater drainage
facilities, sanitary sewer, water mains, roadway, paving, or other
infrastructure shall be constructed until plans are formally approved in
writing by the Village and any other agencies having jurisdiction.
§ 405-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The following methods of enforcement in any combination thereof are
authorized against any landowner or responsible party that is found to be in
violation of any provision of this chapter:
B. The requirements of this chapter are not exclusive. Other public
agencies may have review and permitting jurisdiction, including but not
limited to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, United
States Army Corps of Engineers, Wisconsin Department of
Transportation and Kenosha County. This chapter does not substitute
for the requirements of other public agencies having jurisdiction.
A. Stop-work order. The Village may issue a stop-work order if the work
being done does not comply with Village standards, is not being done
correctly, does not have required approvals or permits from the Village
or other agencies having jurisdiction, or is deemed unsafe to the public.
B. Compliance order. The Village shall notify the owner in writing of any
noncomplying activity. The compliance order shall describe the nature
of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule of remedial action,
and additional enforcement action that may be taken.
C. Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is
subject penalties pursuant to § 1-4 of the Village Code.
D. If the violations are likely to result in damage to private properties,
public facilities, waters of the state or other waterways in the Village,
the Village may take emergency actions necessary to prevent such
damage.
E. The owner or responsible party is responsible for any costs incurred by
the Village to bring the violation into compliance with any compliance
order. The Village shall mail an invoice for any such work to the owner
or responsible party. All invoices shall be paid within 30 days. For
invoices not paid within 30 days, there is a penalty of 1.5% per month
due on the unpaid invoice balance, along with an additional ten-percent
penalty if the outstanding invoice, interest, and penalty are placed on
the tax roll (a lien against the property). The right of the Village to
assess a lien against the property shall be one of the remedies available
to the Village but shall not be the exclusive remedy. The Village may
also sue for a money judgment for any invoices which are past due.
F. The Village may seek enforcement of violations of this chapter through
a court of equity located in Kenosha County.
§ 405-4 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 405-7
344:771
§ 405-7. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter are considered minimum requirements.
Where conditions imposed by this chapter differ from comparable
conditions imposed by any other ordinance, law, resolution, rule, or
regulation of any kind, the regulations that are more restrictive or that
impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. The Village reserves
the right to interpret and make determinations with regard to rules and
regulations.
§ 405-8. Editions and addendums.
§ 405-9. Appeals. [Amended 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-45]
A. Reference to the current Design Standards and Construction
Specifications shall be per current year edition, with first edition year
hereby adopted as 2016.
B. The Village Board may consider amendments, as issued per addendum,
during the year for the current year edition. Addendum(s) shall be made
by resolution that includes a description of the proposed amendments.
C. Each current year edition shall be updated to incorporate the previous
year's addendum(s).
A. Any person aggrieved by any decision, action, or determination made
by an authorized Village official interpreting or implementing this
chapter may file with the Village Engineer a written request for
reconsideration within 30 days of such decision, action, or
determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the request
for reconsideration. The Village Engineer shall render a decision on the
request for reconsideration, in writing, within 15 days of the receipt of
request. If the ruling on the request for reconsideration made by the
Village Engineer is unsatisfactory, the person requesting
reconsideration may, within 15 days after the Village Engineer's ruling,
file a written appeal to the Village Board.
B. A fee of $50, to help defray the cost of the appeal, shall accompany any
appeal to the Village Board for its ruling. The written appeal shall be
heard by the Village Board within 45 days from the date of filing. The
Village Board may reverse, affirm, or modify the determination of the
Village Engineer, and the Board's decision shall be final. The Village
Board shall promptly notify the appellant of its findings in writing.
§ 405-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 405-9
344:772
Chapter 410
SECURITY ORDINANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land division and development control — See
Ch. 395.
Zoning Ordinance — See Ch. 420.
§ 410-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the implementation
and use of digital security imaging systems (hereinafter referred to as
“DSIS”) that monitor the exterior spaces and areas of certain commercial
retail establishments and retail developments in the Village of Pleasant
Prairie. The DSIS will afford the opportunity for public safety departments
(e.g., Village Police Department and Village Fire & Rescue Department) to
visually examine certain retail establishments and retail development sites
and will provide emergency response personnel with a visual assessment
of an emergency situation in advance of arrival without placing an undue
burden for services on the taxpayers. The advanced visual assessment
may pertain to a person or persons (personal identification), a location
(scene identification), and/or a situation (action identification) in emergency
situations. The implementation and usage of DSIS will facilitate law
enforcement agencies in crime investigation. While it is anticipated that
the implementation and usage of DSIS will greatly aid law enforcement
agencies in subsequent criminal investigations and prosecutions, it is
recognized that DSIS alone cannot provide for or be solely relied upon to
produce positive personal, action, or scene identification. Furthermore, it
is recognized that since there is no Village requirement that these systems
be actively monitored, it cannot be reasonably expected that these systems
will, on their own, necessarily provide a safer or more secure environment,
nor are they a substitute for other security measures. It is also the intent
of this chapter to attain commercial retail environments of sustained
desirability and economic stability and to avoid unreasonable adverse
effects to the property values of the surrounding properties and
surrounding neighborhoods and to maintain and promote the public health,
safety and welfare of the Village.
§ 410-2. Developments required to install digital security imaging
systems (DSIS). [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
A. The following buildings/uses pursuant to the Village Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter 420) shall hereby be required to provide, install and maintain
in good working order an exterior DSIS for security surveillance
purposes.
(1) Any new use or building, modifications or additions requiring Plan
Commission approval pursuant to the Village Zoning Ordinance
§ 405-9 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 410-2
344:773
(Chapter 420) within the B-1 Neighborhood Business, B-2
Community Business, B-3 Regional Retail Business, B-4 Freeway
Service Business Districts, and all retail and services uses in the
B-6 Freeway Oriented Business Center District. [Amended
4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(2) Any new use or building, modifications or additions requiring Plan
Commission approval pursuant to the Village Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 420, for the following uses in the B-5 Freeway Office
District and the M-5 Production Manufacturing District: day-care
facility, either for children or adults; retail auxiliary uses as allowed
in the B-5 and M-5 Districts; and service auxiliary uses as allowed
in the B-5 and M-5 Districts.
(3) Any new use or building, modifications or additions requiring Plan
Commission approval pursuant to the Village Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 420, for the following uses in the M-1 Limited
Manufacturing District or M-2 General Manufacturing District:
banks; barber- and beauty shops; clinic-outpatient; dry cleaning
and laundries, pickup and delivery stations and self-service; motor
vehicle showrooms; and day-care facility, either for children or
adults.
(4) Any new use or building, modifications or additions requiring Plan
Commission approval pursuant to the Village Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 420, for the following uses in the I-1 Institutional District:
financial institutions with or without a drive-through facility; retail
sale as allowed in the I-1 District; day-care facility, either for
children or adults; veterinarian emergency service offices; and
veterinarian offices.
(5) Any new use or building, modifications or additions requiring Plan
Commission approval pursuant to the Village Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 420, for the following uses in the PR-2 Community Park-
Recreational District: cabaret or a dry cabaret; and restaurants/
snack bars.
(6) Any new use or building, modifications or additions requiring Plan
Commission approval pursuant to the Village Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 420, for the following uses in the PR-3 Regional Park-
Recreational District: limited retail uses as allowed in the PR-3
District; limited service uses as allowed in the PR-3 District;
restaurants/snack bars; and hotels.
(7) Any new building, modifications or additions requiring Plan
Commission approval pursuant to the Village Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 420, for the following uses in the R-9, R-10 or R-11
Multiple-Family Residential Districts that has 12 or more units per
building where the building has common entries and common
hallways.
§ 410-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 410-2
344:774
§ 410-3. Digital security imaging, storage devices, related
equipment and easements required.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner/developer and any/
all successors in interest or ownership of the properties/developments
to provide, install and maintain in good working order the exterior
DSIS.
C. The property owner/developer and any/all successor owners shall pay
to the Village Treasurer, upon presentment of an itemized statement, a
fee equal to the actual costs incurred by the Village for all IT
Department staff and consultants, attorney and/or other special expert
consultation for the review, inspection, any required ongoing
maintenance conducted by or on behalf of the Village in connection
with the DSIS.
A. Such systems shall provide for complete surveillance of all exterior
building perimeters, rear and side areas, walkways, vehicular points of
entrance and exit, other common areas and parking lots within the
development.
B. Such systems shall function continuously, whether the businesses are
open or closed, and shall provide visible surveillance to the abovedescribed
areas during hours of darkness. Lighting of the site during
darkness hours shall provide the DSIS with illumination levels adequate
to ensure identification of subject matter. [Amended 3-7-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-06]
C. Such systems within such developments shall provide and maintain a
centrally located security room that will be accessible and used by the
Village Departments responsible for public safety.
D. All digital video recorded by such systems shall be archived for a period
of not less than 30 days. Proper software and logins shall be provided to
the Village Police and IT Departments to provide immediate access to
both live and historical video. The Village shall have the rights and
capabilities to download the historical digital video from the site for
public safety purposes directly through Internet Protocol (IP)
transmission. The Village shall have the rights and capabilities for "real
time," "live look" surveillance via that same network. The Village Police
and IT Departments shall have live look and download capabilities to
the DSIS system, independent of the owner's personnel. The DSIS shall
also be capable of exporting exact/uncompressed duplicates of the
recordings in a standard commercial format and/or the native video file
format and/or the database file with proper player/codec. All output
formats must maintain accurate aspect ratios consistent with the
original recording. All output formats shall contain accurate time and
date stamps. [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06; 4-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-20]
§ 410-2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 410-3
344:775
§ 410-4. Hardware standards.
Equipment deployed under this chapter shall conform to the following
minimum standards:
E. The property owner/developer shall grant easements to the Village of
Pleasant Prairie allowing access and maintenance rights to all such
systems, devices and areas associated with the digital security imaging
system.
A. Cameras. Cameras shall be IP-based wired or wireless. Cameras shall
be color wide dynamic range day/night type with noise reduction.
Exterior cameras must possess an Ingress Protection rating of no less
than IP66. In order to achieve the identification level of video capture,
subject matter at the capture line shall have a pixel density rating of 50
pixels per foot or greater for IP-based cameras. Cameras proposed for
the DSIS shall have LUX ratings that can accommodate identification
level images during low light levels, without distorting or adding
excessive noise to video images. [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No.
16-06]
B. Digital/network video recorder. Digital/network video recorders (D/
NVR) shall provide adequate storage capacity to accommodate a
minimum of 30 days of archived digital video files with the lowest
possible amount of compression. The DVR shall be IP addressable so as
to make it accessible via the Internet, and the Village shall be given any
permissions and/or software required to access both the video files
stored thereon and live feed of any camera. [Amended 3-7-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-06]
C. Recorder security. The D/NVR Head End equipment shall be located in
a physically secure area such as a locked cabinet or room taking into
consideration proper environmental controls. Power to the DSIS shall
be surge suppressed and have battery backup of no less than 45
minutes.
D. Software. The property owner/developer shall provide the Village of
Pleasant Prairie with a minimum of two additional software license
seats of the DSIS software. These licenses are in addition to the
software license seat that is housed with the DSIS DVR/NVR.
E. Internet connection. The property owner/developer shall provide at its
expense an Internet connection for the DSIS. This connection is to be
used for the sole purpose of providing access to the DSIS. This
connection must possess upload speeds of no less than 5 mbps and
download speeds of no less than 5 mbps (business class connection). A
static IP address must be assigned to the DSIS connection. The Internet
connection must remain operational for the life of the DSIS at the cost
of the property owner/developer.
§ 410-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 410-5
344:776
§ 410-5. Implementation.
If the development consists of multiple buildings, tenant spaces and/or
phases, the DSIS shall be installed and fully operational upon the verbal
occupancy of each building, tenant and/or phase. The adequacy of the
implementation of the DSIS minimum standards for each building, tenant
and/or phase shall be determined by the Village.
§ 410-6. Plan submittal.
The DSIS shall be a component of the Village site and operational plan
application and review process as specified in the Village Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter 420). Upon application for site and operational plan, the applicant/
property owner shall provide to the Village seven sets of DSIS plans which
shall clearly depict the location of all proposed cameras and hardware as
well as the location of the security room. The DSIS portion of the site and
operational plan submittal shall also include a written narrative explaining
in detail the required DSIS.
§ 410-7. Village discretion.
The Community Development Department shall have discretion, on a caseby-
case basis, to determine the adequacy, ownership and easement
requirements of the DSIS, and the Community Development Department
has the right to waive certain requirements of this Chapter if it is
determined that previous agreements/contracts have been established
between the applicant/developer/property owner.
§ 410-8. Appeals.
Appeals to this Chapter shall follow the procedures set forth in § 420-151 of
the Zoning Ordinance, entitled "Administrative appeals."
Chapter 420
ZONING ORDINANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plan Commission — See Ch. 18, Art. I.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 18, Art. V.
Adult-oriented uses — See Ch. 108.
Manufactured/mobile homes — See Ch. 221.
Quarries and nonmetallic mining
operations — See Ch. 270.
Building and Mechanical Code — See Ch. 370.
Construction site maintenance and erosion
control — See Ch. 381.
Land division and development control — See
Ch. 395.
§ 410-5 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 410-8
344:777

ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 420-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes, including, without limitation, §§ 61.34, 61.35, 61.351, 61.354,
62.23(7), 66.0415, 66.0115, 87.30, 91.71 to 91.80, 145.01 to 145.26, and
703.27, Wis. Stats.
§ 420-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the development and
use of buildings, structures and land (and the related development and use
of water and air space) within the corporate limits of the Village of Pleasant
Prairie, Wisconsin, and thereby to protect and promote the public health,
safety, convenience, prosperity, morals, aesthetics and general welfare.
More particularly, and without limitation, it is the purpose of this chapter
to:
A. Establish zoning districts and otherwise regulate where and under what
conditions and circumstances various uses of land, water, and air space
may be conducted;
B. Regulate the size, height, bulk, location and use of buildings and
structures;
C. Regulate lot coverage, setbacks, yards and other open spaces;
D. Prevent overcrowding and regulate the density and distribution of
population;
E. Encourage the wise use, development, conservation and protection of
the land, water, air space, wetland, woodland and wildlife resources
within the Village and help achieve a balanced relationship between
land use and development and the supporting and sustaining natural
resource base;
F. Promote and provide for the orderly and prosperous development of the
community;
G. Lessen congestion and promote the safety and efficiency of streets and
highways;
H. Secure safety from fire, flooding, panic, pollution, and other dangers;
I. Provide for adequate sanitation and drainage;
J. Facilitate and promote the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public facilities and
services;
K. Stabilize and protect property values;
§ 420-1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-2
344:779
L. Provide for aesthetically pleasing surroundings;
M. Preserve shore cover and other desirable natural vegetation;
N. Assist in the implementation of the Village's Comprehensive Plan and
the various plan components;
O. Prevent and control erosion and sedimentation;
P. Prevent and control water pollution and otherwise protect water
resources;
Q. Maintain safe and healthful water conditions;
R. Protect and control water pollution and otherwise protect water
resources;
S. Prevent flood damage to persons and property and minimize the cost of
flood relief and flood-control projects;
T. Provide for the preservation of sites of historic and aesthetic value;
U. Preserve burial sites;
V. Facilitate and promote the preservation of prime agriculture land;
W. Provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter; and
X. Provide penalties for the violation of this chapter.
§ 420-2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-2
344:780
ARTICLE II
Mechanics and Interpretation
§ 420-3. Adoption.
This chapter and each ordinance amending it shall be adopted by the Village
Board in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 420-4. Effective date.
Following adoption by the Village Board, this chapter and any ordinance
amending it shall become effective upon publication or posting, as provided
by law, or at such later date as may be specified in such ordinance.
§ 420-5. Jurisdiction.
Except as exempted by law, and except as otherwise specifically provided
in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any use of land
and any related use of water or air, and to any development of land and any
development-related physical disturbance of land, and to any construction,
installation, use, expansion or alteration of any building or structure, within
the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
§ 420-6. Projects in progress.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter or in any ordinance
amending this chapter, the provisions of such ordinance shall not apply to
any project for which a valid building permit is issued prior to the effective
date of such ordinance if the conditions and other requirements relating
to such permit are satisfied; provided, however, that such ordinance shall
apply to any request for an extension of such permit, and further provided
that this section shall not prevent such project from being a nonconforming
use or nonconforming structure as a result of such ordinance.
§ 420-7. Abrogation.
Neither this chapter nor any ordinance amending this chapter is intended
to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easement,
covenant, deed restriction or agreement. Whenever this chapter or any
ordinance amending this chapter imposes greater restrictions or burdens,
however, the provisions of such ordinance shall govern except as otherwise
specifically provided.
§ 420-8. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Village. This
chapter shall not be deemed to constitute a limitation on any powers
granted to the Village by the Wisconsin Statutes. Headings are provided
in this chapter for convenience and ease of reference only, and they shall
not be used to interpret the purpose, effect, or meaning of any provision
§ 420-3 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-8
344:781
of this chapter. The words and phrases that are defined in Article XXI of
this chapter shall have the meaning stated in their definitions. Undefined
words or phrases shall have their common, ordinary meanings unless a
specialized meaning is clearly suggested by the particular use of the word
or phrase or the context in which it appears. As used in this chapter, "shall"
is mandatory and "may" is permissive; however, the phrases "shall not"
and "may not" are synonymous and prohibitory. Singular words shall be
understood to include the plural and vice versa. Words used in the present
tense shall be understood to include the future tense and vice versa. Words
of a particular gender shall be understood to include all genders. This
chapter is not intended to abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with the legal
rights of any individuals or other persons guaranteed by the state or federal
constitutions, statutes or administrative rules, and shall be so interpreted.
§ 420-9. Severability.
In the event that any section, subsection or provision of this chapter is
adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable,
shall not be affected by such judgment and shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 420-10. Invalid administrative decision.
In the event that any administrative decision, determination or order made
pursuant to this chapter with respect to a particular set of facts and
circumstances is determined or adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid
by the Village Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision or judgment shall not be deemed to be applicable
to any other facts or circumstances.
§ 420-11. Disclaimer of liability.
The Village makes no guaranties, warranties or representations of any
kind by or as a result of adopting this chapter. Particularly, and without
limitation, the Village does not guarantee, warrant or represent that any
land in the Village is suitable for any type of use or development or that
only those areas designated as floodplain areas are subject to periodic
inundation. Consequently, the Village hereby asserts that there is no liability
on the part of the Village, its agencies, employees or agents for any flood
damage, sanitation problems, or structural or other damages that may
occur despite or as a result of reliance upon or conformance with this
chapter.
§ 420-12. Zoning Maps. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 06-42]
A. General Zoning and Shoreland Maps. A series of 41 cadastral base
maps at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, dated March 2006, as
prepared by the Kenosha County Department of Planning and
Development, on which the current Village zoning districts and
§ 420-8 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-12
344:782
§ 420-13. Amendments to the Official Zoning Maps and zoning text.
shoreland boundaries have been digitized, are hereby adopted as part
of this chapter as the Official General Zoning and Shoreland Zoning
Maps of the Village of Pleasant Prairie and incorporated herein by
reference (such maps, as amended from time to time, are hereinafter
collectively referred to as the " Zoning Maps" of the Village). For
purposes of identification, the date of adoption of each of these Zoning
Maps shall be certified upon its face by the Village President and
attested by the Village Clerk. Each ordinance amending the Zoning
Maps shall be promptly noted on one or more of such maps, as
appropriate, by the Village Zoning Administrator with the change in
zoning district classification and/or the change in zoning district
boundaries, the number of the ordinance and the date of its adoption by
the Village Board. See Appendix B for map amendments after January
17, 2000. For purposes of information, convenience and cross-reference
only, the Village Zoning Administrator may develop a system of
notations or symbols to designate on the Zoning Maps the existence of
variances, conditional use permits, nonconforming uses, conditions of
a particular zoning ordinance's effectiveness, and/or other matters of
zoning interest, but such notations or symbols on the Zoning Maps shall
not be deemed to be adopted as part of the official maps and shall not
themselves have any legal or evidentiary significance. The Zoning Maps
shall be available for inspection in the Village Community Development
Department.
B. Floodplain Zoning Maps. The Village Floodplain Zoning Maps are
adopted and described in § 420-131 of this chapter.
A. Intent. While stability of zoning within the Village is generally
desirable, zoning is by no means static. It is the intent of this section to
recognize that changed or changing conditions may require a change in
the zoning maps or the text of this chapter and that no person has a
right to an unchanged zoning classification or to unchanged provisions
of this chapter. It is the policy of the Village Board generally not to zone
land for development in the absence of an approved plan of
development, and the Village Board reserves its right, without
limitation, to condition an amendment of this chapter upon the owner
timely proceeding to implement an approved development plan or to
downzone land when it becomes apparent that an approved plan of
development will not be acted upon in a timely fashion.
B. Authority and limitations. Whenever the public necessity, convenience
or general welfare requires, the Village Board may, in its discretion,
amend any part of this chapter by ordinance. Such amendments may
include changes in the zoning district classification, changes in zoning
district boundaries, and/or changes in the text of this chapter. Such
amendments shall be enacted in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes and this chapter. Amendments may
§ 420-12 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-13
344:783
also be made upon a showing of a mistake or error on the part of the
Village.
C. Initiation. A petition for amendment of this chapter may be made by any
owner of real property in the Village affected by the proposed
amendment or by such owner's agent. Without filing a petition for an
amendment, any member of the Village Plan Commission or Village
Board may initiate consideration of an amendment of this chapter by
making a resolution which is adopted by such body.
D. Petition for amendment. A petition for any amendment of this chapter
shall be filed with the Village Zoning Administrator on forms furnished
by the Community Development Department.
(1) A petition for the amendment of zoning district boundaries or for an
amendment of the zoning district classification of real property
shall include, at a minimum, the following information (provided,
however, that the Village Zoning Administrator shall have authority
to waive the submission of any information in the possession of the
Village or not deemed necessary for the processing of the
application):
(a) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, and of
the owner of the affected real property if the applicant is not
the owner, and of any authorized agent, architect, professional
engineer, contractor or other person who will be involved in
the processing of the petition;
(b) Legal description and street address of the affected real
property [i.e., of the affected tax key parcel(s)] and legal
description of the area proposed to be rezoned if less than the
affected real property;
(c) Existing zoning district;
(d) Proposed zoning district;
(e) Existing use(s) of the area to be rezoned;
(f) Proposed use(s) of the area to be rezoned (with respect to any
proposed use that requires new construction, substantial
alteration of existing buildings or structures, or substantial
movements of earth, include a detailed narrative statement
explaining and describing the proposed development activities,
including the nature and purpose of the proposed development
activities, the number, size and use of buildings or other
significant structures or features, the type of proposed
construction, whether existing buildings or structures will be
retained, and required public improvements);
§ 420-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-13
344:784
(g) Compatibility of the proposed amendment with the Village's
Comprehensive Plan, approved neighborhood plan(s) and/or
approved conceptual plan;
(h) Compatibility of the proposed zoning and use with the zoning
and use of neighboring properties;
(i) Survey plat or scaled site plan or scaled aerial photograph of
the affected real property and its environs showing the
boundaries of the affected real property, the boundaries of the
area to be rezoned, the location, type and use of existing and
proposed buildings and significant structures on the affected
real property and on neighboring properties within 300 feet of
the affected real property (even if the area to be rezoned is
smaller than the affected real property), the existing and
proposed zoning classifications on the affected real property
and the neighboring properties within such three-hundred-foot
area and significant man-made or natural features within such
three-hundred-foot area, such as streets and highways, sewer,
water and drainage facilities, navigable waters, wetlands,
drainage courses and patterns, and wooded areas;
(j) Documentation of the applicant's ownership interest in the real
property affected by the proposed amendment and, if
applicable, the applicant's status as the owner's agent;
(k) Additional information relating to amendments with respect to
particular zoning districts, as required by other provisions of
this chapter or by state or federal statutes or regulations;
(l) Any additional information requested by the Village Zoning
Administrator, the Village Plan Commission or the Village
Board; and
(m) The fee required by Article V of this chapter.
(2) A petition for the amendment of the text of this chapter shall
include, at a minimum, the following:
(a) The text of the proposed amendment;
(b) A specific statement explaining why the petitioner desires the
adoption of the proposed text amendment and how the
proposed amendment will benefit the petitioner's real property
or use thereof;
(c) A detailed statement of the potential impact of the proposed
text amendment on other property owners or users;
(d) Any additional information requested by the Village Zoning
Administrator, the Village Plan Commission or the Village
Board; and
§ 420-13 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-13
344:785
(e) The fee required by Article V of this chapter.
E. Resolution for proposed amendment. The Zoning Administrator shall
draft or oversee the drafting of any amendments to this chapter
proposed by resolution of the Village Plan Commission or Village Board
or proposed by but not included in a petition for amendment.
F. Review and approval.
(1) Prior to filing any petition for amendment of this chapter, the
applicant shall schedule and participate in a conference with the
Zoning Administrator or the Zoning Administrator's designee
regarding the proposed amendment and the requirements for such
an amendment.
(2) After receipt of a complete petition for any amendment of this
chapter, or after drafting any amendment proposed by resolution of
the Plan Commission or Village Board, the Zoning Administrator
shall promptly submit the petition and/or drafted amendment and
related materials to the Village Plan Commission by written
communication, with a copy of such written communication to the
Village Board, and shall place the matter on the agenda of the Plan
Commission for a public hearing and recommendation and report
to the Village Board. The sixty-day period referred to in
§ 62.23(7)(d), Wis. Stats., after which the Village Board may
proceed without a recommendation of the Plan Commission, shall
begin on the day following such submission of the petition or
drafted amendment to the Plan Commission.
(3) Notice of the public hearing on any petition for amendment or on
any amendment proposed by resolution of the Plan Commission or
Village Board shall be published as a Class 2 notice within a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village pursuant to Ch.
985, Wis. Stats. In addition, written notice of the public hearing
shall be mailed to the last known address of the owners of all real
property within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the real
property affected by any proposed amendment of the zoning
district classification of real property or any proposed amendment
of the boundaries of any zoning district (even if the area to be
rezoned is smaller) and to parties in interest as defined in this
chapter. Failure to give or nonreceipt of such actual notice by any
property owner or other party in interest shall not invalidate any
action taken by the Plan Commission or the Village Board. For good
cause shown, the petitioner may request the Plan Commission to
postpone or adjourn the public hearing. The Plan Commission may,
for good cause shown, postpone or adjourn a public hearing on its
own motion. No further publication or mailing of notice shall be
required if notice of the date, time and location of the postponed or
adjourned hearing is publicly announced at the place and
approximate time of the scheduled public hearing.
§ 420-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-13
344:786
(4) Additional notice requirements. The Zoning Administrator shall
give at least 10 days' prior written notice of the public hearing on a
proposed amendment to the clerk of any municipality whose
boundaries are contiguous with the Village's and within 1,000 feet
of the boundaries of the area to be rezoned, as required in
§ 62.23(7)(d)1a, Wis. Stats. Failure to give or nonreceipt of such
actual notice by any property owner or other party in interest shall
not invalidate any action taken by the Plan Commission or the
Village Board. For good cause shown, the petitioner may request
the Plan Commission to postpone or adjourn the public hearing.
The Zoning Administrator shall give any other actual notice of a
public hearing required by any other provision of this chapter or by
state or federal statute or regulation.
(5) Upon completion of the public hearing and consideration of any
proposed amendment of this chapter, the Plan Commission shall
make a recommendation and report to the Village Board relating to
the proposed amendment. Any substantial changes in the proposed
amendment not covered by the published notice of the public
hearing or not a subject of discussion at the public hearing shall
require a new public hearing and recommendation and report by
the Plan Commission.
(6) Upon receipt of the Plan Commission recommendation and report,
the Village Board may: adopt the amendment as proposed, deny the
proposed amendment, or refer the proposed amendment to staff
and/or the Plan Commission for further review, study and/or
drafting in light of expressed concerns and/or requested changes.
The Village Board may also adopt a proposed amendment with
minor changes, or with substantial changes provided that any such
substantial changes were covered by the published notice of the
public hearing and were a subject of discussions at the public
hearing.
(7) Approval of a down zoning ordinance. Pursuant to 66.10015 (3),
Wis. Stats., the Village may enact a down zoning ordinance only if
the ordinance is approved by at least two-thirds of the Village
Board members, except that if the down zoning ordinance is
requested, or agreed to, by the person who owns the land affected
by the proposed ordinance, then the ordinance may be enacted by a
simple majority of the Village Board. A down zoning ordinance
means a zoning ordinance that affects an area of land in one of the
following ways:
(a) By decreasing the development density of the land to be less
dense than was allowed under its previous usage; or
(b) By reducing the permitted uses of the land, that are specified
in zoning ordinance or other land use regulations, to fewer
uses than were allowed under its previous usage. [Added
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-30]
§ 420-13 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-13
344:787
§ 420-14. (Reserved)109
G. Protest.
(1) If one or more protests are filed with the Village Clerk at least 24
hours prior to the scheduled date and time of the meeting of the
Village Board, or if the day before the meeting is a holiday or a
weekend then said protest shall be filed by 5:00 p.m. of the last
working day prior to the day at which adoption of a proposed
amendment to this chapter is scheduled to be considered, and such
protest(s) is (are) determined to be valid and sufficient, individually
or in the aggregate, then such amendment shall not be adopted
except by the favorable vote of 3/4 of the members of the Village
Board voting on the proposed amendment.
(2) To be valid and sufficient, one or more protests must be timely filed
and must be duly signed and acknowledged, in accordance with the
requirements of this Subsection G and § 62.23(7)(d)2m a and b,
Wis. Stats., by the owners of 20% or more of the area of the land
proposed to be rezoned, or by the owners of 20% or more of the
area of land immediately adjacent to the land proposed to be
rezoned and extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of 20%
or more of the land directly opposite the land to be rezoned and
extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land,
and said protest(s) shall have original signatures; photocopied
signatures, e-mailed signatures or faxed signatures are not valid.
Further, each protester shall state in the protest:
(a) Whether the protestor is protesting as an owner of the land
proposed to be rezoned, as an owner of adjacent land, and/or
as an owner of opposite land;
(b) The tax key parcel number(s) and street address(es) of the
protester's land that provided the basis for the protest; and
(c) Whether the protester is the sole owner of such land and, if
not, the protester's percentage of ownership of such land.
(3) Additionally, if the protestor's ownership interest is not of record,
the protestor shall attach to the protest a copy of the deed or other
instrument on the basis of which the protester claims to be an
owner.
(4) The Village Board's vote on the proposed amendment may be
deferred until the Village Clerk is able to determine the validity and
sufficiency of the protest(s), or the Village Board may proceed to
vote, with the outcome to abide the Clerk's determination as to the
effect of the protest(s). Any and all protests determined to be
invalid or insufficient may be disregarded.
109. Editor’s Note: Former § 420-14, Amendments to Agricultural Preservation Districts, as
amended, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06.
§ 420-13 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-15
344:788
§ 420-15. Annexed lands.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, whenever any area
which has been subject to the Kenosha County General Zoning/Floodplain
and Shoreland Zoning Ordinance becomes part of the Village, the
regulations imposed by the County Zoning Ordinance shall continue to be
in effect, without change, and shall be enforced by the Village until such
regulations have been changed by official action of the Village Board, except
that in the event an annexation ordinance is contested in the courts, the
County Zoning Ordinance shall continue to control and the County shall
continue to have jurisdiction over the area affected until such time as the
annexation ordinance is finally determined not to be invalid as a result
of such challenge, and except that the general zoning classification of
all land coming within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall automatically
be A-2 General Agricultural District (except areas zoned FPO Floodplain
Overlay District, C-1 Lowland Resource Conservancy District, or C-2 Upland
Resource Conservancy District), unless and until the Village Board
affirmatively acts to change the zoning classification of such land.
§ 420-15 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-15
344:789

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 420-16. Boards and commissions.
§ 420-17. Community Development Department.
A. Village Board of Trustees. See Chapter 98 of the Village Code for
establishment, membership, rules, meetings, duties, powers and other
functions/requirements of the Village Board of Trustees.
B. Village Plan Commission. See Chapter 18, Article I of the Village Code
for establishment, membership, rules, meetings, duties, powers and
other functions/requirements of the Village Plan Commission.
C. Village Zoning Board of Appeals. See Chapter 18, Article V of the
Village Code for establishment, membership, rules, meetings, duties,
powers and other functions/requirements of the Village Zoning Board of
Appeals.
A. The Community Development Department is hereby created by the
Village Board of Trustees for the purpose of administering all planning,
zoning, and related inspection functions required by statute and
enforcing all planning, zoning, and related ordinances enacted by the
Village Board and any other ordinance designated by the Village Board
to be enforced by the Community Development Department.
B. Community Development Director/Zoning Administrator.
(1) Selection and term. The Village Board of Trustees has created the
position of Community Development Director as a permanent
position. The term of office shall be indefinite. The Village Board of
Trustees shall determine qualifications for the position of
Community Development Director. Such qualifications shall
include, at a minimum, requirements with respect to expertise in
the areas of planning, zoning, geography or urban affairs and past
related work experience. The Community Development Director
shall also act as the Village Zoning Administrator.
(2) Duties. The Community Development Director shall serve as the
Village Planner and the Village Zoning Administrator and have the
following duties:
(a) To administer and enforce the zoning, shoreland, floodplain,
and land division and development control ordinances110
enacted by the Village Board of Trustees so as to manage and
promote the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village pursuant to the
appropriate statutes and ordinances.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 395, Land Division and Development Control.
§ 420-16 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-17
344:791
(b) To give all legal notices required by state statutes and the
aforementioned ordinances.
(c) To investigate alleged violations of the zoning, shoreland,
floodplain, and land division and development control
ordinances and give notice thereof to the owner of the subject
property and assist in necessary prosecutions and make, as
often as necessary, all necessary inspections of structures,
lands and waters to certify compliance with the
aforementioned ordinances and report uncorrected violations
to the Village Attorney in a manner specified by him and assist
the Village Attorney in any action involving the Community
Development Department.
(d) To provide zoning information, assistance and advice to the
public.
(e) To maintain, by parcel number where feasible, the appropriate
records and indexes for all zoning permits, inspections,
complaints, public hearings, legal notices and zoning map and
text amendments and other official actions.
(f) To attend policy formulation meetings and make
recommendations to the Village Plan Commission, Zoning
Board of Appeals and Village Board and set public hearings as
required by the Wisconsin State Statutes, as amended from
time to time, or the Village Code.
(g) To make all necessary studies required for the improvement of
land use in the Village and studies relevant to the imposition of
conditions for obtaining a conditional use permit.
(h) To supervise the operations of the Village Assistant and Deputy
Zoning Administrators and recommend job descriptions for
positions within the office and fill such positions.
(i) To review applications and issue all zoning- and developmentrelated
permits.
(j) To prepare all necessary resolutions and reports for the Village
Plan Commission, the Village Zoning Board of Appeals and the
Village Board of Trustees that relate to planning, development
and zoning matters.
(k) To make determinations and requests of similar or like uses
allowed in a particular zoning district.
(l) To collect and account for all fees and other moneys paid and
received by the Department.
(m) To prepare, maintain, file and record, by parcel number where
feasible, all records, maps, photographs, studies, reports,
surveys, tapes and indexes required for the efficient and
§ 420-17 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-17
344:792
proper administration and enforcement of the aforementioned
ordinances.
(n) Provide planning assistance and review of transportation plans
and other related studies.
(3) Powers. The Community Development Director shall have the
following powers:
(a) To receive, review and act upon (either granting with
conditions or denying) all zoning, use and other permit
applications authorized by the aforementioned ordinances.
(b) To prohibit the use or construction of any structure or the use
of any land or water until proper zoning and/or land
development permits has been obtained.
(c) To suspend or revoke any permit issued by the Community
Development Department, the Plan Commission, Zoning Board
of Appeals or Village Board, where so delegated, upon
noncompliance with the terms of the permit and/or this
chapter.
(d) To commence, subject to the Village Attorney's approval, any
legal action in the name of the Village to ensure enforcement of
the terms of the aforementioned ordinances.
(e) To enforce this chapter (refer to Article XIX).
(f) To gain entry to premises, buildings and structures for the
purpose of investigating applications for permits and for the
purpose of determining compliance with any permit issued
pursuant to any of the aforementioned ordinances or
provisions of this chapter during reasonable hours or any other
time authorized by the court. If entry is refused after
presentation of proper identification, a special inspection
warrant may be procured in accordance with § 66.0119, Wis.
Stats.
(4) Assistants and deputies. Assistant Zoning Administrators and
Deputy Zoning Administrators may be appointed by the Community
Development Director and confirmed by the Village Administrator.
Deputies may also serve in the capacity of Village Building
Inspectors at the discretion of the Village Board. The Village
Community Development Director may also appoint additional
deputies from the Director's staff so as to fulfill the functions of the
Community Development Department.
§ 420-17 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-17
344:793

ARTICLE IV
Permits and Procedures
§ 420-18. Jurisdiction.
This chapter shall apply to all lands within the corporate limits of the Village
established by §§ 236.10 and 66.0307, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to
time.
§ 420-19. Compliance.
No building or structure, or any part of a building or structure, land, water,
or air space within the Village shall be used or occupied, and no building or
structure within the Village shall be constructed, placed, moved, extended,
reconstructed, structurally altered or repaired or converted to a new use,
and no site development work shall be conducted in the Village, except in
full compliance with this chapter and all other applicable Village ordinances
and codes, all applicable decisions, orders, permits and other approvals
made or issued pursuant thereto, and all other applicable federal, state, or
local laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations.
§ 420-20. Municipalities and state agencies regulated.
Unless specifically exempted by law, all properties with the Village's
jurisdiction are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all required
permits.
§ 420-21. Permits not required.
Except for new development and substantial improvements as approved for
in this chapter, permits as specified below shall not be required:
§ 420-22. Permits required.
A. A zoning permit is not required for farm buildings, such as stands and
structures not for human habitation and which are not permanently
fixed to the ground and which are readily removable in their entirety,
provided that the following information is submitted to the Community
Development Department: a sketch plan which indicates the street,
side, rear and shore yard setback requirements for that district; a list of
items to be kept in the structure; the length of time the structure will
remain at the site; and the location of off-street parking being provided
and a highway access permit is provided. This exemption, however,
shall not apply to roadside stands more than 300 square feet in area
used for the sale of farm products or other goods and services produced
solely on the parcel.
A. Types of permits.
(1) Zoning permit. No person shall construct, place, move, park,
enlarge, reconstruct, structurally alter or repair, or convert to a
§ 420-18 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-22
344:795
new use any building or structure, or any part of a building or
structure, or a driveway, and no person shall commence any new
or expanded use, or resume any prior use after a hiatus of more
than one year, of any land, building, or structure, or any part of any
building or structure, unless a valid zoning permit has first been
issued, as required by this chapter, and such permit has neither
expired nor been suspended or revoked. [Amended 7-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-21]
(2) Conditional use permit. No person shall construct, place, move,
enlarge, maintain, reconstruct, structurally alter or repair, or
convert to a new use any building or structure, or any part of a
building or structure, that requires a conditional use permit
pursuant to this chapter unless a valid conditional use permit has
been issued and such permit has neither expired nor been
suspended or revoked.
(3) Stipulated shoreland permit. No person shall construct, place,
move, park, enlarge, reconstruct an existing structure, remove
trees or brush, grade, excavate, alter the wetland vegetation, or
convert to a new use any building or structure, or any part of a
building or structure, that requires a stipulated shoreland permit
for the project pursuant to this chapter unless a valid stipulated
shoreland permit has been issued and such permit has neither
expired nor been suspended or revoked.
(4) Stipulated conservancy permit. No person shall construct, place,
move, park, enlarge, reconstruct an existing structure, remove
trees or brush, grade, excavate, alter the wetland vegetation, or
convert to a new use any building or structure, or any part of a
building or structure, that requires a stipulated conservancy permit
for the project pursuant to this chapter unless a valid stipulated
conservancy permit has been issued and such permit has neither
expired nor been suspended or revoked.
(5) Temporary use permit. No person shall construct, place, move,
enlarge, reconstruct, structurally alter or repair, or convert to a
new use any building or structure, or any part of a building or
structure, or occupy any land that requires a temporary use permit
pursuant to this chapter unless a valid temporary use permit has
been issued and such permit has neither expired nor been
suspended or revoked.
(6) Home occupation permit. No person shall occupy or convert any
building or structure, or any part of a building or structure, for a
home occupation unless a valid home occupation permit has first
been issued pursuant to this chapter and such permit has neither
expired nor been suspended or revoked.
(7) Commercial communication structure permit. No person shall
construct, modify, alter, place, move, enlarge or reconstruct a
§ 420-22 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-22
344:796
commercial communication structure that requires a commercial
communication structure permit for the project pursuant to this
chapter unless a valid commercial communication structure permit
has been issued or the application is approved by failure of the
Village to act in a timely manner pursuant to § 420-89 of this
chapter or such permit has neither been suspended nor revoked.
[Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
B. Compliance. No person shall obtain or continue to hold a permit except
in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter and in full
compliance with the terms and conditions of any required permit and in
full compliance with the requirements of any applicable approvals,
decisions, orders, judgments or other requirements made, issued or
imposed pursuant to or in the enforcement of this chapter and in full
compliance with the requirements of any other applicable Village,
county, state or federal statute, ordinance, code, regulation, permit,
approval, decision, order or judgment relating to land use, land
division, environmental protection or development control.
C. Preconditions to issuance of permit.
(1) No permit application may be deemed complete and no permit may
be issued until all of the applicable preconditions set out below
have first been satisfied:
(a) A complete application, signed by the applicant (see the
definition of "applicant" in Article XXI), together with all
required information and documentation, has been filed with
the Village Zoning Administrator;
(b) All applicable application fees imposed by or pursuant to this
chapter have been paid to the Village (and no permit may be
issued until all fees imposed by or pursuant to this chapter
have been paid);
(c) All unpaid overdue forfeitures resulting from violations of any
Village ordinance or code owed by the applicant or the owner
of the property for which the permit is proposed have first been
paid, pursuant to § 66.0115, Wis. Stats., unless the imposition
of such unpaid forfeiture(s) is being appealed;
(d) With respect to a permit for any lot or parcel created in
violation of Chapter 395, Land Division and Development
Control, of the Village Code, all such violations have first been
cured, in accordance with § 395-14B;
(e) With respect to any lot or parcel created by a land division
subject to Chapter 395, Land Division and Development
Control, of the Village Code, all public improvements required
by that chapter to be completed during the first 12 months
after the last required approval of the final plat or certified
survey map shall first be completed;
§ 420-22 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-22
344:797
(f) All outstanding building or zoning violations on the property on
which the permit is proposed, regarding which the Village has
issued a written notice of violation, have first been cured,
unless the notice of violation is being appealed; and
(g) The use of the property on which the permit is proposed is in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) No permit issued by mistake shall be valid or effective until all such
preconditions have been satisfied.
D. Permit application required.
(1) Prior to filing a permit application, an applicant shall first confer
with the applicable ordinance requirements related to said
application.
(2) A complete permit application shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator on a form supplied by the Zoning Administrator and
signed by the applicant. (See the definition of "applicant" in Article
XXI.) If the individual signing the application form is not the owner
or user of the property, or expressly an officer or partner of such
owner or user of the property, the Zoning Administrator may (but
has no duty to) require written evidence of the applicant's authority
to act as agent of such owner or user. Without limitation, such form
shall require the following information: the name, address,
telephone number and fax number of the applicant (the owner,
occupant or user of the property who/which is seeking the permit);
the name, address, telephone number and fax number of any
person who is authorized to act for the applicant in connection with
the application; the name, address, telephone number and fax
number of the owner of the property, if the applicant is not the
owner (fax numbers for the applicant, agent and owner are
optional); the street address of the property; the tax key parcel
number(s) of the property; a representation that the owner of the
property has authorized the work specified in the application if the
applicant is not the owner; the project description; the zoning
classification of the property; the amount of the application fee
submitted with the application (if applicable); and the total cost to
complete the work proposed within the permit application.
(3) The information and supporting documents listed below shall be
provided or updated by the applicant with any permit application,
unless waived in writing by the Zoning Administrator as being
unnecessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. The Zoning Administrator may require additional
information as may be needed to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this chapter or to facilitate enforcement of this
chapter, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Proposed use(s): use of each existing and proposed building or
structure.
§ 420-22 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-22
344:798
(b) Elevation drawings of proposed buildings or structures.
(c) Height of each proposed or existing building or structure.
(d) Site plan(s), drawn to scale, showing at a minimum the date of
the plan; name and address of the Wisconsin registered land
surveyor or other preparer; the scale and a North arrow; all
property and street lines; dimensions of the lot or parcel;
location and dimensions of proposed and existing buildings and
structures, proposed additions, and of all lateral projections or
overhangs; location and dimensions of proposed and existing
driveways; location and dimensions of proposed and existing
private sewage disposal and treatment systems and holding
tanks; applicable highway access restrictions; location of any
existing or proposed well; location of any existing or proposed
septic system; all floodplains on the lot; all mapped wetlands
on the lot; all bodies of navigable water and all shorelands on
the lot; all areas of unsuitable soil or steep slope on the lot or
parcel; all areas within a primary environmental corridor on
the lot or parcel; all areas of proposed site development work,;
with existing and proposed elevations; location and dimensions
of all existing and proposed parking, loading and trash disposal
facilities; all applicable setback requirements; all easements
for existing and proposed sewerage system facilities, water
system facilities, storm sewer or drainage system facilities and
utilities; the location and dimensions of all proposed and
existing signs; the location of existing and proposed fences.
(e) Any additional information as required in this chapter for a
particular permit or application or additional information as
requested by the Zoning Administrator.
(f) If valid nonconforming use status is claimed, information
sufficient to support the claim that such use was active and
actual, not merely incidental, occasional or accessory, when
the use became nonconforming, that such use became
nonconforming, that such use was legal in its inception, that
the use has not been discontinued for any twelve-month period
since it became nonconforming, that the use has not been
expanded since it became nonconforming and will not be
expanded by the proposed project, and that the total past and
proposed structural repairs or alterations to any building or
structure used for such use (in present dollars) will not exceed
50% of the assessed value of such building.
(g) Payment of the application fee, if applicable, provided for in or
by this chapter.
E. Incomplete application. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to hold
for completion or deny, in his or her discretion, any incomplete permit
application. With respect to any such application held for completion,
§ 420-22 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-22
344:799
the Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing
by first class mail or by fax what information is needed to complete the
application and what if any preconditions must be satisfied pursuant to
§ 420-22C of this chapter. Any application not completed within 30 days
after the filing of the application shall be denied.
F. Application approval/denial. Applications and all supporting documents
and materials shall be submitted in specific quantities required per
each application. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue
zoning permits alone in situations where a building permit or any other
permit pursuant to this chapter is not required or is premature.
(1) As soon as practicable after a permit application is complete, the
Zoning Administrator shall approve or deny it. The Zoning
Administrator shall have authority to impose any conditions
reasonably based upon the requirements of this chapter. The
Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant of the
approval of said permit application. The Zoning Administrator shall
promptly notify the applicant of the denial in writing by first class
mail or by fax and state in such notice the reasons for any denial.
(2) A permit may not be issued unless the proposed work as described
in the application fully complies with all applicable requirements of
this chapter and all applicable orders, decisions, permits or other
approvals made or issued pursuant to this chapter and with all
other applicable Village, county, state or federal statutes,
ordinances, codes, regulations, permits or orders relating to land
use, land division, environmental protection or development
control.
(3) Among the conditions that shall be imposed on any permit, to the
extent applicable, are the following:
(a) That the applicant has duly authorized the filing of the
application and all related information and that all information
contained in or submitted in connection with the application is
true and accurate;
(b) That the permit and all terms and conditions thereof must be
reviewed and accepted by the applicant prior to
commencement of the work and that such commencement
constitutes acceptance;
(c) That commencement of work upon issuance of the required
permit(s) constitutes a waiver of any right to appeal the
decision or permit of the Zoning Administrator or to otherwise
challenge such decision or permit;
(d) That the applicant shall request the required inspections
during the project at least 48 hours in advance to avoid a
violation; and
§ 420-22 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-22
344:800
(e) That the work shall be in full compliance with this chapter and
the terms and conditions of the permit and must be in
accordance with the approved plans, specifications and other
information submitted with the application.
(4) If a permit is not issued within 30 days after the date on which
notice of approval of the application is given, the application
approval shall automatically be void. No permit shall be issued on
the basis of a void application approval. The applicant may reapply
without prejudice.
G. Permit issuance. A permit shall be issued only upon payment of any
required permit fees provided for in or by this chapter. All permits
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on the premises from the date of issuance to the date of expiration or
revocation, or the date of issuance of the related certificate of
occupancy, whichever is later.
H. Binding nature of application. It shall be the duty of the applicant to
review and duly authorize the filing of any permit application and
information submitted with or in connection with any such application.
Every permit shall be conditioned upon the accuracy of all such
information. Any permit approved or issued on the basis of materially
inaccurate information may be suspended by the Zoning Administrator
or revoked or voided by the Zoning Administrator.
I. Acceptance of permit before commencement of work. It shall be the
duty of the applicant to review and accept the terms and conditions of
any permit before commencement of work pursuant to such permit.
Commencement of work pursuant to a permit automatically constitutes
acceptance of the permit and waives any right to appeal or challenge
the permit decision, the permit or any condition thereof. Any permit not
accepted prior to work commencing may be suspended by the Zoning
Administrator or revoked or voided by the Zoning Administrator.
J. Time limits.
(1) The time limits for development applications shall be as follows:
(a) All written site and operational plan approvals issued by the
Village shall be effective for a period of 180 days from and after
the date of written notification to the applicant of the decision
to approve the application for purposes of the granting of any
erosion control permit, zoning permit and/or building permit.
In the event that conditions precedent to such written approval
are not satisfied within such one-hundred-eight-day period, or
the final site and operational plans are not signed in
accordance with § 420-56H of this chapter within such onehundred-
eight-day period, or in the event that necessary
erosion control, zoning or building permits are not granted
within such one-hundred-eight-day period, a new application
for site and operational plan approval shall be filed in
§ 420-22 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-22
344:801
accordance with § 420-55 of this chapter. [Note the waiver
provisions of § 420-55D with respect to applications to renew
site and operational plan approvals that have lapsed pursuant
to this Subsection J(1) or § 420-56I of this chapter.]
(b) All conditional use permits and stipulated shoreland permits
shall be granted or denied within six months after the
application is submitted, unless the time is extended by mutual
agreement between the Village and the petitioner/owner. If the
above application is granted, the required conditional use or
stipulated shoreland grant document shall be signed and the
building and zoning permits or erosion control permit shall be
issued within six months from the Village approval date of said
application. If said grant document is not signed and the
permits are not issued, said approval and grant shall be invalid
and the applicant shall reapply. A new application, fee and
revised plans, which reflect new or amended Village or state
requirements, shall be submitted for Village Plan Commission
and/or Village Board approval.
(2) The time limits for zoning permits shall be as follows:
(a) All zoning permits that have been applied for and approved by
the Village, except as noted in above, shall be issued to the
petitioner/owner within 30 days from the date the plans were
approved. If the permit is not issued the approval shall be
voided. The Village will return the plans to the owner/
applicant, and the Village shall invoice the property owner for
the plan review fee for the project. If this invoice is not paid per
Village requirements, the cost shall be assessed to the property
for which the permit application was made. If the permit
approval has been voided, the owner/petitioner shall resubmit
all of the required applications and application materials for
review and approval.
(b) All zoning permits for residential accessory structures shall
expire within 12 months of the issuance of said permit. The
applicant may request that the permit be renewed, prior to the
expiration, for an additional six months only after paying the
required renewal fee. If said permit expires, the applicant shall
reapply for a building and zoning permit before recommencing
work on the structure. Any permit issued in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. [Amended
7-6-2015 by Ord. No. 15-21]
(c) All zoning permits related to the construction of a new singlefamily
or two-family house shall expire within two years, unless
the project is substantially completed, as defined below. The
applicant may request that the permit be renewed, prior to the
expiration, for an additional year only after paying the required
renewal fee. If said permit expires, the applicant shall reapply
§ 420-22 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-22
344:802
for a building and zoning permit before recommencing work on
the structure. Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter shall be null and void.
(d) All zoning permits related to the construction of any
commercial, industrial, institutional, government, park and
recreation, or multifamily structure shall be completed per
§ COMM 50.17, Wis. Adm. Code,111 which may be amended
from time to time. If said permit expires, the applicant shall
reapply for a building and zoning permit before recommencing
work on the structure. Any permit issued in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.
(e) All zoning permits for a sign shall automatically expire 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit, or if a building
permit is associated with the permit, said permit shall be
automatically extended to match the expiration date of said
building permit. After such right expires, or after the permit is
revoked or voided, or while it is suspended, no work requiring
such a permit shall be commenced, continued or resumed until
after a new permit is issued or until after the original permit
has been reinstated. A suspension of the permit tolls the
remainder of such twelve-month period. [Amended 7-6-2015
by Ord. No. 15-21]
(f) A zoning permit may be extended in writing by the Zoning
Administrator for up to 60 additional days upon a showing of
good cause by the applicant and the payment of any permit
extension fee imposed by or pursuant to this chapter, provided
that the applicant's rights under the permit have not expired or
been revoked or voided. New or amended regulations that
have become effective after the approval of the initial permit
shall be applied to any application for an extension, and an
extension shall not be granted unless the original application is
amended to conform to such new or amended regulations.
(3) For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the
meaning indicated:
SUBSTANTIAL CONSTRUCTION — The construction is equivalent
to 25% of the projected cost of the project as noted on the
application for the permit.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Construction equivalent to 75%
of the projected cost of the project as noted on the application for
the permit has in fact been completed.
K. Assignment. A permit may be assigned to a new owner or user of the
property, or to a successor of the applicant, upon written consent of the
Zoning Administrator, provided that the rights pursuant to the permit
111. Editor's Note: For the Commercial Building Code, see Chs. SPS 361 to 366.
§ 420-22 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-22
344:803
have not expired or been revoked or voided, that there are no uncured
violations of the permit or of this chapter associated with such permit
and that the assignee or successor accepts the permit and timely
satisfies all conditions of the permit to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Zoning Administrator.
L. Inspections required. The Zoning Administrator designee may inspect
the premises for which any permit is issued, during all reasonable
hours, to ensure compliance with this chapter and all orders, decisions,
permits or other approvals made or issued pursuant thereto.
M. Suspension, revocation or voiding of permit.
(1) In the event the Zoning Administrator determines, prior to the
completion of permitted work pursuant to a permit, that the work is
not in accordance with the terms and conditions of such permit or
the requirements of this chapter, or that the information on the
basis of which the permit was approved or issued was untrue or
inaccurate in material respects, the Zoning Administrator may
suspend such permit, notify the applicant or the applicant's
designated agent in writing by first class mail or by fax of the
reasons for the suspension, and issue a written stop-work order
until the problem or defect is cured to the reasonable satisfaction
of the Zoning Administrator. In the event the applicant refuses or
fails to cure the problem or defect within 30 days following such
notice of suspension, and after conferring with the applicant or the
applicant's agent regarding such refusal or failure, the Zoning
Administrator may revoke said permit and notify the applicant in
writing by first class mail or by fax of the reasons for the revocation
and any related violations.
(2) In the event the Zoning Administrator determines, after the
completion of work done pursuant to any such permit, that the
work was not in accordance with the terms and conditions of such
permit or the requirements of this chapter, or that the information
on the basis of which the permit was approved or issued was
inaccurate in material respects, the Zoning Administrator shall
issue and cause to be served a notice of violation. If such violations
are not cured to the reasonable satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator within 30 days following service of such notice of
violation, the Zoning Administrator may, in addition to all other
remedies, void the permit and promptly notify the owner in writing
by first class mail or by fax of the reasons for voiding the permit.
(3) Work completed pursuant to a permit which has been revoked or
voided is illegal and a violation of this chapter.
N. Circularity. In the event of any circularity between the precondition
requirements for issuing any permit, certificate or approval under this
chapter and any applicable requirements of any other ordinance or law,
e.g. where this chapter requires that an approval under ordinance x be
§ 420-22 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-22
344:804
obtained before a permit can be issued under this chapter but
ordinance x requires that the permit under this chapter be obtained
before an approval under that ordinance can be issued, the Zoning
Administrator and all other Village officials and bodies charged with
the administration and enforcement of such ordinances, in order to
harmonize such requirements, are authorized to issue necessary
permits, certificates and approvals, the effective date of which is
conditioned upon full compliance with specified requirements of other
ordinances or laws. Whenever such a circulatory is discovered, it shall
promptly be brought to the attention of the Village Board so that
appropriate legislative action can be considered. In the event that any
permit, certificate or approval is issued, the effective date of which is so
conditioned, the expiration date of such permit, certificate or approval
shall be determined by its date of issuance rather than its effective date.
O. Plan changes. No plans, specifications or data approved by the Zoning
Administrator in connection with the issuance of a permit, issued
pursuant to this chapter, shall be changed or modified in any manner,
nor shall the amount or character of any work authorized by such
approval be changed or modified, unless the written approval of the
Zoning Administrator is first obtained. No such change or modification
shall be approved unless the changes or modifications are in
compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter and all orders,
decisions, permits or other approvals required, made or issued
pursuant to this chapter. All documents evidencing such approved
changes or modifications shall be endorsed, filed, distributed and
maintained in the same manner as the original documents.
P. Plans on file. Two sets of plans, specifications and data shall be
submitted with each application, unless otherwise required. Upon
approval, one set of approved plans, specifications and data shall be
returned to the owner at the time the permit is issued and the second
approved copy shall be retained by the Community Development
Department and filed as a public record. The owner is responsible to
have an approved set of plans, specifications and data readily
accessible on any construction site, and said plan set shall be open at all
reasonable times to inspection by the Zoning Administrator.
Q. Invalid permits. Any permit intended to authorize a violation of this
chapter is, to that extent, invalid and of no legal force or effect. Each
applicant for a permit required by this chapter is charged with
knowledge of this chapter, which is available for inspection and
purchase, and no reliance on any erroneous statement made, assurance
given or permit issued contrary to the provisions of this chapter is
reasonable.
R. Disclaimer. All permits issued by the Community Development
Department shall note the following disclaimer: "Each applicant for a
permit is charged with the knowledge of the Village Zoning Ordinance.
Copies of said ordinance or portions thereof and copies of the Official
Zoning Maps are available for sale, copying or inspection upon request.
§ 420-22 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-22
344:805
§ 420-23. Other permits.
It is the responsibility of a permit applicant to secure all other necessary
permits required by any federal, state or local agency.
§ 420-24. Surveys/certifications required.
Any statement made, assurance given or permit erroneously issued
contrary to this chapter is null and void."
A. Foundation surveys.
(1) Requirement. No work on a new principal building for which a
zoning permit is required by this chapter shall proceed beyond
completion of the footings, concrete slab or other foundation, or
basement walls up to the first floor level, until the Zoning
Administrator has approved the foundation survey that indicates
that such footings, foundation or walls, as built, are located in
accordance with the requirements of the zoning permit and the
applicable provisions of this chapter.
(2) Procedure. The owner shall submit to the Zoning Administrator,
upon completion of the footings, foundation, or basement walls of
any principal building for which a zoning permit is required by this
chapter, a survey prepared by a Wisconsin registered land surveyor
showing the exact distance of the new footings, foundation or
basement walls, as built, at their closest point, to existing buildings
and structures, property lines, the ordinary high-water mark of any
navigable waterway, or any floodplain and/or wetlands located on
the lot or parcel. No additional work shall commence until the
Zoning Administrator has approved said location for compliance
with this chapter.
B. Release of waiver of foundation survey. The Zoning Administrator is
authorized to prepare a release of waiver of foundation survey if the
permit applicant waived the foundation survey requirements of
§ 12.05-4(a) of the Kenosha County General Zoning and Shoreland/
Floodplain Zoning Ordinance at the time the Village of Pleasant Prairie
was the Town of Pleasant Prairie, where the permit applicant(s) caused
a waiver of liability of foundation survey to be filed with the Kenosha
County Register of Deeds in compliance with § 12.05-4(a) of the
Kenosha County General Zoning and Shoreland/Floodplain Zoning
Ordinance. Upon receipt of the applicable fee and a foundation survey
prepared for said property by a Wisconsin registered land surveyor, the
Village shall verify that the structure was build in conformity with the
requirements of § 12.05-4(a) of the Kenosha County General Zoning and
Shoreland/Floodplain Zoning Ordinance at the time the zoning permit
was issued by Kenosha County. If the structure is in conformance with
said ordinance, the Village shall prepare a waiver of foundation survey
document to be executed by the current owner(s) of said property and
§ 420-22 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-24
344:806
recorded at the Kenosha County Register of Deeds office at the owner's
expense.
C. Certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance. [Amended
7-6-2015 by Ord. No. 15-21]
(1) Requirement. No person shall use or occupy any newly completed
building or structure, and no person shall use or occupy any newly
completed portion of any existing building or structure, unless a
valid certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance has first
been issued for such use or occupancy and such permit has neither
expired nor been suspended or revoked. No person shall commence
any new occupancy of any existing building or structure for any use
other than a permitted residential use in a residential zoning
district or a permitted agricultural use in any agriculture zoning
district unless a valid certificate of occupancy has first been issued
for such use or occupancy and such permit has neither expired nor
has been suspended or revoked.
(2) Preconditions. No certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance shall be issued unless:
(a) Valid zoning, building and erosion control permits or other
required permits were issued for the project; and
(b) The project, as built, was completed in accordance with all
applicable provisions of this chapter and of any orders,
decisions, permits or other approvals made or issued pursuant
to Village ordinances.
D. Verbal or temporary occupancy. To facilitate occupancy and prevent
unnecessary hardship, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue a
verbal or temporary occupancy with respect to any building or
structure, or any part of a building or structure, for which valid permits
have been issued, prior to completion of the building or structure,
provided that such temporary occupancy will not jeopardize the safety,
health, or public welfare of the occupants or the general public. The
Zoning Administrator is authorized to impose as conditions upon the
issuance of such verbal occupancy whatever temporary precautionary
measures may be required to safeguard the public. No such verbal
occupancy shall be construed as vesting in the applicant any right to
receive a certificate of occupancy for a building or structure, or a part
of a building or structure, unless it satisfies all requirements of this
chapter, Chapter 370, Building and Mechanical Code, of the Village
Code, or other ordinances that would be applicable to such building or
structure in the absence of the verbal occupancy certificate or any
activity conducted pursuant thereto. [Amended 7-6-2015 by Ord. No.
15-21]
§ 420-24 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-25
344:807
§ 420-25. Vested rights.
The following provisions shall govern administrative determinations
regarding vested rights to nonconforming use status which are made under
or pursuant to this chapter:
A. Permit necessary but not sufficient. No claim to a vested right to valid
nonconforming use status shall be administratively recognized unless
such claim is based in part upon the issuance of valid permits required
under this chapter, and no such claim shall be administratively
recognized unless there was a substantial change of position in reliance
upon such permit(s) during the period that such permit(s) was (were) in
full force and effect.
B. Presumptions. There shall be a rebuttal presumption against the
existence of a vested right that depends upon conduct which occurred
in reliance upon the issuance of a valid permit required under this
chapter that had not expired or been suspended or revoked at the time
of the conduct in question but which occurred prior to the issuance of
said permit that was required to institute the nonconforming use or any
expansion thereof. There shall be a rebuttal presumption in favor of the
existence of a vested right that depends upon conduct which occurred
under or pursuant to a validly issued building permit that had not
expired or been suspended or revoked at the time of the conduct in
question.
C. Loss. A vested right to nonconforming use status can be lost for the
same reasons and to the same extent that valid nonconforming use
status can be lost. If substantial construction or site development work
has not commenced or has been discontinued for a twelve-month
period, vested rights may be lost.
§ 420-25 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-25
344:808
ARTICLE V
Fees
§ 420-26. Payment required.
§ 420-27. Application fees.
A. Any construction, site development, use, occupancy or other work
requiring a permit, certificate, or approval under this chapter shall not
be commenced, resumed or continued until all required approvals have
been made and all permit fees as required by this chapter or any other
Village ordinance shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
B. Whenever any construction, site development, use, occupancy or other
work requiring a permit, certificate, or approval under this chapter is
commenced, resumed or continued before such a permit or certificate
is issued, the fee for reviewing and processing the application for such
permit shall be tripled to take account of the added difficulty and time
required to process the application.
C. No refund of any application fee or other zoning fee or charges shall be
made in the event that an application for a permit, certificate, or
approval is withdrawn after the review and processing of such
application has substantially commenced and charges have been
incurred or an application has been denied.
A. An initial application fee of $225 shall be paid when any of the following
applications are submitted to the Village for review. This initial
application fee covers the costs of preapplication staff conferences with
the applicant and his representatives, site visits if necessary, providing
copies of applications and related ordinances, and telephone calls with
the applicant related to the Village requirements for the proposed
project prior to submitting the application. In addition, the fees
contained in Subsection C below shall also be paid for the processing
and reviewing of the application. See also § 420-29H below for
additional fees, as applicable, for the review of the following
applications: [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-60; 12-19-2011
by Ord. No. 11-34]
(1) (Reserved)112
(2) Zoning Map/zoning text amendment applications, excluding
planned unit developments and planned developments.
(3) Zoning variance application.
112. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1), Stipulated shoreland permit application, was
repealed 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32.
§ 420-26 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-27
344:809
(4) Wetland staking application.113 [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No.
16-05]
(5) Conditional use permit application.
(6) Floodplain boundary adjustment or Floodplain Map correction
applications.114
B. An initial application fee of $825 shall be paid when any of the following
applications are submitted to the Village for review. This initial
application fee covers the costs of preapplication staff conferences with
the applicant and his representatives, site visits if necessary, providing
copies of applications and related ordinances, and telephone calls with
the applicant related to the Village requirements for the proposed
project prior to submitting the application. In addition, the fees
contained in Subsection C below shall also be paid for the processing
and reviewing of the application. See also § 420-29H below for
additional fees, as applicable, for the review of the following
applications: [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-60; 12-19-2011
by Ord. No. 11-34]
(1) Site and operational plan application that requires Plan
Commission review. [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 16-05]
(2) Joint applications for site and operational plan and conditional use
applications. [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 16-05]
(3) PUD, planned unit development overlay text and map amendments.
(4) PD, planned development text and map amendments.
(5) Site and operational plan appeal.
(6) Motion to reconsider a site and operational plan appeal.
(7) Appeals application or motion to reconsider a zoning variance or
appeal.
C. Predevelopment agreement. In addition to application fees specified
above in Subsections A and B, the applicant(s) and/or property owner(s)
shall agree to be responsible for paying for the Village staff (planners,
zoning administrators, engineers, and GIS employees) actual time
spent and resources required for the processing and reviewing of the
application. As a condition of submitting the application, the
applicant(s) and property owner(s) would enter into a predevelopment
agreement with the Village which specifies, at a minimum, the property
owner's name, address, and telephone and facsimile numbers, the
applicant's name, address, and telephone and facsimile numbers, the
113. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4) Temporary use application, was repealed 9-2-2008
by Ord. No. 08-48.
114. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(7), concerning joint and conditional use applications
for space 5,000 square feet or less, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 16-05.
§ 420-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-27
344:810
type of application, current billable rates to be used for review of the
application, the address, legal description and tax parcel number of
the property(ies), and where and to whom invoices shall be sent. If the
person is not the owner of the property, then a copy of the invoice will
also be sent to the owner of the property. [Amended 2-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-01; 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 16-05]
(1) The Village shall mail said invoices on a monthly basis to the
specified person. All invoices shall be paid within 30 days. There is
a penalty of 1.5% per month on the unpaid invoice balance, and
there is an additional ten-percent penalty if the outstanding
invoice, interest and penalty are placed on the tax roll (a lien
against the property). The right of the Village to assess a lien
against the property shall be one of the remedies available to the
Village but shall not be the exclusive remedy. The Village may also
sue for a money judgment for any invoices which are past due.
Furthermore, if an invoice becomes past due for more than 30 days,
the Village may elect to terminate all staff review and to terminate
the Village approval process on the application until all delinquent
invoices are fully paid.
(2) The Village shall invoice and the applicant/property owner(s) shall
pay for the staff billable time and costs spent for processing and
reviewing the plans, specifications, drawings and other documents
submitted with respect to the proposed application, specific plans,
plats, and maps for the development or project; for preparing
memorandums and letters; for preparing, mailing, faxing, e-mailing
and publishing meeting notices and agendas; for meetings,
telephone calls and e-mails with the applicants, agents, developers,
property owners, officials and-neighbors; and inspecting the site/
building/projects. Billable time includes preparing reports and
documents for the Village Plan Commission, Village Park
Commission, Village Board of Appeals, or Village Board and any
other Village staff time expended to review or analyze the
applications, specific plans, plats, maps or development plans.
Other charges included in the billable hours and costs are
associated with:
(a) Preparing and publishing Village Municipal Code text and map
amendments for the referenced application(s) from the
Village's consultant. (Note: Invoices from the Village's General
Code consultant are typically sent semiannually, which often
results in a time delay in sending final invoices from the Village
to the owner/applicant);
(b) The Village staff seeking expert advice in meetings and
reviewing and preparing correspondence regarding the
specific plans, plats, maps, development plans or project, such
as, but not limited to, the Village's attorney, environmental
consultant, or architectural consultant expertise; and
§ 420-27 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-27
344:811
(c) Requests from the agent/developer/property owners in
gathering additional information; preparing GIS mapping;
reviewing materials; preparing meetings, documents, letters,
e-mails and other correspondence; and researching
information for existing or speculative development proposals
to assure that the proposed applications, specific plans, plats,
maps, development plans, Digital Security Imaging System
(DSIS) plans, reviews and inspection or project details are in
compliance with the applicable Village, county, state or federal
ordinances, rules and regulations and any approved plans or
specifications.
(3) The Village shall continue to invoice the applicant/property owner
until final consideration is made regarding said application and all
conditions have been satisfied, preconstruction meetings are held
and inspections have been completed or said application is
withdrawn in writing by the applicant/property owner(s). All
invoices and all Village staff time and resources spent prior to the
date of the written request to terminate the application shall be
paid by the applicant/property owner(s).
(4) The Zoning Administrator may allow a cash deposit to be accepted
by the Village to pay the invoiced amounts in lieu of sending an
invoice to be paid. A predevelopment agreement is still required.
D. All complete applications as specified in Subsections A and B above that
have been received and are currently being processed by the Village on
or before January 31, 2004, will not be subject to the fees specified in
Subsections A, B and C above. Any application as specified in
Subsections A and B above received on or after February 1, 2004, will
be subject to said fees. To further clarify, any application(s) received for
new projects or projects which require multiple applications for final
approval and which are processed on or after February 1, 2004, will be
subject to said fees.
E. Other application fees. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-63;
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-50; 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-15;
11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40; 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(1) An application fee of $100 shall be paid when any of the following
applications are submitted to the Village for review. This
application fee covers the costs of preapplication staff conferences
with the applicant and his representatives, site visits if necessary,
providing copies of applications and related ordinances, and
telephone calls with the applicant related to the Village
requirements for the proposed project prior to submitting the
application.
(a) A minor amendment to a site and operational plan previously
approved by the Plan Commission.
§ 420-27 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-27
344:812
§ 420-28. Zoning permit and sign fees.
(b) Extension of site and operational plan approval that required
Plan Commission approval.
(c) Site and operational plan application that requires staff review
only.
(d) Stipulated shoreland permit application.
(2) (Reserved)115
A. The following zoning review and inspection permit fees shall be paid to
the Village Treasurer at the time any such permit is approved:
(1) New single-family building: $125 per building. [Amended
12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-63; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-34]
(2) New two-family building: $150 per building. [Amended
12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-63; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-34]
(3) New multiple-family building: $200 per building. [Amended
12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-63; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-34;
11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40]
(4) New principal commercial, industrial, governmental or
institutional structure or building: $200 per structure or building.
[Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-63; 12-19-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-34]
(5) Additions or alterations to any dwelling unit: $50 per structure or
building. [Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40]
(6) Residential or agricultural accessory structure or building,
including but not limited to an attached or detached garage, shed,
pole barn, deck, porch, sport court, swimming pool, hot tub, or
residential communication structure: $50 per structure or building.
[Amended 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-15; 11-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-40]
(7) Addition or alteration to an existing commercial, industrial,
governmental or institutional structure or building: $125 per
structure or building. [Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40]
(8) Commercial, industrial, governmental or institutional tenant
change (without alterations) or an accessory structure or building
(excluding fences): $50 per structure or building. [Amended
12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-34; 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-15;
11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40]
115. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E(2), regarding the fee for a site and operational plan
application requiring only staff review, was repealed 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40. See
now Subsection E(1).
§ 420-27 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-28
344:813
§ 420-29. Other fees.
Other fees are established as follows:
(9) Any residential or commercial fence: $50. [Added 4-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-15]
(10) Any driveway (new, extend or replace): $50 per entrance. [Added
4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-15]
B. Sign fees:
(1) Sign application: $20 per sign, not to exceed $140 per application,
including temprary signs: [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
10-50; 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40]
(2) Sign special exception permit application: $25 per sign, not to
exceed $175 per application. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-34; 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40]
(3) Freestanding sign permit: $55 per sign for first two signs plus $15
for each additional sign. No sign permit fee for any of the following
temporary signs: coming soon sign, community banner sign,
special event sign or device, or temporary banner sign. [Amended
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-50; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-34;
3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 16-05]
(4) Nonfreestanding sign or changing the display area of an existing
freestanding sign: $40 per sign for first five signs plus $10 for each
additional sign. No sign permit fee for any of the following
temporary signs: coming soon sign, community banner sign,
special event sign or device, or temporary banner sign. [Amended
9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-50; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-34;
3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 16-05]
A. Business license: [Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40;
1-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-04]
(1) Initial application:
(a) Per business per site: $25.
(b) Per nonprofit business per site: $10.
(2) Annual renewal application:
(a) Per business per site: $25.
(b) Per nonprofit business per site: $10.
(3) Annual renewal late fee: If the business fails to renew the license by
January 15 of each year, then a late fee of $10 will be assessed to
the applicant.
§ 420-28 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-29
344:814
(4) Notice of change:
(a) Per business per site: $25.
(b) Per nonprofit business per site: $10.
(5) The Village may require additional information for verification of
any nonprofit status.
B. Zoning information request: $100 per parcel. [Amended 3-7-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-05]
C. Parcel information/review letter: $155 per parcel.
D. Release of waiver or other similar document: $100 plus recording fees.
[Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40]
E. Performance bond or cash deposit to ensure compliance with permit
inspection conditions and an administrative processing fee: $100 per
site.116 [Added 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40]
F. Stipulated conservancy permit: $100 and renewal fee of $50 only if the
application or management plan has not changed for the original
permit. [Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40]
G. Recording fees: actual cost to record a document at the Kenosha
County Register of Deeds office plus a Village administrative processing
fee of $10. [Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40]
H. Special fees. The applicant/property owner shall pay to the Village
Treasurer, upon presentment of an itemized statement, a fee equal to
the actual cost incurred by the Village for all engineering, attorney and/
or other special expert consultation or review conducted by or on behalf
of the Village in connection with the review of an application or request
for information; meeting with the applicant/property owner of a project
or other engineering, attorney and/or special expert consultation or
review services; or review, meeting, research of information for
speculative development proposals incurred by the Community
Development Department as the Village Zoning Administrator, Plan
Commission and/or the Village Board may deem necessary to assure
that the proposed application or existing plans or request is in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the approved plans
and specifications. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-50]
I. Temporary use permit: $150 per application; if a minor agreement is
required, then the fee is $250 per application. [Added 9-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-48; amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40]
116. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, Wetland staking fees, as amended, was repealed
3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 16-05.
§ 420-29 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-29
344:815
J. Commercial communication structure application and permit. [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08; amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No.
16-05]
(1) A Class 1 co-location or the siting and construction of a new mobile
service support structure and facilities: application fee of $2,500 to
be submitted at the time the application is filed, and a permit fee of
$500.
(2) A Class 2 co-location or any other modifications to a mobile service
facility not classified as a substantial modification: application fee
of $100 to be submitted at the time the application is filed, and a
permit fee of $40.
K. Any fee paid by credit card to the Village will be charged an additional
finance fee for processing the transaction. [Added 11-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-40]
§ 420-29 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-29
344:816
ARTICLE VI
General Provisions
§ 420-30. Principal and accessory structures and uses: general
requirements.
§ 420-31. Frontage.
Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for a structure on a lot, said lot shall
have the frontage required for said zoning district.
§ 420-32. Sanitary requirements.
A. Principal structures per lot. All structures shall be located entirely on a
lot, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Only one permitted
principal structure shall be located, constructed or moved onto a single
lot unless otherwise permitted. The total number of accessory
structures shall be located, constructed or moved onto a lot pursuant to
the regulations in the underlying zoning district.
B. Accessory uses and structures. In any residential district, accessory
uses and structures are not allowed until the principal use or structure
is present or under construction, except for fences pursuant to and in
accordance with Article XI and signs pursuant to and in accordance
with Article X. Accessory structures shall not involve the conduct of any
business, trade, or industry, except home occupations as defined in the
Village ordinances, and accessory structures shall not be used as a
dwelling unit.
A. Municipal sanitary sewer.
(1) All new lots created in any agricultural district or within the R-1,
R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-8, R-9, R-10, R-11, R-12 and
C-2 Districts shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer system,
except as may be approved by the Village Board for all lots within a
limited urban service area (LUSA). [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-15]
(2) All existing lots located in any agricultural district or within the
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-8, R-12, C-2 Districts shall
be serviced by public sanitary sewer, provided that municipal
sanitary sewer is readily available or in proximity to the property as
determined by the Village, except as may be allowed in Subsection
B below. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-15]
(3) All lots located in business, manufacturing, institutional, park and
recreational or multifamily zoning districts shall be serviced by
public sanitary sewer system, except as provided below in
Subsection B or C. [Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-12]
(4) The Village Board may authorize the use of portable toilets in any
district on a temporary basis.
§ 420-30 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-32
344:817
§ 420-33. Water requirements. [Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord. No.
09-12]
§ 420-34. Multiple district lots.
Any lot containing more than one zoning district, not including an overlay
district, shall be considered to be entirely within the least restrictive district
as defined in this chapter, except that if any portion of the property is
located within the C-1 Lowland Resource Conservancy District or the C-3
B. On-site soil absorption sewage disposal systems. All existing lots within
any agricultural district or within the R-1, PR-1, PR-2 or PR-3 Districts,
where municipal sanitary sewer is not readily available, may install an
on-site soil absorption sewage disposal system only if approved by the
Kenosha County Sanitary Ordinance. Such on-site soil absorption
sewage disposal system shall be designed in accordance with all state,
county or Village laws, regulations and ordinances. The on-site sewage
disposal absorption system shall be located on the same parcel of land
as the building or buildings which are being serviced by said system.
[Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-12; 3-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-15]
C. Holding tanks. Any existing lots located within any agricultural district
or within the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-8, PR-1, PR-2 or
PR-3 and C-2 Districts may install a holding tank, if holding tank rights
exist, only if municipal sanitary sewer is not readily available or is not in
proximity to the property, as determined by the Village, and only if
approved by the Kenosha County Sanitary Ordinance, and only if soil
conditions are not conducive to installing an on-site soil absorption
sewerage disposal system and if the lot was created prior to July 1,
1980. [Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-12; 3-15-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-15]
A. Municipal water.
(1) All lots located in business, manufacturing, institutional, park and
recreational or multifamily districts shall be serviced by a
municipal water system, except as provided in Subsection B below.
(2) All new lots located in any agricultural district or within the R-1,
R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-8, R-9, R-10, R-11, R-12, PR-1,
PR-2 and PR-3 and C-2 Districts shall be serviced by municipal
water, provided that it is readily available or in proximity to the
property as determined by the Village. [Amended 3-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-15]
B. Wells. All existing lots located in any agricultural district or within the
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5, R-6, PR-1, PR-2 and PR-3 and C-2 Districts
may install a well, provided that municipal water is not readily available
or is not in proximity to the property as determined by the Village.
[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-15]
§ 420-32 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-34
344:818
Natural and Scientific Area Resource Conservancy District, then the
property area within the C-1 or C-3 District shall conform to the district
regulations of said C-1 or C-3 District.
§ 420-35. Lots abutting more restrictive districts.
Lots which abut upon more restrictive districts shall provide side and rear
yards not less than those required in the more restrictive abutting district.
§ 420-36. Storage and discharge prohibited.
No waste material, such as garbage, rubbish, gasoline, fuel oil, flammables,
soils, tars, chemicals, greases, industrial or agricultural waste or any other
materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or temperature
so as to contaminate, pollute, or harm the waters, shall be so located,
stored, or discharged in a way that would be likely to run off, seep, or
wash into surface or ground waters, nor shall any such material be allowed
to accumulate on any lot so as to be unsightly or dangerous or so as to
constitute a nuisance. No gasoline storage tanks shall be permitted in a
residential district, and no more than two cords of firewood may be stored
on any parcel located in the R-2 through R-12 Districts.
§ 420-37. Reduction or joint use.
No lot, setback, parking area, building area, sanitary sewage disposal area,
or other space shall be reduced in area or dimensions so as not to meet the
provisions of this chapter. No part of any lot, setback, parking area, sanitary
sewage disposal area, or other space required for a structure or use shall
be used to meet the requirements for any other structure or use, except as
provided in § 420-48G of this chapter.
§ 420-38. Performance standards.
A. Intent. Article XVI of this chapter permits specific uses for specific
districts. It is the intent of the Village that the following performance
standards designed to limit, restrict and prohibit the effects of those
uses outside of their premises or district be imposed upon all parcels
falling within the jurisdiction of this chapter so as to protect the quality
of the environment and the safety and health of the citizens of Village
and to alleviate and, where possible, eliminate nuisances. It is the
further intent of the Village that all structures, land, air and water shall
hereafter, in addition to their use, site, shoreland and sanitary
regulations, comply with the following performance standards and all
applicable standards set forth by the Wisconsin Department of
Commerce, Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, and the
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
B. Procedures.
(1) Prior to construction and operation. Any application for a permit
under this chapter or any use subject to the regulations and
§ 420-34 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-38
344:819
standards set forth herein shall be accompanied by a sworn
statement by the owner of the subject property that said property
and use will be operated in accordance with the performance
standards hereinafter set forth.
(2) Continued compliance. Continued compliance with the regulations
and standards hereinafter set forth in this section is required and
enforcement of such continued compliance with these regulations
and standards shall be a duty of the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Determination of violation. The Zoning Administrator shall
investigate any reported violation of the hereinafter noted
regulations and standards and, if there is reasonable grounds for
the same, shall proceed in accordance with Subsection B(4) below
and Article XIX of this chapter.
(4) Termination of violation. All violations, as ascertained in
accordance with Subsection B(3) above, shall be terminated within
30 days after notice of such violation, and in the event that said
violation is not terminated it shall be deemed a separate violation
for each date of its existence and subject to fines as set forth in this
chapter, except that certain uses established before the effective
date of this chapter and nonconforming as to the regulations and
standards hereinafter set forth shall be given not more than 180
days in which to conform therewith after the determination of the
existence of such violation, and in the event said violation is not
terminated it shall be deemed a separate violation for each day it
existed since the effective date of this chapter.
C. Regulation of nuisance elements.
(1) No land or building in any district shall be operated in such a
manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or
otherwise objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard; noise or
vibration; smoke, dust, dirt or other form of air pollution; water
pollution; electrical, radioactive or other disturbances; glare; or
other substance, condition or element (referred to herein as
"dangerous or objectionable elements") in such amount as to
adversely affect the surrounding area or premises, provided that
any use permitted by this chapter may be undertaken and
maintained if it conforms to the regulations of this subsection
limiting dangerous and objectionable elements at the specified
point or points of the determination of their existence.
(2) The determination of the existence of any dangerous and
objectionable elements shall be made at:
(a) The point or points where such elements shall be most
apparent for fire and explosion hazards, for radioactivity and
electrical disturbances, for smoke and other forms of air
pollution.
§ 420-38 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-38
344:820
(b) The property lines of the use creating such elements for noise,
vibration, glare and odors.
D. Performance standards to be enforced.
(1) Air pollution. No activity shall emit any fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors,
smoke, mists or gases in such quantities as to cause soiling or
danger to the health of person, animals, vegetation or other forms
of property. No activity shall emit any liquid or solid particles in
concentrations exceeding 0.3 grain per cubic foot of the conveying
gas or any color visible smoke equal to or darker than No. 2 on the
Ringelmann Chart described in § NR 154, Wis. Adm. Code, and
amendments thereto.
(2) Electrical, radioactive or other disturbances. No activity shall emit
electrical, radioactive or other disturbances outside its premises
that are dangerous or adversely affect the use of neighboring
premises. All applicable federal and state regulations shall be
complied with.
(3) Fire and explosive hazards. All activities involving the
manufacturing, utilization, processing or storage of flammable and
explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices
against the hazard of fire and explosion with adequate fire-fighting
and fire suppression equipment and devices that are standard in
the industry. All materials that range from active to intense burning
shall be manufactured, utilized, processed and stored only in
completely enclosed buildings which have incombustible exterior
walls and an automatic fire-extinguishing system. The aboveground
storage capacity of materials that produce flammable or explosive
vapors shall not exceed the following:
Closed-Cup Flash Point Gallons
Over 187° F. 400,000
105° F. to 187° F. 200,000
Below 105° F. 100,000
(4) Glare and heat. No activity shall emit glare or heat that is visible or
measurable at the boundaries of the lot on which the principal use
is located. All operations producing intense glare or heat shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building. Exposed sources
of light shall be shielded so as not to be visible outside their
premises.
(5) Noise.
(a) At the points of measurement specified above, the maximum
sound-pressure level radiated in each standard octave band by
any use or facility (other than transportation facilities or
temporary construction work) shall not exceed the values for
octave bands lying within the several frequency limits given in
§ 420-38 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-38
344:821
Table I after applying the corrections shown in Table II. The
sound-pressure level shall be measured with a sound-level
meter and associated octave band analyzer conforming to
standards prescribed by the American Standards Association,
Inc., New York, NY. (American Standard Sound Level Meters
for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.3-1944,
American Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY, and
American Standard Specification for an Octave-Band Filter
Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.10-1953,
or latest approved revision thereof, American Standards
Association, Inc., New York, NY shall be used.)
Table I
Frequency Ranges
Containing Standard
Octave Bands
in Cycles per Second
Octave Band Sound-
Pressure Level in Decibels
re 0.0002 dyne/cm
20 to 75 65
75 to 150 55
150 to 300 50
300 to 600 45
600 to 1,200 40
1,200 to 2,400 40
Above 2,400 35
(b) If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., one or more of
the corrections in Table II shall be applied to the octave band
levels given in Table I.
Table II
Type of Location of Operation
or Character of Noise Correction in Decibels
Daytime operation only 5
*Noise source operates less than
20% of
any 1-hour period
5
*Noise source operates less than
5% of
any 1-hour period
10
Noise of impulsive character
(hammering, etc.)
-5
§ 420-38 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-38
344:822
Table II
Type of Location of Operation
or Character of Noise Correction in Decibels
Noise of periodic character
(hum, screech, etc.)
-5
Property is located in any M
District and is not within 200 feet of
any R District
10
*Apply one of these corrections only.
(6) Odors. Except in any Agricultural District, no activity shall emit any
odorous matter of such nature or quantity as to be offensive,
obnoxious or unhealthful outside its premises. The guide for
determining odor measurement and control shall be Ch. NR
429.032, Wis. Adm. Code, and amendments thereto. [Amended
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06; 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 18-19]
(7) Erodible land regulations. In addition to any other applicable use,
site or sanitary regulation, the following organic and sandy soils
listed below and any other soils having an erosion factor of three
shall not be used for crop production or grazing unless such lands
make use of contour cropping practices or strip cropping practices
or crop terraces.
133 - BmB, BmC2 416 - Ry
316 - BmB, BmC2 417 - CrD2, CrE
359 - MxD2 419 - SfB
414 - BmB, BmC2 451 - Ht
(8) Soil capability regulations. In addition to any other applicable use,
site, or sanitary regulation, the following restrictions or regulations
shall apply to the following soils as shown on the Operational Soil
Survey Maps prepared by the United States Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation Service for the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission:
(a) Because of their erodibility and very low agricultural
capabilities, tillage is permitted on the following rough,
broken, sandy, stony or escarpment soils only when conducted
in accordance with sound soil conservation practices and after
review by the Soil Conservation Service:
75 - CcB, CrC, CrD2, CrE 417 - CrD2, CrE
282 - CeB, CrC, CrD2, CrE 419 - SfB
416 - Ry
§ 420-38 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-38
344:823
(b) Farm drainage systems may be installed on the following soils,
which soils are subject to a flooding hazard and which have
generally unsuitable soil characteristics for an operative
drainage system, only if installed in accordance with sound soil
conservation practices and after review by the Soil
Conservation Service:
4 - Mf 11 - Am
5W - Sg 11W - Ww
7 - Dh 54 - Lp
10 - Am 419 - SfB
10W - Ww 452 - Ac
(c) Because of very severe limitations for pasturing, grazing is
permitted on the following soils when conducted in accordance
with sound soil conservation practices and after review by the
Soil Conservation Service:
4 - Mf 419 - SfB
416 - Ry 462 - Ht
(9) Steep land regulations. In addition to any other applicable use, site,
shoreland, or sanitary regulation, the following restrictions and
regulations shall apply to all lands having slopes of 12% or greater
(see Illustration 1)117 as shown on the Operational Soil Survey
Maps prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service in cooperation with the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission and which are on file
with the Zoning Administrator:
(a) Tillage and grazing of lands with slopes of 12% or greater shall
be permitted only if such tilling and grazing make use of
contour cropping practices, strip cropping practices or
cropping terraces. Spreading the manure or fertilizer on frozen
ground and establishment of feedlots shall be prohibited when
such practice would cause direct runoff of pollutants into a
drainageway or watercourse.
(b) Tree cutting and shrubbery clearing for the purpose of
changing land use from wildlife or wood lot management on
lands with slopes of 12% or greater shall be conducted so as to
minimize erosion and sedimentation and promote the
preservation of scenic beauty.
(10) Vibrations. No activity in any district except the M-1, M-2 and M-3
Districts shall emit vibrations which are discernible without
instruments outside its premises. No activity in the M-1, M-2 or M-3
District shall emit vibrations which exceed the following
117. Editor's Note: Illustration 1 is included in Appendix A at the end of this chapter.
§ 420-38 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-38
344:824
displacement measured with a three-component measuring
system:
Frequency
(Cycles Per
Second)
Displacement
(inches)
Outside the
Premises
Displacement
(inches)
Outside the
District
0 to 10 .0020 .0004
10 to 20 .0010 .0002
20 to 30 .0006 .0001
30 to 40 .0004 .0001
40 to 50 .0003 .0001
50 and over .0002 .0001
(11)Water quality protection.
(a) No activity shall locate, store, discharge or permit the
discharge of any treated, untreated or inadequately treated
liquid, gaseous or solid materials of such nature, quantity,
obnoxiousness, toxicity or temperature that would be likely to
run off, seep, percolate or wash into surface or subsurface
waters so as to contaminate, pollute or harm such waters or
cause nuisances, such as objectionable shore deposits, floating
or submerged debris, oil or scum, color, odor, taste or
unsightliness, or be harmful to human, animal, plant or aquatic
life.
(b) In addition, no activity shall discharge any liquid, gaseous or
solid materials so as to exceed or contribute toward the
exceeding of the minimum standards and those other
standards and the application of those standards set forth in
Ch. NR 102, Wis. Adm. Code, and amendments thereto for all
navigable waters in the Village.
(12)No use or activity shall discharge, emit or release any infectious
substances or materials so to create a danger or hazard of
infection, and no use or activity shall use, store, produce, handle,
study, transport, or dispose of any infectious substances or
materials so as to create a danger or hazard of infection. All uses
and activities involving the use, storage, production, handling,
study, or disposal of any infectious substances or materials shall
comply with all applicable state and federal statutes, regulations or
other laws relating to such use, storage, production, handling,
study, transportation or disposal, and shall be provided with and
shall use state-of-the-art safety equipment and devices and state-ofthe-
art safety procedures which are used in the industry, so as to
§ 420-38 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-38
344:825
§ 420-39. Pet and animal regulations.
§ 420-39.1. Essential services. [Added 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-16]
Essential services are permitted in all zoning districts.
ensure that there is no resulting danger or hazard of infection.
[Added 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-19]
A. Livestock, as defined in this chapter, shall be permitted as follows:
[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-14]
(1) No livestock shall be kept closer than 200 feet to any dwelling
located on an adjacent property.
(2) Type and number of livestock allowed in any agricultural district.
(a) Lots 10 acres or greater: no limit.
(b) Lots less than 10 acres but at least five acres:
[1] No more than one livestock animal, excluding foul or
poultry and rabbits, over six months of age shall be kept
for each acre.
[2] No more than five foul or poultry over two months of age
shall be kept for each acre.
[3] No more than 50 rabbits, over two months of age, shall be
kept for each acre.
(c) Lots less than five acres but at least two acres: no more than
two horses and no more that two foul or poultry.
(d) Lots less than two acres: no livestock allowed.
B. A maximum of four horses, raised for human pleasure only, shall be
permitted only in the R-1 District, provided that the lot is a minimum
area of five acres. Horses shall be permitted in other zoning districts as
a nonconforming use on lots of record prior to the January 7, 1991, and
will be subject to § 420-140 of this chapter.
C. In any A-2 or AGO District, no more than five beehives shall be kept for
each acre, provided that the lot is a minimum of 10 acres. [Added
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-14; amended 9-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-27; 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06]
D. No more than four household pets over five months of age are allowed
in any residential district or any agricultural district unless otherwise
provided in this chapter. [Added 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-14]
§ 420-38 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-39.1
344:826
ARTICLE VII
Business License
[Amended 4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-19; 5-20-2013 by Ord. No.
13-17; 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-37]
§ 420-40. Purpose.
§ 420-41. Home-based business.
A. A business license is required to operate in the Village. There are
various types of Pleasant Prairie licenses and permits that are required
by various government entities at the federal, state and local levels.
This zoning license is the basic type of license that is required for all
home-based and non-home-based businesses in Pleasant Prairie.
B. This article is not a regulation of occupation but rather to verify
locations of active business operations, to obtain emergency contact
information in order to notify and provide efficient public safety
services to the business, to support economic development activities
and to verify compliance with the site and operational zoning
regulations of the Village. The information gathered from the business
license application and the annual renewal is essential to performing
the community's public-safety- and public-work-related services. The
information obtained from the business license application and annual
renewals is also important to the community for the purposes of its
overall economic development business attraction and retention
strategy insofar as the Village will be able to track and maintain an
accurate listing of all active businesses, relevant contact information,
employment counts and anticipated employment growth projections on
an annual basis.
C. All businesses in the Village shall obtain and maintain an annual
business license for any home-based or non-home-based businesses
operating in the Village pursuant to the requirements of this article. If
more than one business is located within a building, each business is
required to obtain a separate business license. Properties with more
than one principal building or more than one principal building address
are required to obtain a separate business license for each principal
building on the property.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this section to permit home-based businesses in
any home within a residential, agricultural, or conservancy zoning
district, provided that such use conforms to the standards and
conditions set forth in this section, conforms to all Village Municipal
Code requirements and maintains an active and continuous Village
business license. In general, a home-based business is an accessory use
located on the property and conducted so that a typical neighbor would
not be aware of said use other than for a sign as herein permitted. The
standards and conditions for home-based businesses in this section are
intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted adjacent uses
§ 420-40 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-41
344:827
and to maintain the residential character of the neighborhood or
underlying zoning district. A home-based business and/or regularly
occurring activity is a business activity which results in a product being
produced or service being performed and is conducted in whole or
in part in the principal or accessory building on the property and is
clearly subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling and property.
A community living arrangement, within a single-family or two-family
dwelling as defined in this chapter, with 15 or fewer persons, is not
classified as a home-based business and is exempt from this section;
however, it is required to obtain a business license pursuant to
§ 420-42.
B. Requirements.
(1) The home-based business shall be carried out by the property
owner or occupant at his or her place of primary residence, and
said home-based business use shall be clearly incidental to the
residential or agricultural use of the principal or accessory building
and parcel and shall not change the essential residential character
of the dwelling and parcel. "Primary residence" shall be defined as
follows:
(a) The place where the owner's or occupant's habitation is fixed,
without any present intent to move, and to which, when absent,
the person intends to return.
(b) The primary residence of a person performing the home-based
business is the main home that the person lives in for a
majority of the year as defined by the Internal Revenue
Service. A person shall not have more than one primary
residence for the purposes of operating a home occupation.
(c) When a person's spouse and/or family resides at one place and
the other spouse's business is conducted at another place, the
former place establishes the place of primary residence for the
purpose of determining whether a home-based business may
be conducted at the requested premises.
(d) No person gains the right to conduct a home-based business at
a residence while living there for temporary purposes only.
(2) The home-based business shall not be detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare.
(3) No more than 25% of the principal building or the accessory
building area shall be used to conduct the home-based business.
Further, there shall be no more than two home-based businesses
conducted from the same premises, provided that the combined
home-based business usage does not exceed 25% of either the
principal or accessory buildings on the premises and all other
home-based business requirements as set forth in this section are
met.
§ 420-41 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-41
344:828
(4) No outside storage or displays shall be used in connection with the
home-based business.
(5) No chemical, mechanical or electrical equipment that is not
normally a part of domestic or household equipment shall be used
in connection with the home-based business which may cause an
interference, disruption or nuisance to an adjacent property owner
on a regular basis.
(6) No machinery or equipment shall be used in connection with the
home-based business that causes noises or other interference in
radio or television reception.
(7) No commercial machine repair or sharpening of equipment or
machines shall be done which may cause an interference,
disruption or nuisance to an adjacent property owner on a regular
basis.
(8) No internal or external building alterations inconsistent with the
residential use of the building shall be permitted.
(9) No construction equipment or construction-related vehicles or
trailers shall be parked or stored on the property.
(10)No commercial construction or delivery vans, trucks, semi-trucks/
semitrailers, truck cabs, box trucks, buses, trailers or any vehicle
licensed or rated to be in excess of 7,000 pounds shall be parked or
stored on the property.
(11)No more than four passenger vehicles shall be permitted at the
referenced property at any one time in connection with the conduct
of the home-based business or regularly occurring activity.
(12) The home-based business shall not cause parking or traffic
congestion problems on the adjacent roadways or neighboring
properties.
(13) The home-based business shall be carried out by the occupant of
the home; however, no more than two nonresidents may be
employed and work on the property.
(14)No display of products shall be visible from the street or the
adjacent property.
(15) Instruction in music, dancing and similar subjects shall be limited
to two students at a time.
(16) Only off-street parking facilities normal for residential use on the
property shall be used.
(17) Deliveries accepted shall be by United States Mail, UPS, Federal
Express or other mail carrier. Semi-truck deliveries shall not be
accepted more than once a month.
§ 420-41 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-41
344:829
(18) Signs shall be subject to regulations in Article X.
(19) If a state or federal license is required for the home-based
business, then a current and valid copy of said license shall be
provided to the Village.
C. Permitted home-based businesses. The following are hereby declared to
be home-based businesses as intended by this section. It is recognized
that it is neither possible nor practicable to list all of the home-based
businesses that are compatible with those listed below, and therefore it
is intended that the aforementioned list of home-based businesses be
illustrative only. Any individual aggrieved by a failure to list a particular
home-based business in this section shall have the right to file a petition
with the Zoning Administrator for a determination as to the similarity of
the intended home-based business with the home-based businesses
listed below.
(1) Artists, sculptors or photographers.
(2) Arts and crafts.
(3) Bookkeeping or tax preparer.
(4) Classes of instruction in areas such as music and dance, provided
that no more than two students are on the premises at any one
time.
(5) Child or adult care with eight or fewer children or adults in the A-2,
A-3, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-8, R-12 and C-2
Districts, subject to obtaining any required state permits/licenses.
(6) Dressmaker or seamstress.
(7) Hairdresser, provided that no more than two patrons are on the
premises at any one time.
(8) Manicure/pedicure, provided that no more than two patrons are on
the premises at any one time.
(9) Office facilities of a salesman, sales representative, or
manufacturer representative, provided that no retail or wholesale
transactions are made in person on the premises.
(10)Office facilities of an accountant, architect, writer, attorney, broker,
engineer, insurance agent, interior designer, land surveyor,
marketing analyst, or word processor or real estate sales.
(11) Office facilities of a minister, rabbi, priest, or other clergy.
(12)Office facilities to repair electronic and communication equipment.
(13) Telephone or mail order (including Internet sales).
(14) Telemarketing.
§ 420-41 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-41
344:830
§ 420-42. Non-home-based business.
Intent. It is the intent of this section to require a business license for any
business located within any business, manufacturing, institutional, park and
recreational, planned development and for certain uses in the agricultural
zoning districts. To clarify, a business license is specifically required for
the following commercial uses within agricultural districts: boarding and
riding stables (commercial); contract sorting (commercial), grading and
packaging of fruits and vegetables (commercial); orchards (commercial);
plant nurseries (commercial retail sales); greenhouses for the retail sales
of plants and flowers (commercial retail sales); kennels; landscaping
(commercial); veterinarian offices and veterinarian emergency services
offices. A business license is also required for community living
arrangements within any zoning district pursuant to this section. Approved
temporary uses pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter are exempt from
(15) Transcriber.
(16) Sales and distribution of products manufactured on or off the
premises where the marketing of said products is through homeoriented
sales on an appointment basis only.
D. Prohibited home-based businesses/home occupations. The following are
hereby declared to be prohibited home-based businesses. It is
recognized that it is neither possible nor practicable to list all of the
home-based businesses that are prohibited, and therefore it is intended
that the aforementioned list of home-based businesses be illustrative
only.
(1) Restaurants/taverns.
(2) Clinics.
(3) Construction businesses with outdoor storage.
(4) Kennels.
(5) Sale of explosives or fireworks.
(6) Tattoo parlors.
(7) Taxidermy.
(8) Massage therapists.
(9) Repair, service or restoration of motor vehicles.
(10) Any permitted uses listed within the manufacturing districts of this
chapter.
E. The property shall be subject to periodic inspections to verify
compliance with the home-based business license.
F. An annual business license is required pursuant to § 420-43 below.
§ 420-41 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-42
344:831
obtaining a business license. Commercial communications structures and
their tenants, transmission lines, electric power substation or gas metering
substation, utility substations and wind energy conversion systems and
cemeteries are exempt from this section.
§ 420-43. Annual business licenses required.
A. Requirements.
(1) The licensed use shall be a legal use allowed within the underlying
zoning district or shall be a legal nonconforming use as defined in
this chapter.
(2) A valid certificate of occupancy/compliance shall have been issued
by the Village for the business activity to occur on the property or
within a portion of the property.
B. The licensed address shall be subject to periodic inspections to verify
compliance with the Village ordinances.
C. An annual business license is required pursuant to § 420-43 below.
A. Initial licenses.
(1) All existing home-based or non-home-based businesses in the
Village as of December 1, 2016, will receive an initial application
for a Village business license that shall be returned with the fee
pursuant to § 420-29 of this chapter by January 15, 2017. Every
year following, the business shall renew this license pursuant to
Subsection B below.
(2) Any new home-based business shall complete the business license
application and submit the required fee pursuant to § 420-29 for
Village review to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(3) Any new non-home-based business requesting to obtain an
occupancy permit from the Village shall complete the business
license application and submit the required fee pursuant to
§ 420-29 of this chapter at the same time that the required building
permit application is submitted for review to ensure compliance
with this article.
(4) Upon receipt of a completed application, the Village will provide
the applicant with an annual business license.
(5) An annual business license (valid during the calendar year) will be
electronically provided to the applicant to print and shall be kept
on file at the business to provide as proof of the required license if
requested by the Village.
(6) A business license issued pursuant to this section is
nontransferable.
§ 420-42 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-43
344:832
B. Renewal of license.
(1) On or about November 15 of each year, the Village will send a
business license renewal notice via regular mail or electronically to
each active home-based and non-home-based business within the
Village. Failure to receive notice does not preclude the business
from the requirement to renew the license.
(2) The renewal application and renewal fee pursuant to § 420-29 of
this chapter shall be submitted to the Village on or before January
15 of every year. If the business fails to renew the license by
January 15 of each year, then a late fee will be assessed and the
business may be subject to further zoning violations, forfeitures or
fines.
(3) When a business is no longer operating at the location as identified
on the previous year's license, written notification shall be provided
to the Village Community Development Department. If the business
relocates to a new location in the Village, a new business license
will be required since a business license is nontransferable.
C. Notice of change. Any expanded home-based or non-home-based
business shall submit the applicable business license application and
fee pursuant to § 420-29 of this chapter at the time the required
building permit application is submitted for the expanded use. An
expanded home-based or non-home-based business is one that modifies
its business operations in such a manner which increases its building
square footage or involves remodeling or renovations so as to require
the issuance of a building permit; or where there is a change in
ownership and other contact information for the business; or which
commences a new business activity that would substantially modify or
change the total full-time, part-time or seasonal employment of the
business, which in turn may impact the business site by blocking
building exiting areas, causing restrictions to the emergency access or
fire lane access, or by causing vehicles to park in nondesignated
parking areas or on the adjacent roadways.
D. Open records requests for personally identifiable information. As part
of the business license application, the Village may collect the names,
addresses, phone numbers, e-mails, and other personally identifiable
information for owners and emergency contacts of businesses in the
Village. That information will enable the Village to quickly communicate
with businesses in the event of an emergency or other circumstances
requiring an immediate response. The Village recognizes that any
personally identifiable information gathered may be a record subject to
requests and disclosure under § 19.35, Wis. Stats. The Village has
determined, in addition to the general presumption of disclosure, that
the following public interests will affect all requests for personally
identifiable information gathered in business license applications: 1) no
public interests generally favor disclosure; 2) the public interest in
preserving the privacy of private employees and business owners
§ 420-43 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-43
344:833
weighs against disclosure; and 3) the Village favors nondisclosure of
the information to encourage more business license applicants to
provide the Village with the requested contact information. The Village
directs the custodian in charge of its records to balance these interests,
as well as any other public interests that may apply to a particular
request, when determining whether to release or withhold personally
identifiable information from business license applications.
E. Other Village ordinances. Any references in the Village Ordinances to a
"home occupation" shall also be referred to as a "home-based business"
as defined in § 420-41 above.
F. Enforcement and penalties: pursuant to Article XIX of this chapter.
§ 420-43 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-43
344:834
ARTICLE VIII
Traffic, Parking and Access
§ 420-44. Vision triangle.
No obstructions, such as structures, fences, parking or vegetation, shall be
permitted in any zoning district between the heights of two feet and 10 feet
above the plane through the center line of the road within the triangular
space formed by any two existing or proposed intersecting roadway rightof-
way lines or private roads as specified below:
§ 420-45. General public or private roadway requirements.
The following regulations are applicable to roads under the Village's
jurisdictional authority. Restricted or controlled access to state or county
roadways may be further restricted as it relates to roadway and driveway
spacing.
A. In the case of any Village roadway and private roadway intersecting
with any other Village roadway or private roadway, the corner cutoff
distances establishing the triangular vision clearance space shall be 15
feet. See Illustration 2 in Appendix A.
B. In the case of any federal, state or county highway or railway
intersection with any other federal, state or county highway or railway,
the corner cutoff distances establishing the triangular vision clearance
space shall be 50 feet. See Illustration 2 in Appendix A.
C. In the case of any federal, state or county highway or railway
intersection with a Village roadway or private roadway, the corner
cutoff distances establishing the triangular vision clearance space shall
be 50 feet from any federal, state or county highway or railway and 15
feet from any Village roadway or private roadway. See Illustration 2 in
Appendix A.
A. Spacing between roadways.
(1) The separation spacing between all public or private nonarterial
roads for all uses, except single-family or two-family residential,
shall meet the following minimum distance from other public or
private nonarterial roads:
Highway Design Speed of
Nonarterial Road
(miles per hour)
Minimum Spacing Distance as
Measured Between the Center
Lines of Public or Private
Nonarterial Roads
(feet)
25 290
30 320
35 350
§ 420-44 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-45
344:835
Highway Design Speed of
Nonarterial Road
(miles per hour)
Minimum Spacing Distance as
Measured Between the Center
Lines of Public or Private
Nonarterial Roads
(feet)
40 380
45 460
50 530
55 670
(2) The separation spacing between all public or private nonarterial
roads for single-family or two-family residential uses shall meet the
following minimum distance from other public or private
nonarterial roads:
Highway Design Speed of
Public or Private Nonarterial
Road
(miles per hour)
Minimum Spacing Distance
as Measured from the Center
Lines of Public or Private
Nonarterial Roads
(feet)
25 316
30 316
35 316
(3) The separation spacing between all public or private nonarterial
roads intersecting an arterial road shall meet the following
minimum distances:
Highway Design Speed
of Arterial Road
(miles per hour)
Minimum Spacing Distance
as Measured from the Center
Lines of Public or Private
Nonarterial Roads
Intersecting an Arterial Road
(feet)
25 290
30 370
35 460
40 530
45 670
50 780
55 910
§ 420-45 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-45
344:836
§ 420-46. Driveways in agricultural, single-family, two-family and
conservancy districts.
All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced, or extended in an
agricultural, single-family or two-family or conservancy district shall meet
the following requirements:
B. Roadway offsets (jogged intersections). Roadway offsets shall not be
allowed in any district unless they meet the criteria as set forth in
Subsection A above.
C. Boulevard islands and medians within roadways. Boulevard islands and
medians within roadways shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width
(measured from back of curb to back of curb), except for entrances to a
subdivision where an entrance boulevard island shall be a minimum of
seven feet in width (measured from the front of curb to front of curb).
Location of openings within boulevard islands or medians is subject to
Village approval. Driveway openings shall be aligned with boulevard
island or median openings.
D. Access barriers. Permanent or temporary access barriers, such as
bollards, barricades, curbing, fencing, ditching, landscaping, or other
topographic barriers, shall be erected where required by the Plan
Commission or Zoning Administrator to prevent unauthorized vehicle
ingress or egress to the above-specified streets or highways.
E. Other urban design standards not listed. The spacing, location, turning
radii and median width and other highway geometrics not listed for
roadways shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in the
book titled "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets"
prepared for American Standards for Highways and Traffic Operations
(ASHTO), prepared by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials, 1984, as amended from time to time, and
supplemental highway engineering and construction standards and
specifications approved by the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation.
A. Width. The minimum width of a driveway shall be 12 feet, and the
driveway shall not exceed 24 feet in width at the property line. In no
case shall a driveway extend into the right-of-way so as to cross the
extension of the side property line as extended into the right-of-way.
B. Setback. Driveways shall be a minimum of five feet from the side or rear
property line, and a minimum of 10 feet from wetlands on said property,
except as provided in Subsection C below.
C. Exceptions to the driveway setback.
(1) The Village Zoning Administrator may allow for encroachment into
the required setback in the following instances:
(a) Extension of a nonconforming driveway.
§ 420-45 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-46
344:837
(b) Installation of a driveway that cannot meet said requirements
if there is no garage on said lot and if an attached garage
cannot be constructed and a detached garage must be
constructed in the rear of the property.
(c) Environmental or drainage problems prevent the meeting of
this requirement.
(2) Encroachment into the setback may be allowed only if the following
conditions are satisfied:
(a) Proper drainage is provided so as not to cause a drainage
problem on said property or adjacent properties;
(b) An area for snow removal and snow storage is provided; and
(c) Any other requirements deemed necessary by the Village to
ensure that public health, safety and welfare are not
compromised.
D. Location of driveway in relation to intersections.
(1) Spacing between driveways and intersections of county, state or
Village arterial roadways. No direct driveway access shall be
permitted within 150 feet, as measured from the center line of the
roadway to the center line of the driveway, of any county, state or
Village arterial roadway intersection, except where existing platted
residential lots have insufficient frontage to meet this requirement,
then the driveway shall be placed as far from the intersection as
practically possible. In the event that a particular parcel lacks
adequate road frontage for access to maintain adequate spacing
between driveways, the property owner may obtain approval from
the Zoning Administrator or shared common driveway access from
the roadway per Subsection F may be approved.
(2) Spacing between driveways and intersections of all other Village
public or private roadways. No direct driveway access shall be
permitted within 100 feet, as measured from the center line of the
roadway to the center line of the driveway, of all other Village
public or private road intersections, except where existing platted
residential lots have insufficient frontage to meet this requirement,
then the driveway shall be placed as far from the intersection as
practically possible. In the event that a particular parcel lacks
adequate road frontage for access to maintain adequate spacing
between driveways, the property owner may obtain approval from
the Zoning Administrator or shared common driveway access from
the roadway per Subsection F may be approved.
E. Number of driveways. Only one driveway shall be allowed onto a state,
county or Village arterial roadway, except farm access points may be
approved by the county, state or Village Zoning Administrator for their
respective roadway jurisdiction, provided that all other Village
§ 420-46 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-46
344:838
§ 420-47. Driveways in business, manufacturing, multifamily,
institutional and park and recreational districts.
All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced, or extended in any
business, manufacturing, multifamily, institutional or park and recreational
district shall meet the following requirements:
driveway requirements are satisfied. More than one driveway onto all
Village public or private roadways may be approved by the Zoning
Administrator, provided that the distance as measured from the center
line to the center line of each driveway is a minimum of 55 feet and all
other driveway requirements are satisfied.
F. Shared driveway access. Shared driveway access may be allowed by the
Plan Commission as long as the underlying district minimum lots widths
are maintained. The shared driveway entrance shall not cross property
lines at the right-of-way. If a shared driveway access is approved, an
easement and maintenance agreement shall be prepared by the
property owner, approved by the Village and recorded at the owner'
expense at the Kenosha County Register of Deeds office.
A. Driveway spacing.
(1) Driveway spacing shall be determined as a function of the adjacent
and/or intersecting roadway operating speeds. Spacing between
driveways and the spacing between driveways and an intersection
for all uses except single-family and two-family residential land
uses shall be determined according to the following table as
outlined below:
Minimum Space Between Driveway
Entrances and/or Adjacent
Intersections as Measured from Center
Line to Center Line
(feet)
Roadway Design
Speed
(miles per hour) Nonarterial Roads Arterial Roads
25 105 210
30 125 250
35 150 300
40 185 370
45 230 460
50 275 550
Source: Wisconsin Department of Transportation and Village of
Pleasant Prairie.
(2) The spacing is based on average vehicle acceleration and
deceleration rates and is considered necessary to maintain safe
§ 420-46 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-47
344:839
traffic operation. Spacing shall be measured from the midpoint of
each driveway or intersection. In the event that a particular parcel
lacks frontage to maintain adequate spacing, the property owner
has one of two options: the property owner can seek approval from
the Zoning Administrator for minimum spacing, but in no case
should the distance be greater than the next lowest classification
on the above table; or the adjacent property owners may agree to
establish a common driveway. This provision does not lessen the
minimum lot width requirement on a public roadway.
(3) To further clarify the above chart the following examples are being
provided:
(a) Example 1: If a driveway is proposed to be located on a
nonarterial road which has a speed limit of 30 miles per hour
and said nonarterial road intersects an arterial road which has
a speed limit of 50 miles per hour, then the driveway shall be
located either on the arterial (unless restricted access
prohibits said driveway) or nonarterial road a minimum of 550
feet as measured from the center line of the driveway and the
center line of the intersecting arterial street.
(b) Example 2: If a second driveway is proposed to be located on
the nonarterial road as described above in Example 1, then the
second driveway shall be a minimum of 125 feet from the first
driveway and shall be a minimum of 550 feet from the center
line of the intersecting arterial street.
(c) Example 3: If a second driveway is proposed to be located on
the arterial road as described above in Example 1, then the
second driveway shall be a minimum of 550 feet from the
driveway that is a minimum of 550 feet from the center line of
the intersecting arterial street.
(d) Example 4: If a driveway is proposed to be located on an
arterial road which has a speed limit of 45 miles per hour and
said arterial road intersects another arterial road which has a
speed limit of 50 miles per hour, then the driveway shall be
located a minimum of 550 feet as measured from the center
line of the driveway and the center line of either intersecting
arterial street.
B. Offset driveways. Offset driveways shall not be allowed in any district
unless they meet the criteria as set forth in Subsection A above.
C. Sight distance.
(1) All driveways shall be located so that an exiting vehicle has an
unobstructed sight distance according to the following minimum
sight distance table as outlined below:
§ 420-47 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-47
344:840
Highway Design Speed
(miles per hour)
Minimum Sight Distance
from Center Line to Center
Line
(feet)
30 200
35 225
40 275
45 325
50 350
(2) Sight distance is defined as the minimum distance required by a
driver of a vehicle traveling at a given speed to bring the vehicle to
a stop after sighting an object in the path. Stopping sight distance
is measured from the driver's eyes, which are assumed to be 3.5
feet above the pavement surface, to an object 1/2 foot high on the
pavement. (Source: American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials, 1984, and the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation's Facility Development Manual.)
D. Width. The maximum width of a driveway shall not exceed 35 feet at the
property line. The Zoning Administrator, however, may allow an
increase in width to provide for safer and adequate traffic movements.
In no case shall a driveway extend into the right-of-way so as to cross
the extension of the side property lines as extended into the right-ofway.
[Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-29]
E. Setback. Driveways shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the side or rear
property line and a minimum of 25 feet from any wetlands on said
property.
F. Driveway design. Any driveway design shall allow an entering vehicle
maximum turning speed of 15 miles per hour to help reduce
interference with through street traffic.
G. Off-street storage on driveway. Driveways shall be sufficient to provide
off-street storage to accommodate at least three vehicles waiting to
park or exit without using any portion of the street right-of-way or in
any other way interfering with traffic.
H. Number of driveways. A maximum of one driveway opening shall be
permitted to a particular site from each of any one or two abutting
Village public or private streets. In an attempt to promote good traffic
circulation, the Plan Commission may permit an additional driveway
entrance along a continuous site with frontage in excess of 300 feet,
provided that the separation distance does not conflict with the spacing
criteria as listed in Subsection A above or more restrictive
requirements as set forth by the state or county. All driveway access to
§ 420-47 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-47
344:841
§ 420-48. Parking lot and circulation requirements.
At the time any use or building, except a single-family home, is constructed,
or at the time an existing use or building, except a single-family home,
is enlarged, extended, relocated or remodeled by 50% or more of the
gross floor area, then the following off-street parking requirements shall be
complied with:
a county or state right-of-way requires approval from the county or
state.
I. One-way driveways. Only one right in, right out only driveway may be
used per 250 feet of frontage.
J. Dual-service driveway. A dual-service driveway (one lane in, one or two
lanes out, separated by a boulevard) shall be considered to be only one
direct-access driveway.
K. Temporary driveway access. Temporary driveway access may be
granted by the Village Plan Commission after review and
recommendations by the highway agencies having jurisdiction. Such
Village access permit shall be temporary, revocable, and subject to any
conditions required and shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12
months.
L. Shared driveway access. Shared driveway access may be allowed by the
Plan Commission as long as the underlying district minimum lots widths
are maintained. The shared driveway entrance may cross property lines
at the right-of-way, except for driveway access onto a county or state
highway right-of-way, then the driveway shall not cross property lines.
If a shared driveway access is approved, an easement and maintenance
agreement shall be prepared by the property owner, approved by the
Village and recorded at the owner's expense at the Kenosha County
Register of Deeds office.
A. Internal site circulation, access roads and private roads. Internal site
circulation, access roads and private roads serving property located
within the R-7, R-8, R-9, R-10, R-11 and R-12 Districts and business,
manufacturing, institutional or recreational districts shall be
constructed of an all-weather paved surface roadway with a minimum
width of 30 feet as measured from face of curb to face of curb.
B. Parking space size. The size of each parking space shall meet the
following criteria as listed below. All parking spaces shall provide
adequate access and maneuvering and proper ingress and egress which
shall not be part of the required space, and vehicles shall not extend
beyond the required space size.
(1) Ninety-degree, sixty-degree and forty-five-degree parking spaces
shall measure nine feet by 18 feet.
(2) Parallel parking spaces shall measure nine feet by 23 feet.
§ 420-47 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-48
344:842
(3) Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided as required by the
Ch. COMM 69, Barrier-Free Design, Wis. Adm. Code, which may be
amended from time to time.
C. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces. Minimum number of offstreet
parking spaces shall be provided as required in § 420-50.
D. Handicapped parking requirements. In addition to any other
requirements relating to parking spaces contained in this chapter, the
provisions contained in §§ 101.13, 346.503 and 346.56, Wis. Stats., and
any Wisconsin Administrative Code sections adopted pursuant thereto,
are hereby adopted by reference and are made applicable to all parking
facilities whenever constructed.
E. Combinations. Combinations of any of the above uses shall provide the
total of the number of spaces required for each individual use.
F. Uses not listed. In the case of structures or uses not mentioned in
§ 420-50, the parking space provisions for a use which is similar, as
determined by the Village Zoning Administrator, shall apply.
G. Shared off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces for separate uses
may be provided collectively or shared if the total number of spaces
provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirement of the
uses being served.
H. Adjustment of spaces required. The Village Plan Commission, after
careful review and consideration, may adjust the minimum number of
required parking spaces due to additional factors which may be
present, such as the availability of on-street parking adjacent to the
development or use; peak or off-peak parking requirements; additional
parking needs; additional parking needs; or dependency of automobile
traffic to access the site.
I. Off-street parking lot aisle widths. The aisle widths for two-way traffic
within parking lots shall be a minimum of 24 feet between the ends of
the parking spaces, except as may be required in Subsection J below.
The aisle widths for one-way traffic within parking lots shall be a
minimum of 20 feet, except as may be required in Subsection J below.
J. Fire lanes. All required fire lanes shall be all-weather, paved surface
roadways with a minimum width of 30 feet and set back at least the
maximum height of the building adjacent to the fire lane, but not to
exceed 50 feet from the building, unless otherwise approved by the Fire
& Rescue Chief. [Amended 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-03]
K. Location. The location of each parking space shall be on the same lot as
the principal use or structure. However, upon approval of the Plan
Commission, the closest off-street parking lot, on adjacent properties,
may be located up to 400 feet from the principal use or structure.
§ 420-48 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-48
344:843
L. Setback for parking areas (which includes parking spaces,
maneuvering lanes and fire lanes). [Amended 10-19-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-51; 11-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-39]
(1) Parking areas shall meet the following minimum setbacks:
(a) Twenty feet from all adjoining street rights-of-way, private
roadways and lot lines, except as provided in Subsection
L(1)(b), (c) and (d) below;
(b) Fifty feet from any railroad right-of-way, excluding railroad
spurs and parking areas in the manufacturing districts,
whereby the parking setback may be reduced to zero; and
(c) Twenty-five feet from any wetlands on the property.
(d) Other exceptions:
[1] For parking areas on abutting properties, the parking area
setback to internal, nonstreet lot lines may be reduced to a
minimum of 10 feet in order to achieve a minimum twentyfoot-
wide separation between parking areas upon the
development of both properties. In no case shall the
distance between abutting parking areas be less than 20
feet. Parking areas shall not encroach into easement areas
without written approval.
[2] If a commercial parking area abuts any residential district,
no vehicle shall be allowed to travel on a driveway or park
closer than 25 feet to the abutting residential property
line.
(2) These required setback areas shall be used for an open green space
with plantings, sidewalks, if required, or signage, provided that it
meets the minimum setback requirements for said sign.
M. Cross access easements. Cross access easements for vehicles or
pedestrian travel between properties may be required by the Plan
Commission to promote safe and controlled access points. Such
agreement, if required, shall be prepared by the developer, reviewed
and approved by the Village and recorded at the Register of Deeds
office. At a minimum such easement shall include a legal description, its
specific use and maintenance responsibilities.
N. Surfacing. All off-street parking areas shall be graded and surfaced with
asphalt or concrete so as to be dust- and mud-free and properly
drained. Any parking area for more than five vehicles shall have aisles
and parking spaces, including handicapped parking spaces, clearly
marked.
O. Landscaping.
§ 420-48 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-48
344:844
(1) All public off-street parking areas which serve 10 vehicles or more
and which are created, redesigned or rebuilt shall provide
accessory landscape areas totaling not less than 5% of the parking
lot surfaced area. In addition, a minimum of 25% of the entire
parcel shall be a green landscaped space. The preservation of
existing trees, shrubs, and other natural vegetation in the parking
area may be included in the calculation of the required minimum
landscaped area.
(2) The ends of each parking aisle shall have a curbed landscaped
island. In addition, all parking areas shall provide one curbed
landscaped island for every 25 parking spaces, placed
appropriately throughout the parking area. All landscaped islands
shall be a minimum of seven feet wide from face of curb to face of
curb and shall extend the full length of the parking space.
(3) For additional landscape requirements see § 420-57J.
P. Curb and gutter.
(1) Curb and gutter shall be installed in order to prevent vehicles from
extending outside of the paved parking of driving areas and/or to
direct on-site stormwater drainage or separate the landscaped
areas from the parking areas.
(a) Parking lots with 10 or more spaces, including all internal site
circulation, access roads and private roads, shall install curb
and gutters, except in the docking and loading areas, when
surface runoff is directed to the curbs and the curbs are being
used to direct water to an inlet or other stormwater drainage
improvement.
(b) Parking lots with 10 or more spaces, including all internal site
circulation, access roads and private roads, shall install
continuous vertical curbs, except in the docking and loading
areas. Continuous vertical curbs may be used only when
surface runoff is not directed to the curbs and the curbs are not
being used to direct water to an inlet or other stormwater
drainage improvement.
(c) Parking lots with fewer than 10 spaces and all internal site
circulation, access roads and private roads shall install either
curb stops at the end of each parking space, continuous
vertical curb or curb and gutters.
(2) For additional requirements for parking lot drainage see
§ 420-57G.
Q. Exterior lighting. Lighting fixtures shall be provided in all parking areas
and shall be shielded or directed in such a manner so as to prevent light
from shining directly onto abutting rights-of-way and adjacent
§ 420-48 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-48
344:845
§ 420-49. Other parking requirements.
properties. For additional requirements for exterior lights see
§ 420-57I.
R. Loading area requirements.
(1) Adequate loading and unloading areas shall be provided so that all
vehicles loading, maneuvering, or unloading are completely off the
public right-of-way or private roadway and so that all vehicles need
not back onto any public right-of-way or private roadway to
maneuver.
(2) On every lot on which a business, manufacturing, park and
recreational or institutional use is hereafter established, space with
access to a public roadway shall be, at a minimum, provided as
indicated below for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the
public right-of-way or private roadway:
(a) Business, institutional and park and recreational uses shall
provide sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number
of loading and unloading areas of at least 10 feet by 25 feet per
space, excluding the area to maneuver.
(b) Manufacturing, distribution center and/or wholesale uses shall
provide sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number
of loading and unloading areas of at least 10 feet by 50 feet per
space, excluding the area to maneuver.
(c) Bus and truck terminals uses shall provide sufficient space to
accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be
stored or to be loaded or unloaded, including adequate space
for maneuvering, at the terminal at any one time.
A. In the A-2, A-3, AGO, C-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-8,
R-9, R-10, R-11 and R-12 Districts, parking of cars, passenger vehicles
or motorcycles accessory to a residential use is permitted only on a
hard-surfaced driveway or well-drained gravel driveway, not on the
grassy or lawn portions of the lot. [Amended 9-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-27; 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06]
B. In the A-2, A-3, AGO, C-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-8,
R-9, R-10, R-11 and R-12 Districts, parking of cars, passenger vehicles
or motorcycles shall be limited to those actually used by the residents
or for temporary parking of guests. [Amended 9-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-27; 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06]
C. In any calendar year, no more than three vehicles, including
recreational vehicles, shall be parked on a hard surface and displayed
for sale from any property, except as approved by the Village Board as a
licensed car dealer in a business district.
§ 420-48 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-49
344:846
D. Semi-trucks, semitrailers and cabs, delivery vans, and specialized
construction equipment and vehicles. Semi-trucks, semitrailers and
cabs, delivery vans, and specialized construction equipment and
vehicles, such as, but not limited to, backhoes, bulldozers, and dump
trucks, used for business or commercial purposes, including retailing
and wholesaling, shall be permitted to be parked in accordance with the
following regulations:
(1) They shall not be permitted to be parked in the residential zoning
districts, except for on-site construction trailers which may be
permitted by the Village Zoning Administrator during the
construction of the residential development. Such on-site
construction trailers shall be located in areas which are accessible
for emergency vehicles.
(2) They shall not be permitted to be parked in the conservancy zoning
districts.
(3) They may be permitted to be parked in the manufacturing,
institutional and business zoning districts during construction
activities. Only semi-trucks, semitrailers, cabs, or specialized
vehicles or equipment used during or in conjunction with the daily
operations shall be parked in the side yard, rear yard, or loading or
docking areas of the site. There shall be no semi-trucks or
semitrailers or related equipment used for the production, storage,
distribution or sale of merchandise in any manufacturing,
institutional or business district, except that the Village Zoning
Administrator may allow semitrailers to store noncombustible,
nonflammable, nontoxic or other materials which do not pose a
threat to the public health, safety or welfare for a limited time
period.
(4) They may be permitted to be parked in the agricultural districts.
Such vehicles, however, shall be parked in the side yard or rear
yard areas of the site. The semi-trucks or semitrailers or related
equipment may only be used for such uses related to the
production, storage, distribution or sale of agricultural products
produced on the site. All such vehicles shall be kept in good repair.
(5) A temporary use permit may be issued for on-site construction
trailers pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter. [Amended
9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-48]
(6) A temporary use permit may be issued for a truck, trailer or tent
product sale pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter. [Amended
9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-48]
E. Recreational vehicle parking regulations.
(1) Recreational vehicles shall include but are not limited to the
following: boats, jet skis, travel trailers, motor homes, camping
trailers, boat or snowmobile trailers, snowmobiles, off-road
§ 420-49 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-49
344:847
vehicles, motorized three-wheelers, minibikes, and converted or
chopped vans.
(2) Recreational vehicles are permitted to be stored in any district only
in the following manner:
(a) Parking of recreational vehicles is permitted inside any
enclosed garage structure which conforms to the zoning
requirements of this chapter.
(b) Parking of recreational vehicles shall not be permitted on a
vacant lot.
(c) Parking of recreational vehicles is permitted outside in the side
yard or rear yard, provided that it is no closer than five feet to
the lot line. Such vehicles shall be screened from adjacent
properties and public view with a solid six-foot-high wooden
fence per § 420-81 of this chapter.
(d) The recreational vehicle(s) shall be owned by the property
owner or resident on whose property the vehicle is parked or
stored.
(e) No more than two recreational vehicles may be parked in the
side or rear yard outside of an enclosed structure, except if a
single trailer can accommodate additional vehicles, then up to
four snowmobiles, off-road vehicles, minibikes, or motorized
bikes shall be considered one recreational vehicle, provided
that the vehicles are stored on the trailer.
(3) Recreational vehicles shall not be:
(a) Used for dwelling purposes, except for overnight sleeping for a
maximum of 14 days in any one calendar year not located on
public land or within a Village right-of-way without the
Village's approval. Recreational vehicles shall not be used as
temporary housing during the construction of a permanent
dwelling or remodeling of an existing dwelling.
(b) Permanently connected to sewer lines, waterlines, or
electricity. The recreational vehicle may be connected to
electricity temporarily for charging batteries and other related
purposes.
(c) Used for storage of goods, materials or equipment other than
those items considered to be part of the unit or essential for its
immediate use.
(d) Parked in the street so as to inhibit traffic movements or be
considered a hazard to the traveling public and parked in a
driveway or other acceptable surface so as to extend beyond
the property line into the right-of-way. Nonmotorized
§ 420-49 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-49
344:848
§ 420-50. Minimum off-street parking spaces required.
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be as follows:
Amusement center 1 space for each 150 square foot of
gross floor, building or ground area
devoted to such use or 1 space per
each 4 seats of facilities available for
patron use, whichever is needed by the
facility
Art gallery 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Assisted living arrangements/
community-based residential
facilities/nursing home
1 space per 6 patient beds, plus 1
space per employee on the largest work
shift, plus 1 space per staff member
and visiting doctor
Athletic field 10 spaces per field, plus an adequate
number of spaces as determined by the
Community Development Department,
to serve the visiting public
Auditorium 1 space for each 3 seats, plus 1 space
for each 2 employees
Auto body shop 1 space per each service bay and
mechanic
Automatic teller machine 2 spaces per machine
Automobile repair 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor
area, with repair space for motor
vehicles not counted as parking space,
plus 1 space for each full-time
employee
Automobile sales 1 designated customer space for each
600 square feet of enclosed floor space,
plus 1 space for each 2,000 square feet
of outside display area
Auto parts store 1 space for each 400 square feet of
leasable area, plus 1 space for each
employee on the maximum work shift
Bank 1 space for each 200 square feet of
usable floor area, plus 8 stacking
spaces for the first drive-in window and
6 stacking spaces for each additional
window; each waiting space shall
measure not less than 20 feet in length
recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored in the
street.
(e) Parked in the driveway in the street yard.
§ 420-49 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-50
344:849
Banquet halls, public assembly
halls, meeting rooms, union
halls and similar
1 space for each 50 square feet of the
public assembly hall's floor area
Barbershop or beauty shop 2 spaces per beauty or barber chair
plus 1 space per each 2 employees
Bed-and-breakfast 1 space per sleeping room, plus 1 space
for each permanent resident
Billiard hall 1 space for each 3 seats or 1 space for
each 100 square feet of gross floor
area, whichever is greater
Bookstore 4.5 spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area, plus 1 space for
each employee
Bowling alley 3 spaces for each alley plus 1 space per
each 2 employees
Car wash 1 space is required; 1 drying space plus
2 stacking spaces are required per
washing space; a washing space is not
a parking space; each drying or waiting
space shall measure not less than 20
feet in length
Cemetery 1 space per full-time employee
Church or synagogue 1 space per 4 seats in the principal
place of worship, provided that the
number of spaces required may be
reduced by not more than 50% if the
place of worship is located within 500
feet of any public parking lot or any
commercial parking lot where sufficient
spaces are available by permission of
the owner(s) without charge during the
time of service to make up the
additional spaces required
Club or lodge 1 space for every 3 persons allowed
within the maximum occupancy load as
establish by local building and health
codes
Coffee shop 1 space for each 100 square feet of
floor area plus 1 space for every 2
employees on the largest work shift
Community-based residential
facilities/nursing home/assisted
living arrangements
1 space per 6 patient beds, plus 1
space per employee on the largest work
shift, plus 1 space per staff member
and visiting doctor
§ 420-50 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-50
344:850
Community center/recreation
center
1 space per 250 square feet of gross
floor area or 1 space per 4 patrons to
the maximum capacity, plus 1 space per
employee on the largest shift
Contractor's yard 1 space per facility vehicle, plus 1
space per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
Convenience store 5 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Convenience store with a fastfood
restaurant
5 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Day-care facility either for
children or adults
2 spaces, plus 1 space for every
employee on the maximum shift; a
paved, unobstructed pickup space with
adequate stacking area (as determined
by the Plan Commission) shall be
provided in addition to standard
driveway and parking requirements, or
1 space for every 6 children; a safe
pedestrian walkway system (as
approved by the Plan Commission)
through the parking area to the
building entrance, with a safety zone a
minimum of 15 feet in width between
parking spaces and the front of the
building entrance, shall be provided in
addition to standard driveway and
parking requirements
Elderly housing 1 space per 2 bedrooms
Funeral home 1 space per 500 square feet of gross
floor area
Gas station without
convenience store
1 space for each employee
Gas station with convenience
store
5 spaces per each 2,000 square feet of
gross floor area plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift
Gas station with convenience
store and fast-food restaurant
5 spaces for every 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area plus 1 space for each
employee on the largest shift
Golf course 1 space per 2 employees, plus 3 spaces
per golf hole
Golf course, par three 25 spaces per 9 holes, plus 1 space per
employee on the largest shift
Golf driving range 2 spaces for every tee
§ 420-50 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-50
344:851
Government building 1 space for each 200 square feet of
gross floor area used by the public and
1 space for each 600 square feet of
gross floor area not used by the public
Greenhouse or nursery 2 spaces for every 3 employees on the
maximum shift; 1 space for every
vehicle customarily used in operation of
the use or stored on the premises; plus
5 spaces for every 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area of sales room
Grocery store 1 space for each 200 square feet of
leasable area
Hardware store 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Headquarters, corporate 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Health club 1 space for each 50 square feet of floor
area
Hospital 1 space for every 2 beds, plus 1 space
for each 5 outpatients, plus 1 for each
employee on the largest working shift;
bassinets shall not be counted as beds
for the purpose of computing parking
Hotel 1 space for each room to be rented,
plus 1 additional space for each 3
employees on the largest shift, plus
specified requirements for restaurants,
public assembly halls and related
facilities
Kennel 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per
1,000 square feet
Library 1 space per 400 square feet, plus 1
space per 2 employees
Manufacturing 5 spaces plus 1 space per employee on
the largest shift
Marina 1.5 spaces for each 1 boat slip
Medical and dental offices 5 spaces for every doctor plus 1 space
for every employee
Meeting rooms, banquet halls,
public assembly halls, union
halls and similar
1 space for each 50 square feet of the
public assembly hall's floor area
Miniature golf course 1 space per hole, plus 1 space per
employee on the largest work shift
Movie theater 1 space for each 100 square feet of
floor area, plus 1 space for every 2
employees on the largest work shift
§ 420-50 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-50
344:852
Museum 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Night club 1 space per 50 square feet of area open
to the public
Nursery or greenhouse 2 spaces for every 3 employees on the
maximum shift; 1 space for every
vehicle customarily used in operation of
the use or stored on the premises; plus
5 spaces for every 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area of sales room
Nursing home/assisted living
arrangements/communitybased
residential facilities
1 space per 6 patient beds, plus 1
space per employee on the largest work
shift, plus 1 space per staff member
and visiting doctor
Post office 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet plus 1
space per each employee on the largest
work shift
Professional offices 1 space per 250 square feet of floor
area
Public assembly halls, banquet
halls, meeting rooms, union
halls and similar
1 space for each 50 square feet of the
public assembly hall's floor area
Residential
Single-family and two-family 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Multifamily dwellings:
1 bedroom 1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit; 50%
of the spaces shall be within an
enclosed garage structure; plus 1 space
for every 8 units for guest parking; the
location of parking spaces and garage
location is subject to Plan Commission
approval
2 bedrooms 2 spaces for each dwelling unit; 75% of
the spaces shall be within an enclosed
garage structure; plus 1 space for
every 8 units for guest parking; the
location of parking spaces and garage
location is subject to Plan Commission
approval
3 or more bedrooms 2.5 spaces for each dwelling unit; 75%
of the spaces shall be within an
enclosed garage structure; plus 1 space
for every 8 units for guest parking; the
location of parking spaces and garage
location is subject to Plan Commission
approval
§ 420-50 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-50
344:853
Manufactured/mobile homes 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Restaurant 1 space for each 100 square feet of
floor area plus 1 space for every 2
employees on the largest work shift
Retail store 1 space for each 200 feet of primary
floor area plus 1 space for every 2
employees
Schools
Elementary and junior high 1 space per teacher, staff member and
aid, plus 1 space per 2 classrooms; a
designated hard-surface playground
shall not be placed within the required
parking lot; the hard-surface play area
may be used for overflow parking
during special events
High school: 1 space per teacher, staff member and
aid on the largest work shift, plus 1
space per 5 students
Self-storage facility 1 space per 10 storage units, plus 1
space per employee
Tavern 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Veterinarian 4 spaces for every doctor, plus 1 space
for every additional employee
Warehouse/distribution centers 1 space for every 2 employees during
any 12-hour period
Zoo 1 space per 2,000 square feet of land
area
§ 420-50 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-50
344:854
ARTICLE IX
Site and Operational Plan Review
§ 420-51. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to protect the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare and, more particularly, and without
limitation, to:
A. Ensure that the development and use of real property in the Village is in
compliance with all applicable requirements of Village ordinances and
is compatible with its natural and man-made surroundings;
B. Promote the wise use, development, conservation and protection of the
soil, water, wetland, woodland and wildlife resources within the Village
and achieve a balanced relationship between land use and development
and the supporting and sustaining natural resource base;
C. Require coordinated site planning and assure adequate standards for
such planning;
D. Promote attractive and aesthetically pleasing surroundings in the
Village;
E. Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of
population;
F. Lessen congestion in the streets and highways;
G. Provide for proper ingress and egress;
H. Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
I. Preserve and enhance the value of real property in the Village;
J. Further the orderly layout and appropriate use of land;
K. Facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water supply,
stormwater management, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and
other public facilities and services;
L. Secure safety from flooding, water pollution, disease and other hazards;
M. Prevent flood damage to persons and properties and minimize
expenditures for flood relief and flood-control projects;
N. Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of
surface and subsurface waters;
O. Provide for adequate light and air;
P. Preserve natural vegetation and shore cover and promote the natural
beauty of the Village;
§ 420-51 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-51
344:855
§ 420-52. Required approval.
No person owning, developing, using or occupying real property within the
Village shall do, and no person owning, developing, using or occupying real
property within the Village shall allow any other person to do, any of the
types of proposed activities on or in such real property that are described
in Subsections A to D below without having first obtained written approval
of an initial or amended site and operational plan, or a preliminary site and
operational plan, in accordance with this article.
Q. Restrict building sites in areas of poor soils or in other areas poorly
suited for development for which engineered building practices are
unsuitable;
R. Coordinate the dedication and reservation of appropriately located sites
for streets (including adequate right-of-way for anticipated future
widening of streets), water supply, stormwater and sewerage systems
and facilities, schools, parks and playgrounds and other desirable
public facilities and services;
S. Facilitate the administration and enforcement of this chapter and other
applicable Village ordinances;
T. Assist in the implementation of the Village's Comprehensive Plan and
other plan elements;
U. Avoid the harmful effects of premature development of land; and
V. Provide for the updating, modernizing and revitalizing of older
buildings and sites within the Village.
A. In any business, manufacturing, institutional or park and recreational
zoning district; provided, however, that any such activities relating to
the continuation of an allowed existing residential or agricultural use in
such zoning district shall be exempted unless Subsection D below is
applicable to such activity:
(1) Commence occupancy of any real property, regardless of whether
accompanied by a change in the use of such real property;
(2) Commence any new or additional principal or accessory use of real
property;
(3) Commence any use of real property after a building or parcel of
land has been vacant or not used for an allowed principal use for 12
consecutive months or more, regardless of whether the same use
was previously conducted in such building or on such land;
(4) Construct, erect, reconstruct, relocate or replace any building or
any structure (e.g., any wall, fence, paved driveway, paved parking
or loading area, sidewalk, sign, light standard, rail spurs, etc.);
(5) Expand, add to or demolish any building or structure;
§ 420-51 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-52
344:856
(6) Structurally alter or structurally repair any building or any
structure;
(7) Materially alter or repair exterior surfaces of any building or
structure, including, without limitation, painting or siding or
roofing such surfaces, or refacing any principal use sign, primary
monument sign, freeway sign or wall sign which has an area of 10
square feet or more, or otherwise materially altering the
appearance or aesthetic qualities of the building or structure.
(8) Materially alter the grade of or materially fill or strip any site or
undertake any other activity on a site that requires an erosion
control permit;
(9) Construct, install, relocate, replace, expand or materially alter any
site improvement (e.g., any berm, drainage course, stormwater
detention or retention basin, graveled surface, landscaping, etc.) or
any external apparatus or equipment which is visible from any
property line of the site;
(10) Change or intensify operations to the extent that the existing onsite
parking or loading facilities are inadequate to serve the needs
of the use(s) conducted on the site or to the extent that thencurrent
performance standards are violated or a public or private
nuisance is created;
(11) Install, replace or materially modify any outdoor lighting;
(12) Undertake any activity with respect to signage that requires a sign
permit;
(13) Commence or expand any outdoor storage or sale of goods or
products;
(14) Remove any trees that are either eight inches or more in diameter
54 inches above the natural grade or 12 inches or more in diameter
at the base, which are not seriously diseased or damaged or which
do not pose an imminent safety hazard to life or property; or
(15)With respect to any site or use for which site and operational plan
approval has been granted, do anything materially different from or
in addition to what is shown, described, required and/or approved
in the site and operational plan, including any conditions of such
plan approval.
B. In any zoning district other than a business, manufacturing,
institutional or park and recreational zoning district, any activities of
the type specified in Subsection A above, with respect to any use of
such real property that would be allowed as a permitted or conditional
principal use in any business, manufacturing, institutional or park and
recreational zoning district, or with respect to any accessory use to any
such principal use, or with respect to the site of any such principal or
§ 420-52 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-52
344:857
§ 420-53. Compliance with approved plan required; violations.
Every owner, developer, user and/or occupant of real property within the
Village with respect to which an initial or amended site and operational plan
or a preliminary site and operational plan has been approved pursuant to
this article shall develop, use and/or occupy such real property, or allow
any other person to develop, use or occupy such real property, only in
accordance with such approved plan, and any conditions of plan approval,
as amended from time to time. Any failure to comply with an approved
initial, amended or preliminary site and operational plan or any conditions
of such plan approval shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be
unlawful. Any development, use or occupancy of real property within the
Village without having first obtained site and operational plan approval,
when such approval is required, shall be a violation of this chapter and shall
be unlawful.
§ 420-54. Review and approval authority.
accessory use, or with respect to any building or structure used for
or in connection with any such principal or accessory use; provided,
however, that home occupations allowed by Article VII of this chapter
shall be exempted.
C. In any agricultural zoning district, any activities of the type specified in
Subsection A above, with respect to any nonresidential principal use
allowed as a conditional use in such district, or any of the following
principal uses allowed as a permitted use in such district: landscaping
contractor's yard, concrete and asphalt batch plants, commercial
horticulture, commercial greenhouse, orchard including on-site retail
sales; excluding roadside stands, plant nursery, sod farming,
commercial riding stable or riding academy and related equestrian
trails, veterinarian office and veterinarian emergency services office,
wind energy conversion systems (commercial) or any principal use of a
commercial nature permitted in any agricultural district, or with
respect to any accessory use to any such principal use, or with respect
to the site of any such principal or accessory use, or with respect to any
building or structure used for or in connection with any such principal
or accessory use. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-16]
D. In any zoning district other than an agricultural zoning district, any
activities of the type specified in Subsection A, above, with respect to
any allowed principal use of such real property that is specified in
Subsection C above, or with respect to any accessory use to any such
principal use, or with respect to the site of any such principal or
accessory use, or with respect to any building or structure used for or in
connection with any such principal or accessory use.
A. By Plan Commission.
(1) The Village Plan Commission shall have authority to review and
decide any application for an initial or amended site and
§ 420-52 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-54
344:858
operational plan approval involving any of the following activities,
after review, comment and recommendation by the Village Zoning
Administrator and other members of the Village staff and/or expert
consultants, as provided for in this article:
(a) Commencement of any new or additional principal use
occupying 50% or more of the gross floor area of any existing
principal building that is greater than 50,000 square feet;
[Amended 5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 08-28]
(b) Commencement of any principal use after a principal building,
principal structure or parcel of land has been vacant or unused
for any allowed principal use for a period of 12 consecutive
months or more, regardless of whether the same use was
previously conducted in such building or structure or on such
land;
(c) Construction, erection, reconstruction, relocation, or
replacement of a principal building or principal structure;
(d) Expansion of or addition to a principal building or principal
structure, constituting at least a twenty-percent increase in
either the height or gross floor area of such building or
structure, or an increase in gross floor area of at least 500
square feet, or an increase in height of at least eight feet,
whichever is less;
(e) Any activity relating to a conditional use which requires an
initial or amended conditional use permit to undertake; or
(f) Any activity for which an amendment of the map or text of this
chapter is required, when an application for such an
amendment is pending and the applicant has made satisfactory
arrangements with the Village Zoning Administrator regarding
the processing of an application for site and operational plan
approval in conjunction with the application for a zoning map
or text amendment.
(2) The Village Plan Commission shall also have authority to review
and decide all applications for preliminary site and operational plan
approval, provided for in § 420-55F below, after review, comment
and recommendation by the Village Zoning Administrator and
other members of the Village staff and/or expert consultants, as
provided for in this article.
B. By Zoning Administrator. The Village Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to review and decide all applications for initial or amended
site and operational plan approval other than those specified in
Subsection A above, after review, comment and recommendation by
other members of the Village staff and/or expert consultants, as
provided for in this article.
§ 420-54 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-55
344:859
§ 420-55. Applications.
A. Application forms and attachments. Applications for initial or amended
site and operational plan approval shall be made on forms obtained
from the Village's Community Development Department. Any
application relating to real property for which site and operational plan
approval has not previously been granted since April 5, 1989, shall be a
full site and operational plan approval application; provided, however,
that an application filed only pursuant to § 420-52A(7) above shall be
required to address the proposed exterior alterations or repairs and
compliance of such alterations or repairs with applicable construction
design standards (and, in the case of proposed exterior alterations or
repairs to a sign, their compliance with applicable sign standards). An
application involving no change in an approved site and operational
plan other than a change of occupancy, or involving only minor or
discrete amendments to an approved site and operational plan, shall
generally be subject to the provisions of Subsection D below, relating to
waiver of application requirements. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this section, each applicant for any site and operational plan
approval shall fully, accurately and legibly complete the application
form and shall file with it eight sets of the plans and other materials and
information identified in Subsection B below and described in much
greater detail in § 420-57 below, including seven sets in which all
architectural or engineering plan sheets are full sized and one set in
which all such plan sheets have been reduced to 8 1/2 inches by 11
inches for easy handling, together with the required filing fee, which
shall be payable at the time of application. (Required filing fees are set
out in Article V of this chapter; fees of expert consultants used by the
Village in the review and evaluation of an application for site and
operational plan review shall be invoiced separately by the Village and
shall be paid by the applicant within 30 days of the date of the invoice.)
B. Site and operational plan components.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the
following information, plans and other attachments, which are
more fully described in § 420-57 below, shall be included as part of
any application for site and operational plan approval:
(a) Applicant, site, use, project and plan information;
(b) Operational plan;
(c) Title sheet;
(d) Survey;
(e) Site plan;
(f) Grading and drainage plan;
(g) Building plan;
§ 420-55 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-55
344:860
(h) Lighting plan;
(i) Landscape and open space plan;
(j) Signage plan;
(k) Industrial/commercial waste survey;
(l) Performance standards compliance plan; and
(m) Additional requirements, as determined by the Village Zoning
Administrator, other appropriate Village staff members, or the
Village Plan Commission, as appropriate.
(2) Two or more plans may be combined, provided that all of the
information submitted on the combined plan is clearly legible, but
in no case shall the combined plans fail to show any of the
information required for each individual plan by § 420-57 below,
unless such information is waived pursuant to Subsection D below.
The applicant shall attach to the application form any waiver of
application requirements granted as a result of a preapplication
staff conference pursuant to Subsection D below.
C. Filing. Applications for site and operational plan approval shall be filed
with the Village's Community Development Department. Obviously
incomplete applications shall not be accepted for filing.
D. Waiver. The Village Zoning Administrator may waive in writing any
application requirement which is not necessary for the effective review
and determination of the application. In the event of an application to
renew a site and operational plan approval that has lapsed for purposes
of the issuance of permits pursuant to § 420-56I below, the requirement
of initially filing a new set of plans shall be waived if the previously
approved plans are on file and readily accessible, unless the Zoning
Administrator knows that substantial changes in the previously
approved plans will need to be made. Such waivers may be issued at a
preapplication conference or at any time during the application or
review process. A preapplication conference with the Zoning
Administrator or other Village zoning staff members is encouraged for
the purpose of discussing the application requirements, as they apply to
a particular proposed project or activity, and potential waivers of such
requirements.
E. Streamlining. The Village Zoning Administrator shall develop
checklists, affidavits of no change, and/or other methodologies to help
streamline the processing of site and operational plan approval
applications whenever possible.
F. Preliminary site and operational plan approval. An applicant may apply
for preliminary site and operational plan approval in connection with an
erosion control permit application for early mass grading, or in
connection with an early foundation permit, or for other good cause
§ 420-55 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-55
344:861
shown. Applications for preliminary site and operational plan approval
shall be filed and processed in accordance with this article, but the
application requirements for such a preliminary approval shall be
limited to a completed application form, survey, a site plan, a grading
and drainage plan, an operational plan (and if an early foundation
permit is sought, a preliminary building plan, plus any additional
requirements imposed by the Village Zoning Administrator in light of
the particular facts and circumstances of the situation), and payment
of a filing fee. Without limitation, the waiver and deferral provisions of
Subsections D and G, respectively, shall be applicable. A preliminary
site and operational plan approval shall vest no rights in the applicant
against changes in any ordinance requirements that occur prior to final
site and operational plan approval, and a condition of any preliminary
site and operational plan approval shall be that the applicant accepts all
risks of relying on the preliminary approval. Any approved preliminary
site and operational plan shall automatically be superseded by any
subsequently approved site and operational plan.
G. Deferral of signage plan and/or landscaping plan review and approval.
The applicant for an initial or amended site and operational plan
approval under circumstances where there will be a substantial interval
of time between site and operational plan approval and occupancy may
request deferred review and approval of that part of the required
signage plan relating to proposed new or modified signs and/or that
part of the landscaping plan relating to proposed new or modified
landscaping. Although the project may be allowed to proceed in
advance of approval of the signage plan and/or the landscaping plan,
the conditions of any site and operational plan approval with respect to
which any deferred review is approved shall include each of the
following conditions: that the applicant assumes all risks of relying on
the plan approval in advance of obtaining the deferred approvals, that
no work shall proceed with respect to any deferred matters until the
applicable plans have been reviewed and approved and any other
required permits or approvals with respect to such deferred matters
have been obtained, and that occupancy of the real property shall not
be permitted until such time as the deferred plans are approved and the
approved signage and/or landscaping is installed (subject only to an
approved delay in installing landscaping due to cold and/or inclement
weather, and then only upon entering into a satisfactory development
agreement and providing satisfactory security). The Village Zoning
Administrator shall have authority to decide all applications for any
such deferred plan review, and for approval of any deferred plans,
regardless of whether the Zoning Administrator or the Plan
Commission had authority to decide the application for site and
operational plan approval as originally filed.
H. Incorrect or inaccurate information. The provision of material
information on or in connection with any application for site and
operational plan approval that is incorrect or inaccurate and not timely
corrected shall be grounds for denial of the application, issuance of a
§ 420-55 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-55
344:862
§ 420-56. Administration.
stop-work order, suspension or revocation by the applicable
decisionmaker of any approved site and operational plan which is
significantly affected by such incorrect or inaccurate information if the
problem is not promptly and satisfactorily resolved after written notice
and an opportunity to be heard (e.g., the filing of correct information
showing that the approval was properly granted, or the filing of an
application for amended site and operational plan approval coupled
with a voluntary interim cessation of the activities in question) and/or
the commencement of a legal action seeking an injunction, forfeitures
and/or other appropriate relief. An applicant for any site and
operational plan approval shall have a duty to correct, update and/
or supplement an application containing information that was either
incorrect or inaccurate when filed or that has become incorrect or
inaccurate during the pendency of the application. Any such changes in
an application may delay the processing or decision of such application.
A. Preliminary determination of completeness. The Village Zoning
Administrator shall use reasonable efforts to make a preliminary
determination of completeness with respect to any application for site
and operational plan approval accepted for filing and shall notify the
applicant by first class mail or by fax of such determination, or of any
additional information or materials required to complete the
application, within 10 business days after the filing of the application.
The Zoning Administrator shall use reasonable efforts to make
additional preliminary determinations of completeness and to notify the
applicant by first class mail or by fax, as necessary, within 10 business
days after receiving supplemental information or materials from an
applicant. The Zoning Administrator may deny an application for
incompleteness if the application is not completed within 30 days after
the date of any notice of incomplete application.
B. Staff and/or consultant review. Upon making a preliminary
determination that an application for site and operational plan approval
is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly transmit the
application and accompanying information and materials to appropriate
Village staff members and/or to expert consultants for review,
comment, and recommendation, as the Zoning Administrator
determines is required under the facts and circumstances of the
particular application.
C. Summary approval/disapproval. Notwithstanding Subsection B above,
the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to approve summarily an
application for site and operational plan approval, without circulating
the application to other Village staff members and/or expert consultants
for review, comment and recommendation, when the application
involves no change or only minor amendments to an approved site and
operational plan and there are no apparent violations of such approved
plan, the conditions of plan approval, or the provisions of any applicable
§ 420-55 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-56
344:863
Village ordinance. Similarly, the Zoning Administrator shall be
authorized to disapprove summarily an application for site and
operational plan approval requiring an amendment of the map or text
of this chapter, if an application for such a zoning ordinance map or text
amendment is not pending and if satisfactory arrangements have not
been made with the Zoning Administrator to process the application for
site and operational plan approval in conjunction with the application
for a zoning ordinance map or text amendment.
D. Zoning Administrator action. Promptly after completion of the Village
staff and/or expert consultant review of an application for site and
operational plan approval, or promptly after the preliminary
determination of completeness if the Village Zoning Administrator
determines that staff and/or consultant review is unnecessary, the
Zoning Administrator shall either notify the applicant by first class mail
or by fax of any additional information or materials required as a result
of the staff and/or consultant review or decide the application, if the
Zoning Administrator has authority to decide it, and notify the applicant
by first class mail or by fax of the decision, including all conditions of
approval and all reasons for denial, or transmit the application and
related staff and/or consultant comments and recommendations to the
Village Plan Commission for decision. The Zoning Administrator shall
make reasonable efforts to take one of these three actions within 30
days after the date of written notification to the applicant of the
preliminary determination of completeness, and other Village staff
members and consultants shall make reasonable efforts to facilitate
timely action by the Village Zoning Administrator. If the Zoning
Administrator notifies the applicant that additional information or
materials are required after the preliminary determination of
completeness, the Zoning Administrator shall make reasonable efforts
to decide the application and notify the applicant of the decision by first
class mail or by fax, or transmit the application and related staff and/or
consultant comments and recommendations to the Plan Commission for
decision, within 10 business days after the filing of all such additional
information or materials, unless further staff and/or consultant review,
comments and recommendations are required with respect to such
additional information. In such event, the Zoning Administrator shall
make reasonable efforts either to decide the application and notify the
applicant of the decision or transmit the application to the Plan
Commission for decision within 15 business days after the filing of all
such additional information or materials.
E. Plan Commission action. The Plan Commission shall make reasonable
efforts to decide an application for site and operational plan approval
within 30 days from the date on which the application and staff and/or
consultant comments and recommendations are transmitted to it for
decision. The Village Zoning Administrator shall make reasonable
efforts to notify the applicant of the Plan Commission's decision by first
class mail or by fax within 10 days after the decision, including all
conditions of approval and all reasons for denial.
§ 420-56 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-56
344:864
F. Decisions. Site and operational plan approval shall be granted if the
application and documents and information submitted in connection
with the application demonstrate that the proposed project or activity
with respect to which the application is filed will comply with all
applicable Village ordinance requirements (including, without
limitation, satisfaction of all applicable conditions precedent
established by provisions of Chapter 395 of the Village Code) and will
comply with all other requirements of applicable federal, state or
county statutes, regulations, ordinances or other laws relating to land
use, buildings, development control, land division, environmental
protection, sewer service, water service, stormwater management,
streets and highways and fire protection. For the purpose of ensuring
compliance with such legal requirements, the Zoning Administrator or
the Plan Commission may reasonably condition approval of a site and
operational plan upon the submission of additional information or
modified plans, the completion of specified public improvements or the
satisfaction of other specified requirements. The Zoning Administrator
or the Plan Commission may impose reasonable time limits for the
completion of specified improvements or the satisfaction of conditions
of approval and may require the applicant to enter into a satisfactory
development agreement with the Village relating to any required public
improvements and to submit an irrevocable letter of credit or other
acceptable security in satisfactory form to insure that public
improvements are completed on schedule and in accordance with
approved plans and specifications. Requirements relating to required
public or private improvements, dedications of interests in land or
dedications of completed public improvements shall be in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 395, Land Division and Development
Control, of the Village Code relating to such matters and in accordance
with any development agreement entered into by and between the
Village and either the applicant(s) or the owner(s) of the real property
involved in the application. Conditions precedent to any site and
operational plan approval shall include at least the following: that the
information contained in the application is correct and accurate; that
any known violation of this chapter, Chapter 395, Land Division and
Development Control, or other applicable Village ordinances is
corrected; and that all expert consultant fees incurred by the Village in
connection with site and operational plan review are paid in full by the
applicant. The Zoning Administrator and the Plan Commission shall be
authorized to process and to grant an application for site and
operational plan approval with respect to a use requiring a special
Village license and/or a conditional use permit which has not yet been
granted, provided that a complete application for such or conditional
use permit has been duly filed and not withdrawn or denied, and further
provided that a condition precedent to the granting of such site and
operational plan approval shall be the issuance of any required license
and/or the required conditional use permit. (With respect to an
application for site and operational plan approval requiring an
amendment of the text or map of this chapter, see Subsection above.) In
§ 420-56 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-56
344:865
the event of any inconsistency between the requirements of site and
operational plan approval and the requirements of the special license
or conditional use permit when issued, the most stringent or restrictive
requirement shall control. Without limitation, ongoing conditions of any
site and operational plan approval shall include continuing compliance
with the approved plan and satisfaction of any conditions of plan
approval and maintaining the real property in a safe, structurally
sound, neat, well cared for and attractive condition. [Amended
5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-21; 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 07-24]
G. Findings. Neither the Zoning Administrator nor the Plan Commission
shall approve any site and operational plan application without finding
in the decision that the application, coupled with satisfaction of any
conditions of approval, will comply with all applicable Village ordinance
requirements and will comply with all other requirements of applicable
federal, state or local statutes, regulations, ordinances or other laws
relating to land use, buildings, development control, land division,
environmental protection, sewer service, water service, stormwater
management, streets and highways and fire protection.
H. Required signatures on final approval forms. Following approval of the
site and operational plan application, the applicant shall file with the
Community Development Department three complete sets of the final
approved site and operational plan components which have been
modified to comply with all conditions precedent set forth in the
approval and which demonstrate satisfaction of any other conditions
precedent to plan approval. Such plans shall be signed by the owner
and by the developer, user and/or occupant of the real property, as
appropriate, and by the Village Zoning Administrator prior to the filing
of any building permit application or erosion control permit application
for the site or the granting of any building permit or erosion control
permit for the site. The Village Zoning Administrator shall make
reasonable efforts to review any signed site and operational plan filed
by the applicant pursuant to this subsection for satisfaction of all
conditions precedent to approval, and to sign such plan, or notify the
applicant by first class mail or fax of any deficiencies, within 10 days
after filing. Approved preliminary site and operational plans and
approved deferred plans shall be processed in the same manner as set
out above.
I. Effective period. For purposes of the granting of any erosion control
permit, zoning permit and/or building permit, a site and operational
plan approval shall be effective for a period of 180 days from the date of
written notification to the applicant of the decision to approve the
application.
J. Permits. Except as provided in § 420-55F or G above (relating,
respectively, to preliminary site and operational plan approval and to
deferral of signage and/or landscaping plan review and approval), no
erosion control permit, zoning permit or building permit shall be issued
by the Community Development Department until site and operational
§ 420-56 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-56
344:866
plan approval has been granted, and until all conditions precedent
set forth in the approval have been satisfied, and until the final plans
have been fully signed as required by Subsection H above. (Note that
the Chief of the Village Fire & Rescue Department has review and
approval authority with respect to matters relating to fire protection,
independent of the Community Development Department, pursuant to
Chapter 180, Fire and Rescue Protection, of the Village Code.) In
a situation where review of a signage plan and/or landscaping plan
has been deferred pursuant to § 420-55G above, no permit relating to
signage and/or landscaping, respectively, shall be issued until approval
of the deferred plan has been granted, and until all conditions
precedent set forth in such approval have been satisfied, and until the
final plan has been fully signed as required by Subsection H above.
Site and operational plan approval for a use requiring a conditional
use permit shall be processed in conjunction with the conditional use
permit application.
K. Amendments. Any proposed changes to the uses, buildings, structures,
site, operations, occupancy or other matters appearing in an approved
site and operational plan, or to any of the conditions of plan approval,
shall require the approval of an amended site and operational plan.
Applications for amended site and operational plan approval shall be
filed and processed in the same manner as applications for initial site
and operational plan approval. Without limitation, the provisions of
§§ 420-55D and 420-56C above, relating to waiver of application
requirements and to summary approval, respectively, may be applicable
to such applications.
L. Time periods. Any time period provided for in this article, except the
periods specified in Subsections I and M of this section, can be
extended by agreement of the applicant and the Zoning Administrator
or Plan Commission, as appropriate, and memorialized in writing.
Failure of the Village Zoning Administrator, the Village Plan
Commission or any other Village employee or consultant to act within
the time provided by this article shall not result in approval of the
application and shall not constitute a violation of this chapter or give
rise to any cause of action, but the Zoning Administrator and the Plan
Commission shall promptly report to the Village Board any failure to
comply with such time requirements, together with a brief explanation
of the circumstances of such failure, so that the Village Board can take
such actions as may be necessary to ensure timely Village action on
applications for site and operational plan review. Notwithstanding the
foregoing sentence, if the Village Zoning Administrator or the Village
Plan Commission fails to take any action provided for in this section
with respect to an application for site and operational plan approval
relating to an adult-oriented use within the time provided by this
§ 420-56 (or within such time as is extended pursuant to this Subsection
L), the action in question shall be deemed to have been taken in favor of
the applicant, and the basis for such action shall be deemed to be the
application as amended or supplemented at such time.
§ 420-56 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-56
344:867
§ 420-57. Contents of plan components and related standards.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, a full and complete
application shall include each of the components described below in this
section. The required minimum contents of each such component, and
certain standards applicable to such components, are set out below.
M. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Village Zoning
Administrator or of the Village Plan Commission relating to site and
operational plan review may appeal the decision to the Village Zoning
Board of Appeals in the manner and within the time provided for such
appeals. Any applicant for site and operational plan approval with
respect to an adult-oriented use who wishes to challenge any decision
of the Village Zoning Administrator or of the Village Plan Commission
on its application pursuant to this article shall not be required to appeal
to the Village Zoning Board of Appeals before commencing an action in
court.
N. Exemptions. This article shall not be applicable to Village public works
projects involving streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers,
fiber optic communication facilities, sanitation facilities or related
facilities. However, reasonable efforts as determined by the Zoning
Administrator shall be made by the Village to comply with the site and
pperational plan provisions set forth in this article as it pertains to
Village buildings, or other Village structures or site improvements. This
article shall not be applicable to City of Kenosha public works projects
involving streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers or related
facilities, provided that the Village has been notified of the project in
advance and in writing, and further provided that a permit has been
obtained for work in a Village street right-of-way, if applicable, but this
exemption shall not be applicable to city buildings or other city
structures or site improvements. This article shall not be applicable to
county or state projects involving highways, provided that the Village
has been notified in advance of the project in writing. This article shall
not be applicable to utility company projects involving electric power
lines or communications lines designed to serve consumers directly
(e.g., this exception shall not apply to towers, transmission lines,
substations or power plants, etc.), provided that the Village has been
notified of the project in advance and in writing, and further provided
that a permit has been obtained for work in a street right-of-way, if
applicable.
A. Applicant, site, use, project and plan information. Each applicant for
site and operational plan approval shall include in the application at
least the following information about the applicant (and any other
owner, developer or occupant of the real property), the site, the use(s)
conducted on the site, the proposed project or activity giving rise to the
need for site and operational plan approval and the plans involved in
the application:
§ 420-56 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:868
(1) Name, address, telephone number and fax number (and cell phone
number and e-mail address, if applicable) of the applicant and of
the project manager or principal contact individual for purposes of
the application;
(2) Whether the applicant is the owner of the subject real property
and, if not, either proof of the applicant's legal interest in the
subject real property (e.g., accepted offer to purchase, lease, etc.,
which may be appropriately redacted to preserve confidential
information) or written authorization signed by the owner for the
applicant to act as the owner's agent in connection with the
application;
(3) Name, address, and telephone number (and fax number, cell phone
number and e-mail address, if applicable) of each owner, developer,
user or occupant of the site other than the applicant;
(4) Street address or location of the subject site;
(5) Area of the subject site in acres or square feet;
(6) Tax key number(s) of any lot(s) or parcel(s) included within the site;
(7) Current zoning classification(s) of the site; if an amendment of the
map or text of this chapter is required for the proposed project or
activity giving rise to the need for site and operational plan review,
whether the application for such amendment has been made, and
whether arrangements have been made with the Village Zoning
Administrator to process the application for site and operational
plan approval in conjunction with the application for a zoning
ordinance map or text amendment;
(8) Whether the site is served by public sanitary sewer and public
water supply and, if not, where the closest public sanitary sewer
and public water facilities are located relative to the site;
(9) Standard-sized photographs (not Polaroid) showing all aspects of
the site (e.g., locations of proposed improvements, bodies of
navigable water, wetlands, wooded areas, etc.) and of the exterior
of structures or other site improvements (e.g., buildings,
entrances/exits, signs, driveways, trash enclosures, parking areas,
loading areas, accessory structures, stormwater detention or
retention facilities, landscaping, etc.), together with a statement
regarding each photograph, which includes the date the
photograph was taken, the location from which it was taken, the
direction in which the camera was pointed, and a description of
what is shown in the photograph (note the specific requirements
regarding photographs of signs set out in Subsection K below);
(10) All current principal and accessory uses of the site, whether they
are proposed to be continued, and all proposed principal and
accessory uses of the site;
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:869
(11)With respect to any nonconforming use of the site, prima facie
proof of each element of legal nonconforming use status (i.e., that
the nonconforming use was legal in its inception, that the use was
active and actual and not merely casual, occasional, incidental or
accessory when it became nonconforming, that the use has been
continuous with no gap of 12 or more consecutive months since it
became nonconforming, that no building or structure housing the
nonconforming use has been structurally repaired or altered to the
extent of 50% or more of its assessed value since the use became
nonconforming, and that the use has not been changed in nature or
physically extended or expanded since becoming nonconforming);
(12)With respect to any nonconforming structure on the site, proof of
legal nonconforming structure status (that the structure and each
addition to it was legal when it was built);
(13) The gross floor area and height of each existing building on the site
and whether it is proposed to be continued, and the gross floor area
and height of each proposed building or addition;
(14) A brief description of the proposed project or activity requiring site
and operational plan approval, in terms of § 420-52 above;
(15) The date of initial site and operational plan approval for the site
and the date of each approved amendment;
(16) A description of all local (other than Village), county, state and
federal permits or approvals relating in any way to land use,
buildings, development control, land division, environmental
protection, sewer service, water service, stormwater management,
streets and highways or fire protection that are required for or with
respect to the project or activity for which site and operational plan
approval is sought and an appropriate citation to the controlling
statute, regulation or other law regarding each such permit or
approval; and
(17) A list of all documents, materials or information attached to the
application form.
B. General standards. Without limitation, the following general standards
shall apply to site and operational plans and to the review and approval
of such plans:
(1) All plans shall conform to applicable Village ordinance
requirements (including, without limitation, satisfaction of all
applicable conditions precedent established by provisions of
Chapter 395 of the Village Code) and to all other applicable local,
state and federal requirements relating to land use, buildings,
development control, land division, environmental protection,
sewer service, water service, stormwater management, streets and
highways and fire protection, and in the event of conflicting
requirements or standards, the most restrictive shall apply.
§ 420-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:870
[Amended 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-21; 5-21-2007 by Ord. No.
07-24]
(2) All plans shall be drawn to a recognized architect's or engineer's
scale that permits the plan to be easily read.
(3) Building floor plans and elevations may be drawn to an architect's
scale; all other plans shall use an engineering scale no smaller that
one inch equals 40 feet unless a smaller scale is needed to show the
proposed development clearly and is approved by the Village
Zoning Administrator prior to filing.
(4) Plan sheets shall not exceed 30 inches by 42 inches in size, unless a
larger size is needed to show the proposed development clearly and
is approved by the Village Zoning Administrator prior to filing.
(5) Each plan sheet shall be titled and numbered.
(6) Each plan sheet shall state the project name and address or
location.
(7) Each plan sheet shall contain a graphic scale.
(8) Each plan sheet depicting a site or some portion thereof from an
overhead perspective shall contain a North arrow.
(9) Each plan sheet shall state the applicant's name, address,
telephone number and fax number.
(10) Each plan sheet shall contain the name, address, telephone
number, fax number, state license number, seal and signature of
any architect, professional engineer or land surveyor involved in
the preparation of the plan sheet.
(11) Each plan sheet shall contain the date of the plan sheet and the
date of each revision thereof.
(12) Each plan sheet shall distinguish between existing and proposed
buildings, structures, improvements and features shown on the
plan and shall indicate which (if any) of the existing buildings,
structures, improvements and features shown are proposed to be
removed or retained as part of the project giving rise to the need
for site and operation plan review.
(13) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter
(including, without limitation, in Article XVIII), the standards set
forth in this article shall be fully applicable to any proposed
development of a site on which no principal building or structure is
located or on which the existing principal building(s) or
structure(s) will be removed in conjunction with the project or
activity giving rise to the need for site and operational plan review.
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:871
(14) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter
(including, without limitation, in Article XVIII), the standards set
forth in this article shall be fully applicable to any proposed
relocation or reconstruction of an existing principal building or
structure.
(15) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter
(including, without limitation, in Article XVIII), the standards set
forth in this article shall be fully applicable to any proposed
commencement of any principal use of real property if a building or
parcel of land has been vacant or unused for an allowed principal
use for 12 consecutive months or more, regardless of whether the
same use was previously conducted in such building or on such
land, except to the extent that the application of such standards is
constrained by the physical presence or nature of the existing
principal building or structure.
(16) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, and to the
extent reasonably practicable, any proposed addition to or
structural alteration or repair of an existing principal building or
structure shall invoke the application of all standards relating to
the proposed addition or structural alteration or repair or relating
to any improvement or modification of the building, structure or
site required as a consequence of the proposed addition or
structural alteration or repair, with the following exceptions:
(a) In the event the standards relating to building facing or accent
materials would make an addition or repair to a building or
structure incompatible with the existing building, a reasonable
exception to the standard shall be allowed.
(b) In the event of a voluntary or required expansion of a graveled
parking lot, the entire parking lot shall be paved with concrete
or asphalt, and if the number of parking spaces exceeds 25, the
storm sewers and storm sewer inlets and other required
parking lot improvements shall be installed to the extent
reasonably practicable.
(c) To the extent reasonably practicable, any graveled entrance
shall be correctly located, sized, paved with concrete or
asphalt and otherwise improved in accordance with this
chapter.
(17) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, any
proposed new or additional accessory use, or any material change
or intensification of the operations involved in an existing principal
or accessory use, shall invoke then-current parking, loading and
performance standards.
(18) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, and to the
extent reasonably practicable, any proposed construction,
installation, relocation, expansion or material alteration of any
§ 420-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:872
accessory building, accessory structure or site improvement shall
invoke the application of all standards relating to the proposed
improvement or modification, or relating to any improvement or
modification which is required as a consequence of the proposed
improvement or modification.
(19) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, any
proposed material alteration or repair of the exterior surfaces of
any building or structure, including, without limitation, painting or
siding or roofing such surfaces, or refacing any principal use sign,
primary monument sign, freeway sign or wall sign which has an
area of 10 square feet or more, or otherwise materially altering the
appearance or aesthetic qualities of the building or structure, shall
invoke the application of all applicable construction design
standards (and, in the case of proposed exterior alterations or
repairs to a sign, all applicable sign standards).
(20) In the context of any site and operational plan approval, the Village
Zoning Administrator or the Village Plan Commission may impose
reasonable requirements, based on the standards of this article, to
make the real property safe, structurally sound, neat, well cared for
and attractive.
(21) While this chapter recognizes the right to continue nonconforming
uses and nonconforming structures, such rights shall not be free of
reasonable regulation in the context of site and operational
modifications.
(22) Any site consisting of more than a single lot shall be unified and
integrated through consolidation of all such lots into a single lot, or
through a planned development zoning ordinance enacted by the
Village Board for the site, or through the imposition on the site of
restrictive covenants running with the land, and/or through the
utilization of other effective legal mechanisms, approved by either
the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator as appropriate
under § 420-54 of this chapter, which will ensure that development,
use and maintenance of the real property included within the
approved site will be subject to ongoing coordinated restrictions
and requirements.
(23) In the context of an approved site consisting of more than a single
lot, on which only a single principal building or a single group of
two or more attached principal buildings will be constructed,
restrictions relating to a lot (e.g., setback requirements,
requirements that an accessory use or accessory structure must be
located on the same lot as the principal use to which it is related,
etc.) may be applied to the site instead, provided that appropriate
restrictive covenants are in place to prevent the construction of
additional principal buildings on the site.
C. Operational plan.
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:873
(1) Operational plan requirements. The applicant shall prepare and file
as part of the application for site and operational plan approval an
operational plan which shall include at least the following
information or materials:
(a) A detailed narrative description of the operations, processes
and functions of the existing and proposed uses to be
conducted in or on the real property constituting the site,
together with any diagrams, maps, charts or other visual aids
that are helpful in understanding the operations and any
potential adverse impacts on neighboring properties.
(b) A detailed description of the proposed project or activity giving
rise to the need for site and operational plan approval and a
detailed explanation of how such project or activity relates to
the site and to the existing or proposed operations to be
conducted in or on the real property constituting the site.
(c) Gross floor area of the existing building(s) and/or proposed
addition.
(d) Anticipated hours of operation, hours open to the public, and
hours of deliveries or shipments.
(e) Anticipated startup and total number of full- and part-time
employees.
(f) Anticipated number of shifts and the anticipated number of
employees per shift.
(g) Anticipated maximum number of employees on site at any time
of the day.
(h) Number of anticipated students, participants or persons to be
gathered in places of assembly, if applicable.
(i) Number of parking spaces required per this chapter and the
method used to calculate such number.
(j) Number of existing and proposed on-site parking spaces to be
provided (conventional spaces and handicapped spaces to be
stated separately).
(k) Anticipated daily average and maximum potential number of
automobile trips to and from the site (excluding trucks).
(l) Anticipated daily average and maximum potential number of
truck trips to and from the site.
(m) Types of goods and materials to be made, used or stored on
site.
(n) Types of equipment or machinery to be used on site.
§ 420-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:874
(o) Types of solid or liquid waste materials which will require
disposal.
(p) Method of handling, storing and disposing of solid or liquid
waste materials.
(q) Methods of providing site and building security other than the
Village Police Department.
(r) Description of the methods to be used to maintain all buildings,
structures, site improvements and sites in a safe, structurally
sound, neat, well cared for and attractive condition.
(s) Description of potential adverse impacts to neighboring
properties or public facilities and measures to be taken to
eliminate or minimize such adverse impacts.
(t) A list of all local, county, state and federal permits or approvals
required for the project or activity giving rise to the need for
site and operational plan approval and copies of such permits
and approvals that have been obtained.
(2) Operational plan standards. In addition to any other applicable
requirements or standards specified in this chapter, the following
requirements or standards shall apply to the operational plan:
(a) No use shall be conducted in such a way as to constitute a
public or private nuisance.
(b) No use shall be conducted in such a way as to violate any of the
performance standards set out in § 420-38 of this chapter.
(c) (Reserved)118
(d) No owner, occupant or user of real property shall conduct a use
so intensively that there is inadequate provision of on-site
parking spaces and/or loading spaces to accommodate the
needs of such use.
(e) All buildings, structures, site improvements and sites shall be
maintained in a safe, structurally sound, neat, well cared for
and attractive condition.
(f) Within a building, any provision of live entertainment in
connection with a business or club use involving the selling or
service of alcoholic beverages shall comply with the following
restrictions:
[1] Live entertainment shall be provided only on a raised
platform that is not less than 23 inches higher than the
elevation of the surrounding floor surfaces where
118. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2)(c), concerning smoking, was repealed 10-18-2010
by Ord. No. 10-62.
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:875
customers, members or their guests are sitting, standing
or dancing;
[2] Customers, members or their guests shall at all times be
separated from the raised platform on which live
entertainment is being provided by a distance of not less
than four feet and a physical barrier to mark and enforce
such separation distance; and
[3] There shall be no touching of any kind between
entertainers and customers, members or their guests.
(g) No proposed new or expanded use shall be permitted to create
or significantly exacerbate unsafe traffic conditions on any
street or highway in the Village.
(h) Indoor pyrotechnic displays are prohibited.
D. Title sheet. The applicant shall file a plan title sheet as part of the
application for site and operational plan approval which shall include at
least the following information: the project name; the name, address,
telephone number and fax number of the applicant, any project
manager or principal contact person, and any architect, professional
engineer or land surveyor involved in the preparation of the plans; a
legend; a table of contents showing each plan sheet; and the date of the
title page.
E. Survey. A survey of the site shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a
Wisconsin registered land surveyor which shall include at least the
following information:
(1) The dimensions of the site, including the length and bearing of each
property line of the site.
(2) The area of the site in acres or square feet.
(3) The legal description of the site.
(4) The type, location, footprint, outside dimensions, height and gross
floor area (if applicable) of each existing building or structure on
the site, including, without limitation, any walls, fences, paved
driveways, paved parking or loading areas, sidewalks, freestanding
signs, light standards, rail spurs, etc.
(5) The location, footprint, outside dimensions and purpose of any
graveled areas on the site (e.g., driveways, parking or loading
areas, circulation routes, pedestrian walkways, etc.).
(6) The location, dimensions and name of any existing highways,
streets or other rights-of-way and any related improvements (e.g.,
bridges, turning lanes, acceleration lanes, medians, median cuts,
traffic signals, etc.) on or adjacent to the site, and with respect to
any such adjacent highways and streets, the location and
§ 420-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:876
dimensions of any existing entrances or exits to or from the site and
the location and dimensions of any existing intersecting highways,
streets, driveways, or curb cuts that are opposite the site.
(7) The location, dimensions and purpose of any existing easements on
the site or of any existing easements located on surrounding
parcels of land that serve the site.
(8) The location, dimensions and legal description of any wetlands on
the site, the date the wetlands were staked and the identity of the
agency or organization (and the individual if known) that staked the
wetlands.
(9) The location of any one-hundred-year floodplain on the site, the
elevation of the one-hundred-year floodplain, and the source of the
one-hundred-year floodplain elevation and date that the surveyor
field delineated the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(10) The location, dimensions and legal description of any primary
environmental corridor on the site, the date the corridor was
staked and the identity of the agency or organization (and the
individual if known) that staked the corridor.
(11) The location of the ordinary high-water mark (OHWM) of any
navigable body of water located on the site, the location of any
shoreland jurisdictional boundary located on the site which is
associated with any navigable body of water located on or near the
site, the date the OHWM of any such navigable body of water was
staked and the identity of the agency or organization (and the
individual if known) that staked the OHWM.
(12) The location, species and diameter of all existing trees on the site
that are eight inches or more in diameter, measured 54 inches
above the natural grade (the location and dimensions of a wooded
area may be shown rather than individual trees, but any trees in
such wooded area that are proposed to be removed shall be
individually shown).
(13) The location, species and diameter of all existing street trees in the
street right-of-way adjacent to the site.
(14) The location and setback distance of lines showing the applicable
minimum street setback, side setback, rear setback, shore setback
and wetland setback (if any) on the site, and with respect to any
building or structure that is within three feet of any such setback
line, the distance of such building or structure from such line.
(15) The distance between buildings if they are closer than 25 feet.
(16) The location, dimensions, type of legal interest, legal description
and purpose of any land or interests in land on the site that are
dedicated or reserved for public use.
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:877
(17) The existing topography on the site and extending at least 50 feet
beyond the site (or beyond any adjacent highway, street or other
right-of-way, whichever is greater), shown by contours related to
United States Geological Survey (USGS) survey datum at an
interval of one foot.
(18) Top of foundation elevations of all existing building and structures
on the site.
(19) Spot elevations of representative high points and low points, of wet
areas, and of berms, detention basins, retention basins and other
significant site improvements or features.
(20) The location and elevation of any benchmark.
(21) An indication of which (if any) of the existing buildings, structures,
site improvements, trees or other site features shown on the survey
are proposed to be removed or retained as part of the proposed
project or activity giving rise to the need for site and operational
plan approval.
F. Site plan.
(1) Site plan requirements. A site plan prepared, signed and sealed by
a Wisconsin registered professional engineer shall be filed with the
application for site and operational plan approval and shall include
at least the following information:
(a) The base document of the site plan shall be the survey
described in Subsection E above, less the required topographic
information and required information relating to existing
buildings, structures, site improvements and site features
shown on the survey that are proposed to be removed as part
of the proposed project or activity giving rise to the need for
site and operational plan review;
(b) The type, location, footprint, outside dimensions, height and
gross floor area (if applicable) of each existing or proposed
building or structure to be retained or constructed on the site,
including, without limitation, any walls, fences, paved
driveways, parking or loading areas, sidewalks, freestanding
signs, light standards, rail spurs, etc.;
(c) The location, dimensions and name of any existing or proposed
highways, streets or other rights-of-way and any related
existing or proposed improvements (e.g., bridges, turning
lanes, acceleration lanes, medians, median cuts, traffic signals,
etc.) to be retained or constructed on or adjacent to the site,
and with respect to any such adjacent streets or highways, the
location and dimensions of any existing or proposed entrances
or exits to or from the site to be retained or constructed and
how they relate to the location and dimensions of any existing
§ 420-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:878
or proposed intersecting highways, streets, driveways, curb
cuts, medians, and median cuts that are opposite the site;
(d) The location, dimensions and purpose of any existing or
proposed easements on the site, or of any existing or proposed
easements on surrounding parcels to serve the site, which will
be retained or created;
(e) With respect to each existing or proposed building or structure
that will be located within three feet of any setback line on the
site, the distance such building or structure will be from the
setback line;
(f) The location on the site of the habitat of any endangered
species of animals or plants as identified by the federal
government and/or Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources and the species involved and how such habitat will
be preserved;
(g) The location and diameter of all existing or proposed sanitary
sewers, water mains, and storm sewers and the location and
size of any related existing or proposed facilities, such as
stormwater basins, which will be located on the site or which
will be located in adjacent rights-of-way or on adjacent parcels
of land and will serve the site, and the length of each segment
of any such proposed sewer mains, water mains or storm
sewers;
(h) The location of all existing or proposed aboveground or
underground electric power lines, natural gas mains,
telephone lines, cable television lines or other communications
lines and related facilities which will be located on the site or
which will be located in adjacent rights-of-way or on adjacent
parcels of land and will serve the site;
(i) The location, dimensions, and surface type of all existing or
proposed on-site parking and loading areas and the layout and
total number of all parking spaces that will be located on the
site;
(j) The location, dimensions, layout, surface type and name (if
applicable) of all existing or proposed internal vehicular
circulation routes and improvements to be retained,
constructed or installed on the site, including, without
limitation, entrances or exits, turning lanes, curb cuts,
driveways, private roads, parking lot aisles, fire lanes, and
related directions of travel, and the layout of circulation
elements (e.g., curbs, islands, etc.) and circulation markings;
(k) The location, dimensions, layout and surface type of all existing
or proposed internal pedestrian circulation routes and
improvements to be retained, constructed or installed on the
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:879
site, including, without limitation, access points, sidewalks,
marked walkways, circulation elements, and bicycle paths;
(l) The location, dimensions, layout and surface type of all existing
and proposed fire lanes to be retained or constructed on the
site;
(m) The location, dimensions, type of legal interest, legal
description and purpose of any land or interests in land
proposed to be dedicated or reserved on the site for public use;
(n) The existence, nature and areas of the site affected by existing
or proposed deed restrictions or restrictive covenants that may
constrain development;
(o) Soil characteristics of the site; and
(p) The location of all existing or proposed utility connections,
metering facilities, fire hydrants, pumper pads, Fire & Rescue
Department remote fire connections, functioning wells, and
related pumping facilities which will be located on the site or
which are or will be located in adjacent rights-of-way or on
adjacent parcels of land and which will serve the site.
(2) Site plan design standards. In addition to any other applicable
requirements or standards specified in this chapter, the following
requirements or standards shall apply to the site plan:
(a) Natural features of the site shall be incorporated into the
design of the development to the extent practicable.
(b) Floodplains, shorelands and wetlands may be developed or
used only in accordance with applicable Village, state and
federal requirements.
(c) Steep slopes in excess of 20% as measured over a fifty-foot
interval shall not be developed unless appropriate engineering
measures are proposed.
(d) Buildings and structures shall be readily accessible to police
and fire/rescue emergency vehicles.
(e) The location, size, proportion and orientation of buildings and
structures relative to the site and its surroundings shall be
functional and attractive.
(f) The development of a site shall be designed so as to retain
substantial trees or other elements of the site's natural beauty
to the extent practicable in light of the proposed use.
(g) The facade of the building shall be parallel to the adjacent
public street (or, if the street is curved, parallel to a line
connecting the points of intersection of the side lot lines with
§ 420-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:880
the street right-of-way line), unless the site is a minimum of
five acres in area and the building is set back a minimum of
100 feet from all property lines, in which event the building
can be appropriately oriented relative to other surrounding
features; or unless the site is subject to physical or legal
limitations which prevent the building from being parallel to
the public street, in which event care shall be taken to create
a sense of harmony between the building and its surroundings;
or unless the property is located at the corner of an
intersection, in which event the building may be oriented so
that when the plane of its facade is extended it intersects the
right-of-way line of each intersecting street the same distance
from the corner of the intersection of such right-of-way lines
extended.
(h) The site plan shall demonstrate compliance with Article VIII of
this chapter relating to parking, access and traffic.
(i) The number of parking spaces provided for in this chapter are
minimum requirements, and the developer/owner shall ensure
that adequate on-site parking and loading areas are or can be
provided for the proposed use(s) on the site operated at full
potential intensity.
(j) Loading docks and exterior trash enclosures shall be
appropriately screened from view.
(k) Internal vehicular circulation routes shall be clearly separated
from parking and pedestrian areas through the use of
landscaped islands, barrier curbs, lane striping and/or other
appropriate means so as to minimize potential conflicts with
parking and pedestrian areas.
(l) Truck traffic shall be routed to service docking or loading areas
in such a way as to minimize potential conflicts with parking or
pedestrian areas and to avoid any obstruction of public rightsof-
way.
(m) Unless otherwise exempted by the Chief of the Village Fire &
Rescue Department for good cause shown, all circulation lanes
adjoining or in close proximity to the perimeter of the
building(s) shall be designated fire lanes.
(n) There shall be a minimum of a five-foot-wide paved pedestrian
walkway provided between every building entrance or exit and
parking areas and public sidewalks serving such building(s);
all such walkways shall be handicapped accessible.
(o) Pedestrian walkways shall be located and designed so that
sheet drainage shall not be permitted to flow across the
walkway.
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:881
(p) Pedestrian walkways shall generally not have a longitudinal
slope exceeding 5% or a side slope exceeding 2%.
(q) Public and private sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water
facilities shall be constructed in accordance with Village
requirements, and electric, gas, cable television and telephone
facilities shall satisfy state and federal requirements and the
requirements of the respective utility company.
(r) All new on-site electric, gas and communications facilities
serving the site shall be installed underground.
(s) If buildings and/or parking facilities are proposed to be
constructed so as to be located under existing overhead utility
facilities, such facilities shall be relocated underground.
G. Grading and drainage plan.
(1) Grading and drainage plan requirements. A grading and drainage
plan prepared, signed and sealed by a Wisconsin registered
professional engineer shall be filed with the application for site and
operational approval and shall include at least the following
information:
(a) The base document of the grading and drainage plan shall be
the site plan described in Subsection F above, less the required
setback lines.
(b) The existing and proposed topography on the site and
extending at least 50 feet beyond the site (or beyond any
adjacent highway, street or other right-of-way, whichever is
greater), shown by contours related to USGS survey datum at
an interval of one foot.
(c) Top of foundation elevations for all existing and proposed
buildings and structures on the site.
(d) Spot elevations of representative high points and low points, of
wet areas, and of berms, detention basins, retention basins and
other significant site improvements or features.
(e) The location, species, and size of all existing trees on the site
that are eight inches or more in diameter, measured 54 inches
above the natural grade, and whether such trees are proposed
to be retained or removed.
(f) All information required to demonstrate conformance with
Chapter 298, Stormwater Management and Stormwater
Drainage System Facilities, and Chapter 381, Construction
Site Maintenance and Erosion Control, of the Village Code
shall be shown on the plan. [Amended 5-18-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-33]
§ 420-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:882
(g) The location, capacity and dimensions of existing and proposed
stormwater drainage facilities (e.g., storm sewers, manholes,
pipes, curbs, gutters, curb inlets, curb cuts and drainage
grates) to be retained or constructed on site or in adjacent
public rights-of-way to serve the site, together with design
calculations and a drainage basin map.
(h) The location, typical cross sections and slope ratios of all
existing and proposed stormwater retention and detention
areas, swales and drainageways to be retained or constructed
on site or in adjacent rights-of-way to serve the site.
(i) The type, location and installation details of all proposed
erosion control measures.
(j) The locations and dimensions of snow removal storage areas.
(2) Grading and drainage plan design standards. In addition to any
other applicable requirements or standards specified in this
chapter, the following requirements or standards shall apply to the
grading and drainage plan:
(a) The grading and drainage plan shall demonstrate compliance
with Chapter 298, Stormwater Management and Stormwater
Drainage System Facilities, and Chapter 381, Construction
Site Maintenance and Erosion Control, of this Code.
[Amended 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 09-33]
(b) Proposed buildings and uses shall maintain existing
topography and drainage patterns to the extent practicable in
light of the proposed use.
(c) All stormwater basins shall be designed in accordance with
requirements of Chapter 395, Land Division and Development
Control, of this Code.
(d) All storm sewers and related apparatus shall be designed in
accordance with the Village's design specifications set out in
Chapter 298, Stormwater Management and Stormwater
Drainage System Facilities, and Chapter 405, Public
Improvement Projects, of the Village Municipal Code;
provided, however, that parking lot storm sewers may be
designed in accordance with the Wisconsin Department of
Commerce regulations. [Amended 5-18-2009 by Ord. No.
09-33]
(e) Parking lots with more than 25 spaces shall be designed with
storm sewers; storm sewer inlets shall be installed to minimize
sheet drainage and shall be appropriately sized and spaced to
prevent pooling of water and to prevent runoff from adversely
affecting users of the parking lot; such inlets shall not be
located within or immediately adjacent to parking spaces.
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:883
(f) Parking lots shall not be permitted to sheet drain from a
driveway to a public street or highway.119
H. Construction plan.
(1) Construction plan requirements. Construction plans prepared,
signed and sealed by a Wisconsin registered architect or Wisconsin
registered professional engineer, as appropriate, shall be filed with
the application for site and operational plan approval and shall
include at least the following information:
(a) The construction plans shall demonstrate compliance with
Chapter 180, Fire and Rescue Protection, of the Village Code,
and with Chapter 370, Building and Mechanical Code, of the
Village Code.
(b) The construction plans shall be dimensioned, labeled and
drawn to an architectural scale of not less than 1/8 inch equals
one foot.
(c) The construction plans shall include detailed architectural
plans, including, without limitation, elevations, perspective
drawings and sketches illustrating the design and character of
the proposed structures, floor plans, plumbing plans and
details, HVAC plans and details, and building cross sections.
(d) The construction plans shall clearly show room sizes, wall
openings, building projections, and locations of all HVAC and
utility service equipment and connections (e.g., sewer
sampling manhole, utility connections, water meters, etc.) and
indicate the materials (and percent of coverage of such
materials) and colors of all exterior surfaces (e.g., exterior
walls, roofs, window and door trim, etc.).
(e) The location and details of all existing and proposed remote
touch pad units, key boxes, annunciator panels, pull stations,
fire detection devices, fire alarm devices and other safety
devices and systems, including fire suppression, sprinkler,
standpipe, and restaurant hood suppression systems to be
retained or installed.
(f) Detailed plans and specifications for any proposed racking
systems.
(g) Whether or not domestic water and fire protection will be
serviced by the same waterline.
(h) A chart that includes the following information:
119. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(2)(g), concerning the connection of roof leaders to
downspouts, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-18-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-33.
§ 420-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:884
[1] Methods of fire prevention, including, without limitation,
accessibility for the Fire & Rescue Department and its
equipment.
[2] Building height.
[3] Number of stories/floors.
[4] Mezzanines.
[5] Clear space, the height of the finished floor to the ceiling
or the underside of the roof structure.
[6] Elevator size(s).
[7] Hazard class.
[8] Commodity.
[9] Maximum storage height and type of racking system.
[10] Square footage of office space.
[11] Square footage of receiving space.
[12] Square footage of shipping space.
[13] Square footage of warehousing space.
[14] Square footage of manufacturing space.
[15] Location and type of exterior storage.
[16] Fire protection method(s) proposed.
(2) Construction design standards. In addition to any other applicable
requirements or standards specified in this chapter, the following
requirements or standards shall apply to the construction plans
unless specifically modified by the Plan Commission, on a case-bycase
basis: [Amended 10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 12-38]
(a) All buildings and structures shall be constructed of high quality
materials using a high quality of craftsmanship.
(b) All sides, elevations or facades of all buildings or structures
shall be architecturally and aesthetically pleasing, and
buildings shall not be designed to be so unorthodox or
abnormal as to be unsightly or offensive.
(c) All buildings shall provide for varying rooflines and
architectural features that provide dimension and pitch.
(d) All roof-mounted mechanical or electrical equipment shall be
architecturally screened.
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:885
(e) Any pedestal-mounted or ground-mounted mechanical or
electrical equipment shall be screened on all sides using
materials identical to or complementary to the materials used
in the principal building.
(f) Colors used on buildings and structures shall be
architecturally and aesthetically pleasing, and garish,
unsightly or offensive colors shall not be used; provided,
however, that signs for a particular company or business may
utilize well known colors associated with that particular
company or business.
(g) Exterior walls of all principal or accessory buildings shall be
constructed of the following materials:
[1] Facing materials shall consist of any of the following
materials; provided, however, that brick, decorative
concrete block or any stone facing materials shall not be
painted or stained, and further provided that the balance
of the exterior walls shall be covered with either approved
facing materials or approved decorative accent materials:
[a] Standard, queen, jumbo or utility bricks with a
minimum thickness of two inches, covering a
minimum of 70% (by area) of each exterior elevation.
[b] Decorative concrete block, covering a minimum of
70% (by area) of each exterior elevation.
[c] Lannon stone or other stone, covering a minimum of
70% (by area) of each exterior elevation.
[d] Architectural precast concrete on manufacturing or
warehouse buildings in a manufacturing or
agricultural zoning district, or on park and
recreational buildings over 50,000 square feet in a
park and recreational zoning district, covering a
minimum of 70% (by area) of each exterior elevation.
[e] Spandrel glass on office buildings in the B-5 Zoning
District, covering a minimum of 70% (by area) of each
exterior elevation.
(h) Decorative accents (e.g., lintels, wall accent bands, cornice or
base elements, parapet walls or other architectural features)
may use only the following materials; provided, however, that
parapet walls shall be constructed of materials that match the
building exterior and that brick, decorative concrete block or
stone decorative accents shall not be painted or stained:
§ 420-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:886
[1] Standard, queen, jumbo or utility bricks with a minimum
thickness of two inches, covering a maximum of 30% (by
area) of each exterior elevation.
[2] Decorative concrete block, covering a maximum of 30%
(by area) of each exterior elevation.
[3] Lannon stone or other stone, covering a maximum of 30%
(by area) of each exterior elevation.
[4] Architectural precast concrete, covering a maximum of
30% (by area) of each exterior elevation.
[5] Spandrel glass, covering a maximum of 30% (by area) of
each exterior elevation.
[6] Stucco or exterior insulation finish systems (EIFS),
covering a maximum of 30% (by area) on or above the
second story of each exterior elevation.
(i) Roofing materials that are visible to the public shall be
constructed of the following materials; provided, however, that
all roof material colors shall be complementary to the exterior
wall materials and that asphalt, slate, metal or copper roofs
shall not be painted or stained (except that factory finishes on
metal roofs shall be acceptable):
[1] Asphalt architectural grade shingles with high texture.
[2] Slate.
[3] Cedar shakes.
[4] Standing seam metal roofing on buildings in a park and
recreational zoning district and in all zoning districts on
architectural features.
[5] Copper or anodized aluminum on architectural features in
all zoning districts.
(j) Window and door frames shall comply with the following
requirements:
[1] Windows shall be architectural grade window systems
with a metal or vinyl closed exterior and wood or
aluminum interior.
[2] Door frames shall match window frames in material, finish
and color.
[3] Building windows may be clear, tinted or mirrored.
(k) Garbage enclosures for storage of solid wastes and recyclables
shall comply with the following requirements:
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:887
[1] All dumpsters and other trash receptacles shall be stored
in an enclosed structure and screened from view from all
street rights-of-way and adjacent residential uses.
[2] Garbage enclosures shall be large enough to include all
solid waste related to the uses in the principal building(s)
located on the site.
[3] Garbage enclosures shall be located on a paved surface.
[4] Garbage enclosures are not required to be under a roof;
provided, however, that if a garbage enclosure will be used
for the storage of equipment or other materials, the
structure shall include a roof.
[5] Garbage enclosures shall be constructed of the same
materials as the principal building or of materials that are
complementary to the materials used in the principal
building.
[6] The opening to a garbage enclosure shall be gated using a
nine-gauge chain link fence with slats that are
complementary to the building color or cedar fence boards
that are stained or painted a color complementary to the
building color and attached to a heavy-duty metal frame.
[7] The gated opening to garbage enclosures shall remain
closed and secured when not in use.
I. Lighting plan.
(1) Lighting plan requirements. An exterior lighting plan shall be filed
with the application for site and operational plan approval and shall
include at least the following information:
(a) The base document for the lighting plan shall be the site plan
described in Subsection F above.
(b) The location of all existing and proposed outdoor lighting
fixtures to be retained or installed on the site, together with
catalog cuts or specifications for all such existing and proposed
exterior lighting fixtures, including, without limitation, the
type and intensity.
(c) Photometric plan of the illuminating effect on the site and on
adjacent real property and adjacent public rights-of-way of all
existing and proposed exterior lighting fixtures to be retained
or installed on the site.
(2) Lighting plan standards. In addition to any other applicable
requirements or standards specified in this chapter, the following
requirements or standards shall apply to the lighting plan:
§ 420-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:888
(a) Light fixtures shall be selected with care to ensure that they
are styled and appropriately scaled to ensure that they are
functionally and aesthetically compatible with the character of
their surroundings.
(b) Luminaries shall be located, aimed and shielded so as to
minimize glare.
(c) The maximum allowable light spillover to an adjacent
residential property shall be 0.5 footcandle measured at the
property line, four feet above grade; for all other adjacent uses,
the maximum allowable light spillover shall be 0.75 average
footcandle, measured in the same manner.
(d) Lighting levels shall be measured in footcandles with a directreading,
portable light meter, as follows:
[1] The meter sensor shall be mounted not more than four feet
above the ground line in a horizontal position.
[2] Readings shall be taken only after the cell has been
exposed long enough to provide a constant reading.
[3] Measurements shall be made after dark, first with the light
sources in question on, then with the same sources off.
[4] The difference between the two readings shall be
compared to the maximum permitted illumination.
(e) All lighting wires/cables shall be placed underground.
(f) Accent lighting should be used to highlight architectural and
landscape design elements when appropriate.
(g) Illumination of uses shall meet the minimum standards of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IES).
(h) Pedestrian walkways and parking areas shall be illuminated to
a sufficient level so as to provide for reasonable security.
(i) Lights in a parking lot shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
(j) Pedestrian lights shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
(k) Lights for ball fields and other outdoor recreational uses in a
park and recreational zoning district shall not exceed 100 feet
in height.
(l) Lights required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
shall be exempt from the standards of this Subsection I, except
that such lights shall not be white or blinking unless
specifically required by the FAA.
J. Landscape and open space plan.
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:889
(1) Landscape and open space plan requirements. A landscape and
open space plan shall be filed with the application for site and
operational plan approval and shall include at least the following
information:
(a) The base document for the landscape and open space plan
shall be the grading and drainage plan described in Subsection
G above.
(b) The location of all existing or proposed landscaping (e.g., trees,
shrubs, flowers, ground cover, mowed grass, natural cover and
nonliving ground cover, etc.) to be retained or installed on the
site; any existing landscaping to be removed shall be clearly
identified.
(c) The plants on the plans shall be drawn to scale in relation to
mature spread.
(d) A chart shall be provided on the plans that shows the following:
[1] Scientific and common names of all existing and proposed
plants.
[2] Proposed quantity of plants or materials.
[3] Installation size and height.
[4] Intended maintained size and/or mature size (height and
spread).
[5] Square footage of parking lot area.
[6] Square footage and of interior parking lot landscaped area
and the percentage of total parking lot area represented
by such landscaped area.
[7] Square footage of open space on the site.
(e) Description of how plantings and buffer areas will be
maintained, including location of any irrigation systems.
(f) All existing and proposed street trees to be retained or planted
in the street rights-of-way adjacent to the site.
(2) Landscape and open space design standards. In addition to all
other applicable landscape and open space requirements or
standards specified in this chapter, the following requirements and
standards shall apply:
(a) All areas of the site that are not impervious, exclusive of
landscape elements or landscaped planting beds, or wetlands
or other areas approved for natural growth because of
environmental concerns, shall be seeded or sodded and
maintained in a manicured condition.
§ 420-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:890
(b) Aesthetically pleasing foundation landscaping shall be
installed around those portions of the pervious perimeter of
principal buildings used for business or institutional uses
which are visible from public rights-of-way or residential
districts.
(c) Loading docks and garbage enclosures which are visible from
public rights-of-way or residential districts shall be screened
by aesthetically pleasing landscaping.
(d) Parking lots associated with manufacturing, business or
institutional uses shall be screened from public rights-of-way
and/or residential zoning districts located within 50 feet of
such parking lots; such screening shall be installed in close
proximity to the parking lot and shall be seventy-percent
opaque to a height of at least four feet above the grade of the
nearest edge of such parking lot within three years of
installation and may consist of shrubs and trees, an
appropriately landscaped undulating berm or a cedar board (or
other comparable approved) fence, with the finished side
facing out and with sufficient landscaping installed in front to
break the stark line of the fence, or a decorative masonry
block, brick or stone wall with sufficient landscaping installed
in front to break the stark line of the wall; provided, however,
that screening from a public right-of-way for a parking lot used
as a motor vehicle sales area may be reduced to two feet above
the grade of the nearest edge of such parking lot.
(e) Parking lots and internal circulation routes associated with
business uses involving substantial volumes of drive-through
traffic (e.g., fast-food restaurants, gasoline stations, drive-in
financial institutions, etc.) shall be screened from residential
districts adjacent to the site of such use; such screening may
be installed either in close proximity to the parking lot or
circulation route or at the perimeter of the site; such screening
shall be seventy-percent opaque to a height of six feet above
the grade of the nearest edge of such parking lot or circulation
route within three years after installation and may consist of
shrubs and trees, an appropriately landscaped undulating
berm, or a cedar board (or other comparable approved) fence
with the finished side facing out and with sufficient
landscaping installed in front (if practicable or, if not, behind)
to break the stark line of the fence, or a decorative masonry
block wall with sufficient landscaping installed in front (if
practicable or, if not, behind) to break the stark line of the wall.
(f) Manufacturing, business and institutional uses shall install
sufficient scattered landscaping on the site to break the lines of
buildings and unscreened parking lots and to make the site
aesthetically pleasing.
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:891
(g) Adverse effects of manufacturing, business and institutional
uses and related operations on the site upon adjoining owners
or uses shall be minimized by appropriate screening, fencing,
or landscaping.
(h) Detailed description of a landscape maintenance program that
will ensure that approved landscaping is maintained and
replaced as needed shall be provided.
(i) All required landscaping or screening shall be installed prior to
occupancy, and written verification and/or certification shall be
provided to the Village by the landscape designer that the
landscaping has been installed in accordance with the
approved landscape plan prior to the issuance of a certificate
of compliance/occupancy (if weather conditions prevent
installation of all or portions of the landscape materials, the
developer, owner or occupant shall enter into a written
agreement with the Village that specifies the date by which all
approved landscaping shall be completed and grants the
Village a temporary easement to complete the landscaping if
not timely completed and shall deposit with the Village Clerk a
cash deposit, an irrevocable letter of credit, or other financial
assurance approved by the Zoning Administrator to ensure
timely completion of all required landscaping; the amount of
the financial assurance shall be equal to 110% of the
contracted amount to complete the landscaping improvements
in order to reasonably compensate the Village for the cost of
completion of any landscaping improvements not completed
within the specified time).
(j) One street tree per 50 feet of public street frontage shall be
planted when such trees are not already present in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 395, Land Division and
Development Control, of this Code.
(k) An irrigation system shall be required for new principal
buildings for landscaping around the foundation and for
landscaping to screen any parking lot.
(l) Each parking lot island or peninsula shall have at least one
deciduous tree two inches in diameter at a height of 54 inches
above the grade installed (and an additional deciduous tree for
every 18 feet of island or peninsula length over 10 feet),
together with a variety of appropriate shrubs and ground
cover.
K. Signage plan. With respect to all proposed signs, and all proposed
modifications of existing signs, the applicant shall file with the
application for site and operation plan approval a signage plan that
satisfies the sign permit application requirements of Article X of this
chapter, unless review of the signage plan is deferred pursuant to
§ 420-57 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-57
344:892
§ 420-55G above. With respect to all existing signs, the applicant shall
file with the application for site and operational plan approval
photographs of all such existing signs pursuant to Subsection A(9)
above and shall specify in the written statement accompanying each
such photograph of a sign the dimensions of such sign. (Article X of this
chapter specifies how certain types of signs are to be measured.)
L. Industrial/commercial waste survey. The applicant shall complete and
file with the application for site and operational plan approval an
industrial/commercial waste survey form prepared by the Kenosha
Water Utility and obtained from the Village Department of Community
Development.
M. Performance standards compliance plan. The applicant shall prepare
and file with the application for site and operational plan approval a
narrative statement explaining in detail how the applicant will comply
with each performance standard set out in § 420-38 of this chapter
which is of concern in light of the use(s) and operations to be conducted
on the site.
N. Additional requirements. The applicant shall file with the application
for site and operational plan approval, or supplement such application
with, any other or additional information or materials that may
reasonably be required by the Zoning Administrator or the Plan
Commission based upon the particular facts and circumstances of the
application and the proposed use(s) and operation(s) to be conducted
on the site. Without limitation, and by way of illustration only, such
additional requirements may include the following:
(1) If poor quality soils are present, a geotechnical engineering report
from a qualified engineering firm may be required to ensure that
the proposed development or certain aspects thereof can be
successfully built as proposed.
(2) If maintenance of private drainage improvements is a concern,
drainage easements may be required to ensure compliance with
the grading and drainage plan requirements.
(3) If the capacity of adjacent streets or highways is in question, a
traffic impact study may be required.
(4) If environmental impacts are in question, an environmental impact
study may be required.
(5) If historic sites are threatened, a historic site impact study may be
required.
§ 420-57 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-57
344:893

ARTICLE X
Signs, Flags, Festoons and Lights
§ 420-58. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the use of outdoor signs, flags,
festoons and lights; to provide for signs and related devices which are
functional, attractive and safe and which satisfy the reasonable needs of
owners and users of real property and of the public; to maintain and
enhance the aesthetic environment of the Village; to protect property
values; to promote vehicular and pedestrian safety; and to clarify the rights
and duties of owners and users of nonconforming signs.
§ 420-59. Definitions.
The definitions set out below shall apply to this article and shall control with
respect to signs, flags, festoons and lights, in the event of any inconsistency
between such definitions and the definitions set out in Article XXI of this
chapter. The following definitions are not necessarily intended to be
mutually exclusive, e.g., because signs in this chapter are classified both by
function and by physical characteristics.
ACCESSORY SIGN — A sign that is accessory to a particular principal
use of the property on which the sign is located, as distinguished from
a principal use sign, a principal structure sign or an off-site sign. (Note
that pursuant to § 420-78T of this chapter, nonconforming accessory signs
are not nonconforming uses; that the right to continue an accessory sign
after it becomes nonconforming does not necessarily run with the land;
and that the nonconformity must be cured when such a sign becomes
obsolete, or when such a sign is destroyed or damaged to the extent of more
than 50% of the cost of its replacement, or when the cumulative cost of
structural alterations, modifications or repairs exceeds 50% of the cost of
its replacement.)
AGGREGATE PERMITTED BACKGROUND COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING
SIGN AREA — The total area of commercial advertising signs that is
permitted to exist on a property used for any business, manufacturing,
institutional, recreational or agricultural purpose or use, exclusive of
primary monument signs (or related sign area allowances), secondary
monument signs, freeway signs (or related sign area allowances), other
identification signs, drive-through customer information signs, on-site
information signs, window signs (nonilluminated) or any temporary signs.
(Note that pursuant to § 420-78V of this chapter, freestanding signs are not
permitted for background commercial advertising sign purposes.)
AGRICULTURAL BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A freestanding
single-faced or two-faced back-to-back or angled sign located in an
agricultural zoning district that identifies an agriculture-related business,
other than farming, which is operated on the property where the sign is
located.
§ 420-58 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-59
344:895
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A freestanding
single-faced or two-faced back-to-back or angled sign or a wall sign which
advertises the sale of agricultural products on the property where the sign
is located.
ANGLED SIGN — A freestanding or projecting two-faced sign whose faces
are connected at one end and form an angle of not more than 90°.
APPLICANT (for a sign permit or a sign special exception permit) — The
owner or user of the property on which a sign is proposed to be located
or modified who/which is seeking a sign permit or sign special exception
permit. (Note that pursuant to § 420-62 of this chapter, the applicant may
designate an agent to act for the applicant in connection with such
application.)
AREA (of a single-faced sign or of a single face of a sign having more than
one face) — Except as otherwise specifically provided below, the area of a
sign (or the area of a single face of a sign having more than one face) is
the area of the smallest horizontally and vertically oriented rectangle that
fully encloses the extreme limits of the message, writing, emblem, logo,
symbol or other graphic or pictorial representation on the face of a sign and
any background panel, surface or color which forms the backdrop of the
message or other graphic or pictorial representation or which differentiates
the message or other graphic or pictorial representation from the structure
on or against which the sign mounted, placed or depicted, together with
any related framing, but excluding any differentiated sign base or other
differentiated supporting structure or apparatus of the sign other than such
background panel, surface or color and related framing.
The area of a single face of a three-dimensional sign is the area of
the smallest horizontally and vertically oriented rectangle that fully
encloses the one-dimensional outline of such sign, produced at the
same scale as the sign itself and from the perspective from which the
outer dimensions of such sign are most extensive, exclusive of any
differentiated sign base or other differentiated supporting structure or
apparatus. (Note that pursuant to the definition of "three-dimensional
sign" in this section, any three-dimensional primary monument sign is
deemed to have two sides.)
A.
The area of a wall sign, canopy sign or roof sign consisting only of
words, letters, numerals, characters and/or symbols, with no
differentiated background panel, material or color other than the
surface of the wall, canopy or roof itself, is the area of the smallest
horizontally and vertically oriented rectangle that fully encloses such
words, letters, numerals, characters and/or symbols, exclusive of
decorative striping. [Each word, phrase, number, character or symbol
or each group of related words, letters, numerals, characters and/or
symbols that functions as an independent message (but excluding the
street address) shall be enclosed within a single rectangle for this
purpose.]
B.
§ 420-59 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-59
344:896
ARTERIAL STREET OR HIGHWAY — The following are arterial streets or
highways in the Village of Pleasant Prairie: all state and county highways,
Cooper Road (75th Street/STH 50 to 93rd Street), Bain Station Road, 7th
Avenue (corporate limits to 91st Street), 52nd Avenue (corporate limits
to 75th Street/STH 50), 85th Street (39th Avenue/CTH EZ to Green Bay
Road/STH 31), 91st Street (22nd Avenue to Sheridan Road/STH 32), 93rd
Street (30th Avenue to Green Bay Road/STH 31), 95th Street (Green Bay
Road/STH 31 to 88th Avenue/CTH H), 104th Avenue (75th Street/STH 50
to Wilmot Road/CTH C), 116th Street (Sheridan Road/STH 32 to Green Bay
Road/STH 31), and 120th Avenue (I-94 frontage road, east and west).
AUTOMOBILE SIGN — A sign painted or mounted on an automobile.
BACKGROUND COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING SIGN — A commercial
advertising sign exclusive of the following types of signs: primary
monument signs, secondary monument signs, freeway signs, other
identification signs, drive-through customer information signs, on-site
information signs, window signs (nonilluminated) or any temporary signs.
(Note that pursuant to § 420-78V of this chapter, freestanding signs are not
permitted for background commercial advertising sign purposes.)
BACK-TO-BACK SIGN — A freestanding or projecting two-faced sign whose
faces are connected, parallel, oriented in opposite directions and not more
than four feet apart.
BASE (of a sign) — The solid, solid-appearing or enclosed foundation or
supporting structure of a freestanding sign, which is differentiated from the
display, and which appears to directly support at least 75% of the horizontal
dimension of the display of the sign. Although the base of a sign is generally
the lower portion of the sign, that is not necessarily a defining characteristic
of a sign base. (See Illustration 6 in Appendix A, incorporated herein by
reference, which illustrates a variety of acceptable sign bases.) The base of
a sign is to be distinguished from supporting structural elements which are
neither solid, solid appearing nor enclosed (e.g., two posts) or which do not
appear to directly support at least 75% of the horizontal dimension of the
sign display (e.g., a single post or pole).
BUILDING ADDRESS SIGN — A wall sign mounted near the main entrance
of a principal building, and under certain circumstances a freestanding sign
located in front of a principal building, which is comprised of the numerals
forming the numerical portion of the street address of the building.
BUILDING FLOOR AREA — The floor area of a principal building, based on
the exterior dimensions of the building and the number of floors (but in the
event of partial floors, counting only the area of such partial floors), less the
area of any floor or any partial floor which is in an area of the building that
is not fully enclosed, or is not heated, or is used for parking.
The area of a primary monument sign does not include the street
address appearing on the base of the sign but does include the space
between separate display areas.
C.
§ 420-59 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-59
344:897
BUILDING MARKER SIGN — The name or date of a building cut, molded or
cast into any masonry surface of the building or cut, molded or cast into a
masonry or metal plaque affixed flat against the wall of a building.
BULLETIN BOARD SIGN — A changeable copy wall sign used to display
information relating to meetings and other activities of a public, charitable
or religious entity located or operating on the property where the sign is
located.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign mounted or displayed on or otherwise incorporated
into a canopy or awning and which does not extend beyond any horizontal
or vertical edge of the canopy or awning or appear to do so from the
perspective of the intended viewers. (Note that pursuant § 420-73H of this
chapter, decorative striping on a canopy does not constitute a canopy sign.)
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign whose message, or a portion thereof,
can be manually changed from time to time.
CLEARANCE (with respect to a sign) — The vertical distance from the
bottom of the display of a projecting sign to the ground surface or pavement
below, or to the highest elevation of such ground surface or pavement if it
is sloped under the sign.
COMING SOON SIGN — A temporary plastic or fabric wall sign advertising
or announcing a business or other entity that has made legally binding
arrangements to locate in the building where the sign is located within the
next 90 days.
COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which advertises, announces
or draws attention to any business or any other person, entity, place,
event or activity involved in the production of revenue (whether for profit
or not for profit) or which advertises, announces or draws attention to
any products, goods, services, activities, properties or other things for
sale, rent, trade or otherwise available in exchange for compensation or
other consideration. (Note that pursuant to the definitions of "aggregate
permitted background commercial advertising sign area" and "background
commercial advertising sign" in this section, not all commercial advertising
signs are counted toward the aggregate permitted background commercial
advertising sign area.)
COMMUNITY BANNER SIGN — A temporary fabric or plastic sign
displayed within a public street or highway right-of-way to advertise or
announce a special event that is open to the public and of interest to
a substantial portion of the community, but excluding commercial
promotional events at a merchant's place of business or at a shopping
center or mall.
CONTRACTOR SIGN — A temporary freestanding single-faced or two-faced
back-to-back sign identifying a contractor currently doing remodeling,
roofing, paving, painting or other similar work on the property where the
sign is located.
COST (of a new sign or of alterations, repairs or other modifications to
an existing sign) — The total cost of a new sign, or the total cost of any
§ 420-59 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-59
344:898
alterations, repairs or other modifications to an existing sign, including but
not limited to parts, materials and labor, and design, fabrication, painting,
purchase, installation, construction, wiring and lighting and any related site
work.
CURE (with respect to a violation or nonconformity relating to a sign) —
To remove the sign or otherwise eliminate the violation of or nonconformity
with this article pursuant to and in accordance with a valid sign permit or
sign special exception permit.
DECORATIVE POLE SIGN — Under certain very limited circumstances, a
freestanding commercial advertising sign that is suspended or projected
from a decorative pole.
DILAPIDATED SIGN — A sign that has become unsafe, unsightly or
otherwise in need of maintenance or repairs. (Note that pursuant to
§ 420-78H and Q of this chapter, a dilapidated sign is subject to removal by
the Village at the cost of the owner if not timely removed or otherwise cured
following service of a notice of violation.)
DISPLAY (of a sign) — The message, writing, emblem, logo, symbol or
any other graphic or pictorial representation on a sign, including any
background panel, surface or color which forms the backdrop of such
message or other graphic or pictorial representation or which differentiates
the message or other graphic or pictorial representation from the structure
on or against which it is mounted, placed or depicted, together with any
related framing, but excluding any differentiated sign base or other
differentiated supporting structure or other apparatus of the sign, other
than such background panel, surface or color and related framing.
DISTANCE (of a sign from a boundary or object) — Measured horizontally
from the vertical extension of the closest part of such sign to the vertical
extension of the closest part of such boundary or object, excluding any
building or other structure or object on which the sign is mounted which
exists independently of the sign.
DRIVE-THROUGH CUSTOMER INFORMATION SIGN — A sign providing
information to drive-through customers who are already on site, relating
to specific products, goods or services available on the property where the
sign is located; such signs are not directed to off-site passing motorists or
pedestrians.
ELECTION SIGN — A temporary freestanding single-faced or two-faced
back-to-back or angled sign relating to a candidate, political party or
proposition involved in a scheduled election.
ELECTRONIC CHANGING MESSAGE SIGN — A sign whose message, or a
portion thereof, changes frequently by means of electronic devices.
ELECTRONIC SCROLLING SIGN — A sign whose message, or a portion
thereof, changes in a scrolling fashion by means of electronic devices.
EXEMPT SIGN — A sign that is not regulated by this article.
§ 420-59 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-59
344:899
FACE (of a sign) — The side of a sign on which a message or other display
appears. (Note that under § 420-78B of this chapter, a sign may have
only one face unless otherwise expressly authorized by this article.) Any
three-dimensional primary monument sign allowed by this chapter shall be
deemed to have two faces for purposes of determining its area.
FARM IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A freestanding single-faced or two-faced
back-to-back or angled sign that identifies a farming operation conducted
on the property where the sign is located.
FESTOON — A string of lights, tinsel, pennants, pinwheels or other similar
devices hanging between two points.
FLAG — Any individual flag, banner, pennant, streamer or standard, but
excluding a community banner sign.
FLAGPOLE — The pole or staff to which a flag is attached, provided that the
height or length of such pole or staff exceeds 10 feet.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A ground-mounted sign having its own dedicated
base or support system, as distinguished from a sign mounted on or
displayed from a building, structure or object existing independently of the
sign.
FREEWAY SIGN — A freestanding single-faced or two-faced back-to-back
sign or wall sign that advertises to vehicular traffic on or exiting from
the freeway (and to local traffic as well) the identity and presence on the
property where the sign is located of one or more individual retail business
uses or an aggregation of retail business uses in a unified development,
which at that location are largely dependent for their customer base on
freeway traffic, including gasoline filling stations with or without
convenience stores, restaurants, hotels, and motels, and also including
major shopping centers, shopping malls or other major retail stores or
outlets which, individually or collectively as a unified development, exceed
100,000 square feet in building floor area.
FRONTAGE — The length of a property measured along any abutting public
street or highway right-of-way line.
HEIGHT —
Height of a sign: the vertical distance from the ground surface or
pavement under the sign (or nearest to being under the sign in a
situation where some portion of a building or structure is directly
beneath the sign, or from the mean elevation of the ground surface or
pavement under the sign in a situation where the grade changes) to the
top or highest point of the sign. In a situation where the sign is located
on an artificially increased elevation relative to the surrounding terrain
(as on a berm), the difference between such artificially increased
elevation and the elevation of the ground surface in the absence of such
artificially increased elevation is included in the height of the sign.
A.
Height as applied to the portion of the sign base located directly
under the sign display: the vertical distance from the ground surface
B.
§ 420-59 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-59
344:900
HOME OCCUPATION IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A wall sign which
identifies and provides basic information about a home occupation operated
on the property where the sign is located pursuant to an approved home
occupation permit, which may include the name of the home occupation,
the name of the person conducting the home occupation, the street address,
telephone number and/or hours of operation of the home occupation.
HORIZONTAL DIMENSION (of the display of a sign) — The horizontal
dimension of the smallest horizontally and vertically oriented rectangle that
fully encloses the display of a sign.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Any primary monument sign, secondary
monument sign, freestanding freeway sign, nonresidential development
identification sign, agricultural business identification sign, agricultural
products identification sign, farm identification sign, multifamily residential
development identification sign, single-family/duplex development
identification sign or home occupation identification sign.
ILLEGAL SIGN — Any sign which is in violation of this article, including,
without limitation, the following: any nonconforming sign that was initially
installed or constructed other than in full compliance with all applicable
requirements of this article or of the then-applicable requirements of any
zoning ordinance or code, or other than in full compliance with any permit
required for such sign; or any nonconforming sign that has been reinstalled,
reconstructed, relocated, enlarged, extended, altered or otherwise modified
(including any modification of the sign's message or other display) without
a required permit, or other than in full compliance with all applicable
requirements of this article or all applicable requirements of the thenapplicable
requirements of any zoning ordinance or code, or other than
in full compliance with any permit required for such modification; or any
nonconforming principal use, principal structure or off-site sign that has
ceased to be a valid nonconforming use; or any obsolete sign or dilapidated
sign existing as such for more than 30 days. (Note that pursuant to
§ 420-78H of this chapter, an illegal sign is subject to removal by the Village
at the cost of the owner if not timely removed or otherwise cured following
service of a notice of violation.)
INCIDENTAL SIGN — Any nonfreestanding sign the area of which is one
square foot or less.
INTENTIONAL VIOLATION — A violation of this article which continues for
more than 30 days after the date of service of a notice of such violation
by the Village. Each day that an intentional violation continues constitutes
a separate intentional violation. (Note that pursuant to § 420-78G, the
minimal forfeiture for each intentional violation is $250.)
LANDSCAPING (with respect to a sign) — Low-growing shrubs, ground
cover, or perennial and/or annual flowers that reasonably and attractively
or pavement under the sign (or from the mean elevation of the ground
surface or pavement under the sign in a situation where the grade
changes) to the top or highest point of that portion of the base which is
directly under the display of the sign.
§ 420-59 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-59
344:901
fill a worked bed of the required dimensions around the base or other
supporting structure of a freestanding sign.
MEMORIAL SIGN — A wall sign memorializing a person or event.
MODEL HOME SIGN — A temporarily freestanding single-faced or twofaced
back-to-back sign which identifies an unoccupied dwelling as a
demonstration unit for purposes of selling or renting other similar dwelling
units.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IDENTIFICATION SIGN —
A freestanding single-faced or two-faced back-to-back or angled sign
located within a multifamily residential development which identifies the
development and which may optionally include the owner's or manager's
name, logo and telephone number.
NEIGHBORHOOD SIGN — A temporary freestanding single-faced or twofaced
back-to-back sign relating to an individual or family event or
occurrence in a residential neighborhood, such as a garage sale sign, a
lemonade stand sign, a welcome home sign, or a congratulatory sign.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign that does not conform to the current
requirements of this article. Depending upon the circumstances, a
nonconforming sign may be an illegal sign; or it may be a valid
nonconforming use sign if it is a principal use sign, a principal structure
sign or an off-site sign which is allowed to continue, subject to certain
restrictions, so long as it continues to satisfy all of the tests for a valid
nonconforming use; or it may be a valid nonconforming accessory sign
which is allowed to continue, subject to certain restrictions, pursuant to
§ 420-78T of this chapter. (See definitions for "valid nonconforming use
sign" and "valid nonconforming accessory sign.")
NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A
freestanding single-faced or two-faced back-to-back or angled sign located
within a nonresidential development which identifies the development and
which may optionally include the developer's name and logo, and which
does not advertise any individual businesses or other entities located within
the development. [Note that pursuant to § 420-76R(2), only a nonresidential
unified development encompassing a minimum of 100 acres, exclusive of
public streets and highways, is eligible for such a sign.]
NO PERMIT SIGN — A sign which is regulated by this article but for which
no sign permit or sign special exception permit is required.
OBJECT SIGN — A nonfreestanding sign mounted on an object other than a
building or a structure.
OBSOLETE SIGN — A sign that advertises, announces or directs attention
to a business, product, service, place, activity, event, person, entity, feature,
object, destination, hazard, prohibition or restriction which is past or no
longer existent, or which is no longer located or available on the property
where the sign is located or at the location stated on the sign. (Note that
pursuant to § 420-78P of this chapter, an obsolete sign is subject to removal
§ 420-59 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-59
344:902
by the Village at the cost of the owner if not timely removed or otherwise
cured following service of a notice of violation.)
OFFICIAL PUBLIC SIGN — A sign installed or constructed by the Village, or
some other federal, state or local governmental authority or public utility, to
protect, preserve or foster the public health, safety, convenience or welfare.
OFF-SITE SIGN — Any sign which advertises, announces, or directs
attention to a business, product, service, place, property, activity, event,
person or object not located, operating, manufactured, for sale, for rent
or otherwise available on the real property where the sign is located, or
which states or expresses a belief, idea, concept or position unrelated to a
business, person, product, service, place, activity, event, or object located,
living, operating, manufactured, for sale, for rent or otherwise available on
the property where the sign is located (other than by virtue of the sign itself
or a related lease or license arrangement); a billboard or other sign for rent
is an off-site sign.
ON-SITE INFORMATION SIGN — A freestanding single-faced or two-faced
back-to-back or angled sign (or when pedestrian-oriented, a solid-appearing
freestanding sign having three or four interconnected faces, the cross
section of which is a triangle or square, provided that the thickness of
the sign does not exceed four feet) or a wall or structure sign providing
information and/or direction to customers, employees, invitees, visitors and/
or vendors who are already on site, relating to matters such as directions
to on-site destinations, entrances and exits, parking areas or safety
regulations, but not relating to businesses, products, goods or services that
are available on site other than as destinations. On-site information signs
are mutually exclusive of commercial advertising signs. The appearance of a
small logo on on-site information signs, associated with the owner, occupant
or user of the property where the signs are located, does not convert an onsite
information sign to a different type of sign, but an on-site information
sign cannot be directed to off-site passing motorists or pedestrians (except
entrance and exit signs).
OUTDOOR (with respect to signs, flags, festoons and lights) — Located
outdoors or located within a building or structure but having as its principal
purpose to be visible from outside the building or structure (e.g., an
illuminated beer sign in the front window of a tavern).
PANEL — The rigid flat surface of a typical sign on which the display
appears and which often forms the background for the message or other
graphic or pictorial representation in the display.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited liability partnership, joint venture, city, village, town,
county, state, trust, estate, agency, association or any other entity.
PERSONAL MESSAGE SIGN — A temporary freestanding single-faced or
two-faced back-to-back sign stating beliefs, ideas, concepts or positions
of or asserted by the owner or user of the property where the sign is
located, and under certain circumstances a nonfreestanding sign of the
§ 420-59 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-59
344:903
same function substituted for permitted background commercial
advertising signs.
PRIMARY ENTRANCE — An unrestricted driveway used generally by
customers, tenants, employees, invitees, visitors and/or vendors to access
a property used for purposes other than single-family or two-family
residential or agricultural.
PRIMARY MONUMENT SIGN — A freestanding single-faced or two-faced
back-to-back or angled sign situated on a solid or solid-appearing base,
having one or more display areas, which identifies all individual businesses
or other entities or uses located or operating on the property where the sign
is located or, alternatively, which identifies a unified development located or
operating on the property where the sign is located (e.g., a shopping center
or shopping mall), and which optionally identifies one or more individual
businesses or other entities located or operating in the unified development
(e.g., the names of the anchor stores in a shopping mall).
PRINCIPAL USE OR PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE SIGN — A sign that is itself a
principal use of and/or a principal structure on the property on which it is
located, as distinguished from an accessory sign.
PRIVATE WARNING SIGN — A privately installed single-faced freestanding,
wall or structure sign containing a cautionary message, such as a "beware
of dog" sign or a "no trespassing" sign.
PROJECTING SIGN — A single-faced or two-faced back-to-back or angled
sign that is attached to an exterior wall of a building and extends more than
12 inches from the surface of such wall.
PROPERTY (with respect to a sign) — All of the real property (including
all of the tax key parcels) involved in the particular use(s) or the unified
development to which an accessory sign relates (or in a unified
development, for certain purposes, the area occupied by a particular
business or other entity to which an accessory sign relates), or the tax key
parcel on which a principal use sign, principal structure sign, or an off-site
sign is located. (See definition of "site", which is synonymous.)
PUBLIC INTEREST SIGN — A freestanding single-faced or two-faced backto-
back or angled sign (or, when pedestrian-oriented, a solid-appearing
freestanding sign having three or four interconnected faces, the cross
section of which is a triangle or square) that identifies and optionally
describes the significance of a conservancy or preservation area, a parkway,
waterway, scenic way or ethnic, archaeological, or historical site or trail,
or other site or feature of public interest. A public information sign may
incidentally identify the sponsor of the sign.
REAL ESTATE MARKETING SIGN — A temporary freestanding single-faced
or two-faced back-to-back or angled sign that advertises the sale or lease
of all or part of the real property on which the sign is located and which
is larger, includes more information, and is subject to more stringent
regulations than a real estate sign.
§ 420-59 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-59
344:904
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary freestanding single-faced or two-faced
back-to-back sign or wall sign that advertises the sale or lease of all or part
of the real property on which the sign is located and which may include the
name and telephone number of the person selling the property.
ROOF SIGN — A sign mounted on or attached to the roof of a building.
[Note that pursuant to § 420-76X(2), all parts of a roof sign must be within
12 inches of the surface of the roof, and no part of the sign may actually
extend above or beyond any horizontal or vertical edge of the roof or appear
to do so from the perspective of the intended viewers.]
SECONDARY ENTRANCE — A restricted driveway (e.g., designated for
deliveries or vendors only) which is used to access a property used for
purposes other than single-family residential, two-family residential or
agricultural.
SECONDARY MONUMENT SIGN — A freestanding single-faced or twofaced
back-to-back or angled sign situated on a solid or solid-appearing
base, having one or more display areas, which identifies all individual
businesses or other entities or uses located or operating on the property
where the sign is located or, alternatively, which identifies a unified
development located or operating on the property where the sign is located
(e.g., a shopping center or shopping mall) and which optionally identifies
one or more businesses or other entities located or operating in the unified
development (e.g., the names of the anchor stores in a shopping mall) but
which is smaller than a primary monument sign and subject to somewhat
different restrictions.
SETBACK (as applied to a sign) — The required minimum distance from
a sign to a property line, public highway or street right-of-way line or
other boundary line or object with respect to which a setback distance
is established by this chapter, measured horizontally from the vertical
extension of the closest part of the sign (excluding any building or other
structure or object existing independently of the sign on which the sign
is mounted) to the vertical extension of the closest part of the boundary
or object from which the setback is established. (See the definition of
"distance" in this section.)
SIGN — Any writing, inscription or other graphic or pictorial
representation, including, without limitation, words, letters, numerals,
characters, symbols, emblems, logos, trademarks, images, maps or
diagrams which, together with any background panel, surface or coloring
that serves as a backdrop for the message or other graphic or pictorial
representation, and any related framing, and any base or other supporting
structure or apparatus:
Is an independent structure or is attached to, suspended from, painted
on or otherwise represented or displayed on or from a building,
structure, utility pole, tree or other object;
A.
Is either located outdoors or is located within a building or structure
but has as its principal purpose to be visible from outside the building
or structure; and
B.
§ 420-59 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-59
344:905
SIGN PERMIT — A permit issued by the Village Zoning Administrator
which is required to install, construct, reinstall, reconstruct, relocate, move,
enlarge, extend, alter or otherwise modify a sign or any part of a sign
(including, without limitation, changing the message or other display of
a sign), except as is specifically provided in such permit or in applicable
provisions of this article.
SIGN SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT — A permit, approved and issued by
the Zoning Administrator, which is required to install, construct, reinstall,
reconstruct, relocate, move, enlarge, extend, alter or otherwise modify (but
not including changing the message or other display on such a sign, which
requires only a sign permit) certain specified types of signs or certain
signs under certain specified conditions.[Amended 2-2-2009 by Ord. No.
09-01]
SINGLE-FAMILY/TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A freestanding single-faced or two-faced back-toback
or angled sign located within a single-family or two-family residential
development which identifies the residential development and which may
optionally include the developer's name and logo.
SITE (with respect to a sign) — See the definition of "property," which is
synonymous.
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN OR DEVICE — A temporary sign or device (e.g., a
festoon) advertising, announcing or calling attention to a festival, auction,
bazaar, school performance, fund-raising event, carnival, circus, antique
show, grand opening, going out of business sale, new management or other
similar special event.
STRUCTURE SIGN — A sign mounted or displayed on a structure, other
than a building wall, which exists independently of the sign.
TEMPORARY BANNER SIGN — A temporary plastic or fabric wall sign used
to display the name of a new occupant of a building pending installation of
a nontemporary wall or canopy sign.
TEMPORARY DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A temporary freestanding singlefaced
or two-faced back-to-back or angled sign used to identify, advertise
and/or offer for sale or lease a development project that has received final
approval from the Village and is under construction on the property where
the sign is located and which optionally identifies the owner, occupant,
developer, broker, architect, contractor, financial institution or other
persons or entities involved in the development.
THICKNESS (as applied to a sign) — The greatest horizontal dimension
of a sign, excluding any differentiated base below the level of the display,
measured as perpendicular as possible to the face of the sign or, as applied
to an angled sign, measured through the thickest side of the angle, without
regard to the other half of the "V," or, as applied to a three-dimensional
Advertises, announces or directs attention to a business, product,
service, place, activity, event, person, feature, object, destination, idea,
concept, position, hazard, prohibition or restriction.
C.
§ 420-59 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-59
344:906
primary monument sign, measured through the thickest part of the sign
from the perspective from which the outer dimensions of the sign are
most extensive, exclusive of any differentiated base or other differentiated
supporting structure or apparatus.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL SIGN — A roundish sign without distinct faces
or a sign with a thickness exceeding four feet. [Note that pursuant to
§ 420-76T(15) and V(5) only primary monument signs and public interest
signs may be three dimensional.]
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT — A development on one or more tax key parcels
which was planned and developed in a coordinated fashion, which is
operated or generally recognized as a collective whole, and which is unified
by covenants running with the land, planned development zoning, physical
layout (e.g., no side yard setbacks at tax key parcel boundaries), and/
or single or unified ownership. (Note that pursuant to § 420-78K of this
chapter, certain regulations under this chapter are, at the option of the
owner of the property, applied either to the whole of the unified
development or individually to its appropriate parts or units.)
VALID NONCONFORMING ACCESSORY SIGN — An accessory sign which
fully conformed to the applicable zoning requirements when it was installed
or constructed but which has subsequently become nonconforming as a
result of an amendment of this chapter. (Note that a valid nonconforming
accessory sign is a type of nonconforming accessory structure, not a
nonconforming use, which is allowed to continue subject to certain
restrictions pursuant to § 420-78T of this chapter, including, without
limitation, that the nonconformity must be timely cured whenever the sign
becomes obsolete or illegal.)
VALID NONCONFORMING USE SIGN — A principal use sign, principal
structure sign, or off-site sign that fully conformed to the applicable zoning
requirements when it was installed or constructed but has subsequently
become a nonconforming use, which is allowed to continue, subject to
certain restrictions, so long as it continues to satisfy all of the tests for a
valid nonconforming use.
VERTICAL DIMENSION (as applied to the display of a sign) — The vertical
dimension of the smallest horizontally and vertically oriented rectangle that
fully encloses the display of a sign.
WALL SIGN — A sign mounted or displayed on an exterior building wall.
(Note that pursuant to § 420-76DD of this chapter, all parts of a wall sign
must be within 12 inches of the surface of the wall, and no part of the sign
may actually extend above or beyond any horizontal or vertical edge of the
wall or appear to do so from the perspective of the intended viewers. Note
also that pursuant to § 420-73H of this chapter, decorative striping on a wall
does not constitute a wall sign.)
WINDOW SIGN — A sign displayed within a window. (Note that different
restrictions apply to window signs depending upon whether they are
illuminated or nonilluminated.)
§ 420-59 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-59
344:907
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Zoning Administrator and his or
her designee(s).
§ 420-60. Compliance required.
No person may install or construct a new sign, or any part thereof, or
use, allow to continue, maintain, repair, reinstall, reconstruct, relocate,
extend, enlarge, alter or otherwise modify an existing sign or any part
thereof (including, without limitation, changing or blanking out the message
or other display of an existing sign), except in full compliance with the
requirements of this article and in full compliance with the terms and
conditions of any required sign permit or of any required sign special
exception permit, and in full compliance with the requirements of any
applicable approvals, decisions, orders, judgments or other requirements
made, issued or imposed pursuant to or in the enforcement of this chapter,
and in full compliance with the requirements of any other applicable Village,
county, state or federal statute, ordinance, code, regulation, permit,
approval, decision, order or judgment relating to land use, land division,
environmental protection or development control, and no person may fail
to install, construct, use, maintain, repair, modify, blank out or remove a
sign as required by this article or by any such sign permit or sign special
exception permit for a sign, or by any such other applicable requirements.
§ 420-61. Preconditions to issuance of permit.
No sign permit application or sign special exception permit application may
be deemed complete and no sign permit or sign special exception permit
may be issued until all of the applicable preconditions set out below have
first been satisfied. No sign permit or sign special exception permit issued
by mistake shall be valid or effective until all such preconditions have been
satisfied.
A. A complete sign application, signed by the applicant (see the definition
of "applicant" in § 420-59), together with all required information and
documentation, has been filed with the Village Zoning Administrator;
B. All applicable sign application fees imposed by or pursuant to this
chapter have been paid to the Village (and no sign permit or special
exception permit may be issued until all sign inspection fees imposed by
or pursuant to this chapter have been paid);
C. All unpaid overdue forfeitures resulting from violations of any Village
ordinance or code owed by the applicant or the owner of the property
for which the sign or sign modification is proposed have first been paid,
pursuant to § 66.0115, Wis. Stats., unless the imposition of such unpaid
forfeiture(s) is being appealed;
D. With respect to a sign proposed for any lot or parcel created in violation
of Chapter 395, Land Division and Development Control, of the Village
Code, all such violations have first been cured, in accordance with
§ 395-14B of that chapter;
§ 420-59 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-61
344:908
§ 420-62. Permit application.
Prior to filing a sign permit application or a sign special exception
application, an applicant shall first confer with the Zoning Administrator
regarding the contemplated sign(s) or sign modifications and the applicable
requirements of this article.
E. All outstanding building or zoning violations on the property on which
the sign or sign modification is proposed, regarding which the Village
has issued a written notice of violation, have first been cured, unless the
notice of violation is being appealed; and
F. The use of the property on which the sign or sign modification is
proposed is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Except as is otherwise specifically provided in this article (without
limitation, see §§ 420-73 and 420-75), a complete sign permit
application or sign special exception permit application shall be filed
with the Zoning Administrator, on a form supplied by the Zoning
Administrator, for any proposed new sign or any proposed alteration,
repair or other modification of an existing sign, including, without
limitation, any proposed modification of or blanking out of the message
or other display of a sign. Without limitation, such form shall require
the following information: the name, address, telephone number and
fax number of the applicant (the owner, occupant or user of the
property who/which is seeking the permit); the name, address,
telephone number and fax number of any person who is authorized to
act for the applicant in connection with the application; the name,
address, telephone number and fax number of the owner of the
property on which the sign will be located or modified, if the applicant
is not the owner (fax numbers for the applicant, agent and owner are
optional); the street address of the property; the tax key parcel
number(s) of the property; whether the property is part of a unified
development; a representation that the owner of the property has
authorized the installation, construction or modification of the sign if
the applicant is not the owner; the physical type and function of the
sign; the zoning classification of the property; the amount of the
application fee submitted with the application; the total cost of any new
sign or of any sign modification; and, with respect to any modification of
a nonconforming sign, the cumulative cost of all modifications since the
sign became nonconforming or since the effective date of Ordinance
No. 00-09 (February 28, 2000), whichever is later, and the total cost of
replacement.
B. Multiple sign permit applications, or multiple sign special exception
permit applications, relating to the same property may be filed as a
package to make efficient use of common supporting materials or to
more efficiently demonstrate that the signs are coordinated for
purposes of functionality and aesthetic appeal and that the design and
materials of such signs are complementary to the use(s) on the
§ 420-61 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-62
344:909
property, to the design and materials of the buildings and structures on
the property and to the other signs on the property.
C. A complete sign permit application or sign special exception permit
application shall include or attach the following documents and
information; provided, however, that the Zoning Administrator is
authorized to waive in writing, on the application or separately, the
submission of any information which is readily available to the Village
or which is otherwise not required to process the application:
(1) A fully completed sign permit application form, provided by the
Village and signed by the applicant. (See the definition of
"applicant" in § 420-59.) If the individual signing the application
form is not the owner or user of the property, or expressly an officer
or partner of such owner or user of the property, the Zoning
Administrator may (but has no duty to) require written evidence of
the applicant's authority to act as agent of such owner or user.
(2) Scaled drawings, diagrams or photographs showing the display,
base and/or other supporting structure or apparatus of the
proposed sign and the appearance, design, colors, materials and
dimensions of the sign, including the height and thickness of the
sign, and the horizontal and vertical dimensions of the sign display;
and, in the case of a freestanding sign, the height of the base under
the sign display, the horizontal and vertical dimensions of the base,
and the distance the base extends to either side of or above the
display of the sign; and, in the case of a projecting sign, the
clearance of the sign and the maximum distance it extends from the
building wall on or to which it is mounted or attached; and, in the
case of a wall sign, the maximum distance it extends from the
surface of the wall and its actual and apparent position relative to
any edge of the wall behind it; and, in the case of a roof sign, the
maximum distance it extends from the surface of the roof and its
actual and apparent positioning relative to any edge of the roof
behind it.
(3) A scaled site plan showing the location and orientation of the
face(s) of the proposed sign on the property and the distance from
the closest part of any freestanding sign to any existing or proposed
building or structure, property line, public highway or public street
right-of-way line, sidewalk, driveway, private roadway, parking lot,
overhead or underground wires, pipes, conduits or similar
structures, or floodplain and/or wetland boundary within 35 feet of
such sign (within 50 feet of a freestanding freeway sign), and the
distance of the closest part of such sign to the ordinary high-water
mark of any navigable water within 90 feet of such sign.
(4) Detailed scaled plans and specifications for the installation or
construction of any proposed sign, including, without limitation,
the base and/or other supporting structure, apparatus or footings,
§ 420-62 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-62
344:910
and for any connections to any independent structure, which
explain how the sign will satisfy all applicable safety standards.
(5) Detailed scaled plans and specifications for any landscaping or
berming associated with any proposed sign, including, without
limitation, the specific location, type and dimensions of all
proposed plantings and other landscape elements.
(6) Detailed scaled plans and specifications for any proposed lighting
for a sign which explain how prohibited glare on any neighboring
properties or on any public street or highway will be avoided.
(7) Detailed scaled plans and specifications and operating limitations
for any electronic changing message sign or component of a sign,
or any electronic scrolling sign or component of a sign, and a
detailed and complete description and explanation of the proposed
limitations on the types of messages or information that will be
displayed, the proposed frequency and manner of change of the
message (second to second and day to day), and how and why such
changes will not constitute a prohibited hazardous distraction to
motorists or a prohibited flashing or pulsing light source.
(8) Detailed plans and specifications and operating limitations for any
changeable copy sign or component of a sign and a detailed and
complete description and explanation of the proposed limitations
on the types of messages or information to be presented and the
proposed frequency and manner of change.
(9) Written consent of the owner of the real property upon which any
proposed new sign is to be located, or upon which any existing sign
is proposed to be altered or modified, if the applicant is not the
owner or lessee of the property.
(10) For a proposed sign modification, a copy of the sign permit or sign
special exception permit for the existing sign and the supporting
application and related documents and information, together with
all documents and information necessary to update, complete and
make currently accurate such prior application and supporting
documents and information and to fully describe, picture and
explain the proposed alteration or modification.
(11) For a sign special exception permit application, any information
required by the Zoning Administrator to evaluate the particular
criteria for granting such a permit or other requirements to make
the necessary findings to grant such a permit. [Amended
2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-01]
(12) Documentation supporting the figures provided with respect to the
cost of the sign or sign modification and the cost of replacement (if
applicable).
§ 420-62 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-62
344:911
§ 420-63. Incomplete application.
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to hold for completion or deny, in
his or her discretion, any incomplete sign permit application or sign special
exception permit application. With respect to any such application held for
completion, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in
writing by first class mail or by fax what information is needed to complete
the application and what if any preconditions must be satisfied pursuant to
§ 420-61 of this chapter. Any application not completed within 30 days after
the filing the application shall be denied.
§ 420-64. Application approval or denial.
(13) Any other information requested by the Zoning Administrator.
[Amended 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-01]
(14) Payment of the sign application fee provided for in or by this
chapter.
A. As soon as practicable after a sign permit application is complete, the
Zoning Administrator shall approve or deny it. The Zoning
Administrator, or his/her designee, shall have authority to impose any
conditions reasonably based upon the requirements of this article. The
Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, shall promptly notify the
applicant of the approval and any conditions of approval. If denied, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing by first-class
mail, e-mail or fax and state in such notice the reasons for any denial.
[Amended 7-6-2015 by Ord. No. 15-21]
B. As soon as practicable after a sign special exception application is
complete, the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, shall approve
or deny it and state in its decision the reasons for any denial, any
findings it is required to make to approve the application, and any
conditions of its approval. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to impose any conditions reasonably based upon the
requirements of this article and any conditions which it reasonably
determines are necessary for it to make any required findings. The
Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, shall promptly notify the
applicant of the approval and any conditions of approval. If denied, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing by first-class
mail, e-mail or fax and state in such notice the reasons for any denial.
[Amended 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-01; 7-6-2015 by Ord. No.
15-21]
C. Neither a sign permit nor a sign special exception permit may be issued
unless the proposed sign or proposed sign modification fully complies
with all applicable requirements of this article and all applicable orders,
decisions, permits or other approvals made or issued pursuant to this
chapter and with all other applicable Village, county, state or federal
statutes, ordinances, codes, regulations, permits or orders relating to
§ 420-62 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-64
344:912
§ 420-65. Permit issuance. [Amended 7-6-2015 by Ord. No. 15-21]
A permit shall be issued only upon payment of any sign inspection fees
provided for in or by this chapter.
land use, land division, environmental protection or development
control.
D. Among the conditions that shall be imposed on any permit, to the extent
applicable, are the following:
(1) That the applicant has duly authorized the filing of the application
and all related information and that all information contained in or
submitted in connection with the application is true and accurate;
(2) That the permit and all terms and conditions thereof must be
reviewed and accepted by the applicant prior to commencement of
the installation, construction or modification of the sign and that
such commencement constitutes acceptance;
(3) That commencement of installation, construction or modification of
the sign constitutes a waiver of any right to appeal the decision or
permit of the Zoning Administrator or any part thereof to the
Village Zoning Board of Appeals or to otherwise challenge such
decision or permit; [Amended 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-01]
(4) That in the case of a freestanding sign, the applicant shall stake the
location of the sign prior to commencement of the installation or
construction of the sign, and any boundaries, buildings or objects
for which sign setbacks have been established, which are within
the standard thirty-five-foot area of concern [or the fifty-foot area of
concern with respect to a freeway sign or the ninety-foot area of
concern with respect to the ordinary high-water mark of any
navigable water, pursuant to § 420-62C(3)] and shall request a
Village inspection of such stakings;
(5) That the applicant shall request a final inspection of the sign by the
Village within seven days of its completion to avoid a violation; and
(6) That the sign shall be installed, constructed or modified only in full
compliance with this article and the terms and conditions of the
permit and must be in accordance with the approved plans,
specifications and other information submitted with the
application.
E. If a sign permit is not issued within 30 days after the date on which
written notice of approval of the sign application was mailed or faxed to
the applicant or the applicant's agent, the sign application approval
shall automatically be void. No sign permit shall be issued on the basis
of a void sign application approval. The applicant may reapply without
prejudice.
§ 420-64 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-66
344:913
§ 420-66. Changes in display provided for in sign permit.
A sign permit or sign special exception permit may specify that the message
or other display of the sign may be changed in specified ways, and with
specified frequency, without having to seek a new permit, but specific
limitations shall be imposed on such changes. Such provisions may be
allowed only in situations where this article specifically allows changeable
copy signs, electronic changing message signs or electronic scrolling signs.
With respect to electronic changing message signs, the permit shall state
that a new message shall not appear more frequently than once every three
seconds, and the sign shall not have the appearance of flashing or pulsing.
§ 420-67. Binding nature of application. [Amended 2-2-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-01]
It shall be the duty of the applicant to review and duly authorize the filing of
any sign permit application or sign special exception permit application and
any information submitted with or in connection with any such application.
Every sign permit and sign special exception permit shall be conditioned
upon the accuracy of all such information. Any permit approved or issued on
the basis of materially inaccurate information may be suspended, revoked
or voided by the Zoning Administrator.
§ 420-68. Acceptance of permit before commencement of work.
[Amended 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-01]
It shall be the duty of the applicant to review and accept the terms and
conditions of any sign permit or sign special exception permit before
commencement of the installation, construction or modification of any sign
pursuant to such permit. Commencement of installation, construction or
modification of any sign pursuant to a permit automatically constitutes
acceptance of the permit and waives any right to appeal or challenge
the permit decision, the permit or any condition thereof. Any permit not
accepted prior to commencement of installation, construction or
modification may be suspended, revoked or voided by the Zoning
Administrator.
§ 420-69. Duration of rights pursuant to permit.
A. The right to install, construct or modify a sign pursuant to a sign permit
or a sign special exception permit shall automatically expire 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit. After such right expires, or
after the permit is revoked or voided, or while it is suspended, no work
requiring such a permit shall be commenced, continued or resumed
until after a new permit is issued or until after the original permit has
been reinstated. A suspension of the permit tolls the remainder of such
twelve-month period. [Amended 7-6-2015 by Ord. No. 15-21]
B. The right to install, construct or modify a sign pursuant to a sign permit
or a sign special exception permit may be extended in writing by the
Zoning Administrator for up to 60 additional days upon a showing of
§ 420-66 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-69
344:914
§ 420-70. Assignment of permit.
A sign permit or sign special exception permit may be assigned to a new
owner or user of the property, or to a successor of the applicant, upon
written consent of the Zoning Administrator, provided that the rights
pursuant to the permit have not expired or been revoked or voided, that
there are no uncured violations of the permit or of this article associated
with such sign, that no modification of the permitted sign or the permit is
required to prevent the sign from becoming obsolete, and that the assignee
or successor accepts the permit and timely satisfies all conditions of the
permit to the reasonable satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator.
§ 420-71. Inspections.
§ 420-72. Suspension, revocation or voiding of permit.
good cause by the applicant and the payment of any permit extension
fee imposed by or pursuant to this chapter, provided that the applicant's
rights under the permit have not expired or been revoked or voided.
New or amended sign regulations that have become effective after the
approval of the initial sign permit shall be applied to any application
for an extension, and an extension shall not be granted unless the
original application is amended to conform to such new or amended
sign regulations.
A. Prior to installation or construction of any new freestanding sign that
requires a sign permit or a sign special exception permit, the applicant
shall stake the proposed sign or any modification that changes the
location or dimensions of the sign and any boundaries, buildings or
objects for which sign setbacks have been established which are within
the thirty-five-foot area of concern (or the fifty-foot area of concern with
respect to a freeway sign or the ninety-foot area of concern with respect
to the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable water) pursuant to
§ 420-62C(3) of this chapter and shall request that a staking inspection
be performed by the Village. The applicant shall modify the staking to
comply with the results of such staking inspection prior to commencing
installation, construction or modification of the sign, and the sign shall
be installed or constructed in accordance with the approved staking.
B. Within seven days of the completion of any sign that requires a sign
permit or a sign special exception permit, the applicant shall request
that the Village perform a final inspection to ensure that the sign is in
compliance with the permit and the applicable provisions of this
chapter. If necessary, the applicant shall promptly modify the sign to
comply with the permit and this article. A sign for which such an
inspection request has not been timely made or which has not promptly
been modified to comply fully with the permit and this article is a
violation of this chapter.
§ 420-69 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-72
344:915
§ 420-73. Exempted signs, flags, festoons and lights.
Except as may be specifically prohibited by § 420-74, the following signs,
flags, festoons and lights are exempt from this article:
A. In the event the Zoning Administrator determines, prior to the
completion of permitted sign work pursuant to a sign permit or sign
special exception permit, that the sign or related work is not in
accordance with the terms and conditions of such permit or the
requirements of this article, or that the information on the basis of
which the permit was approved or issued was untrue or inaccurate in
material respects, the Zoning Administrator may suspend such permit,
notify the applicant or the applicant's designated agent in writing by
first class mail or by fax of the reasons for the suspension and issue a
written stop-work order until the problem or defect is cured to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator. In the event the
applicant refuses or fails to cure the problem or defect within 30 days
following such notice of suspension, and after conferring with the
applicant or the applicant's agent regarding such refusal or failure, the
Zoning Administrator may revoke a sign permit and notify the applicant
in writing by first class mail or by fax of the reasons for the revocation
and any related violations.
B. In the event the Zoning Administrator determines, after the completion
of work done pursuant to any such permit, that the sign or related work
was not in accordance with the terms and conditions of such permit or
the requirements of this article, or that the information on the basis of
which the permit was approved or issued was inaccurate in material
respects, the Zoning Administrator shall issue and cause to be served a
notice of violation. If such violations are not cured to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator within 30 days following
service of such notice of violation, the Zoning Administrator may, in
addition to all other remedies, void the permit and promptly notify the
owner and user of the property where the sign is located in writing by
first class mail or by fax of the reasons for voiding the permit.
C. A sign installed, constructed or modified pursuant to a permit which has
been revoked or voided is illegal and a violation of this article.
A. Indoor signs, flags, festoons and lights, unless their primary function is
to be visible from outdoors (e.g., an illuminated beer sign in the front
window of a tavern).
B. Lights, unless used in conjunction with a sign or used specifically for
commercial advertising purposes.
C. Holiday decorations reasonably proximate in time to the holiday.
D. Hand-held signs, flags, festoons and lights.
E. Incidental signs (one square foot or less in area), unless there are more
than two such signs within 15 feet of a building entrance.
§ 420-72 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-73
344:916
§ 420-74. Prohibited signs, flags, festoons and lights.
Any signs, flags, festoons or lights that are not expressly permitted by this
article are prohibited. Without limitation, the following signs or types or
uses of signs, flags, festoons or lights are prohibited:
F. Seed identification signs in an agricultural district, provided that they
are less than two square feet in size.
G. Art work, except in the form of a freestanding sign, or when used in
conjunction with an explicit message or text.
H. Decoration, not including logos (e.g., decorative striping on a building).
I. Architectural features containing elements that might be considered a
sign, provided that the sign is not the principal reason for the
architectural feature and is clearly incidental and subordinate to the
function of the architectural feature.
J. Automobile signs that advertise a business or other entity or activity in
which the automobile is used as an automobile on a day-to-day basis,
other than merely for advertising.
K. Rooftop signs not visible from the ground or from other buildings.
L. Newspaper vending boxes.
M. Brand or model names or designations on equipment or goods.
N. Telephone booths.
O. Emergency signs erected by appropriate governmental or utility
authorities.
P. Cemetery monuments.
Q. Signs, flags and lights on floating boats.
R. Mailboxes.
S. Scoreboards used in connection with outdoor athletic facilities.
A. Any sign with flashing or pulsating lights, except pursuant to § 420-75I
of this chapter (but excluding a validly permitted electronic changing
message sign or electronic scrolling sign pursuant to § 420-76J or K of
this chapter).
B. Any sign that moves or has moving or animated parts, except pursuant
to §§ 420-75I and 420-76J or K of this chapter.
C. Any inflatable sign, including but not limited to tethered balloon signs
or other gas-filled figures.
§ 420-73 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-74
344:917
D. Any off-site sign, principal use sign or principal structure sign, except
an official public sign pursuant to § 420-75I of this chapter, or except as
may be approved in connection with planned development zoning.
E. Any temporary, spring-action metal advertising sign used, for example,
to advertise cigarette or gasoline prices.
F. Any festoon, except as approved as a special event device pursuant to
§ 420-76AA of this chapter, or an official public sign pursuant to
§ 420-75I of this chapter.
G. Any commercial advertising sign painted on or attached to a bench, bus
shelter, garbage can, or garbage enclosure, except incidental signs.
H. Any sign that creates a hazard or dangerous distraction to motorists.
I. Any sign that creates a public nuisance or a private nuisance to
neighboring properties.
J. Any sign that resembles, imitates or approximates the size, shape, form
and/or color of railroad or traffic safety signs, signals or devices.
K. Any sign that is lighted in such a way as to cause unpleasant glare upon
any public street or highway or upon neighboring properties.
L. Any sign that is attached, fastened or anchored to a fire escape, fire
ladder, standpipe or fire hydrant.
M. Any sign that prevents or hinders ingress or egress to or from public or
private driveways, parking lots, fire escapes or doorways.
N. Any sign that prevents or hinders pedestrian traffic on a sidewalk.
O. Any sign that prevents or materially hinders the raising or placing of
ladders against a building by the Fire & Rescue Department.
P. Any sign that is installed on or attached to any public utility facilities,
except pursuant to § 420-75I or 420-76G of this chapter.
Q. Any sign that is installed or constructed in or attached to trees or other
landscaping within a public right-of-way, except pursuant to § 420-75I
of this chapter.
R. Any vehicle that is painted as or displays a commercial advertising sign,
which is parked on a lawn or other area where the parking of a vehicle
is not permitted, or which is parked on or visible from a public street or
highway, unless the vehicle is used in the day-to-day operations of the
business or other entity or activity so advertised for a purpose other
than such advertising.
S. A "for sale" or a price sign displayed on or in a vehicle parked within a
public right-of-way.
§ 420-74 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-74
344:918
§ 420-75. Signs allowed without permit.
The following types of signs are permitted without a sign permit or a
sign special exception permit, provided that they comply with the specific
requirements stated below and all other applicable requirements of this
article:
T. Any sign located within in the C-1 Lowland Resource Conservancy
District, the C-3 Natural and Scientific Area Resource Conservancy
District, or the FPO Floodplain Overlay District, unless specifically
allowed in such district or any district pursuant to this article.
U. Any sign located within a vision triangle,120 except pursuant to
§ 420-75I of this chapter.
V. Any sign other than an emergency official public sign installed or
constructed within the right-of-way of a Village street without the
written approval of the Village.
W. Any sign containing statements, words or pictures that are obscene.
X. Any spotlights used as visual attention-getters.
A. Agricultural products identification sign.
(1) Permitted in any agricultural district.
(2) Maximum number: one sign per property on which a roadside
produce stand or "pick your own" operation is located, provided
that the property on which the sign is located has a minimum of
150 feet of frontage, and further provided that two wall signs may
be substituted for the freestanding sign, and further provided that
if the property on which the roadside stand or "pick your own"
operation is located has a minimum of 600 feet of frontage, two
freestanding single-face signs on the property are permitted.
(3) Maximum area: 20 square feet per face or per wall sign.
(4) Maximum height: six feet for freestanding signs.
(5) Minimum setback: two feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
(6) May be illuminated.
B. Building address sign.
(1) Permitted in any zoning district.
(2) Minimum number: one building address sign shall be located on
each principal building to designate the correct numerical address
of the property.
120. Editor's Note: See § 420-44, Vision triangle.
§ 420-74 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-75
344:919
(3) Minimum vertical dimension: three inches in height.
(4) If a principal building is located more than 75 feet from the public
street or highway right-of-way line, or if the building address sign is
not readily visible from the public street or highway for any other
reason, and there is no primary monument sign or other
identification sign on the property on which the building address is
stated, then a freestanding building address sign shall be installed
in front of such building to identify the address of the property.
C. Building marker sign.
(1) Permitted in any zoning district.
(2) Maximum number: one per principal building.
(3) Maximum area: four square feet.
D. Contractor sign.
(1) Permitted in any agricultural or residential district.
(2) Maximum number: one per property.
(3) Maximum area: nine square feet per face.
(4) Maximum height: five feet.
(5) Minimum setback: two feet from any public street and highway
right-of-way lines.
(6) Shall be removed upon completion of work.
E. Election signs.
(1) Permitted in any zoning district.
(2) Permission shall be obtained from the owner, or occupant of the
property on which the sign is placed.
F. Flag/flagpole.
(1) Permitted in any zoning district.
(2) Maximum number:
(a) One flagpole and three flags per property in any agricultural or
residential district.
(b) Three flagpoles and six flags per property in any other district.
(c) Seven flagpoles and 14 flags if in conjunction with a
nonresidential development identification sign.
(3) Minimum setback: the distance from any public street or highway
right-of-way line equal to the height or length of the flagpole.
§ 420-75 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-75
344:920
(4) Maximum height of any flagpole:
(a) Twenty feet in any agricultural or residential district.
(b) Forty feet in any other district.
(5) May be illuminated, provided that adequate precautions are taken
to prevent prohibited glare on neighboring properties or on any
public street or highway right-of-way.
G. Memorial sign.
(1) Permitted in any zoning district.
(2) Maximum number: one per building.
(3) Maximum area: four square feet.
H. Neighborhood sign.
(1) Permitted in any agricultural or residential district.
(2) Time limitation: three days.
(3) Maximum number per calendar year: six
(4) Maximum area: 18 square feet per face.
(5) Maximum height: five feet.
(6) Minimum setback: two feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
I. Official public sign. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-55]
(1) Permitted in public street or highway right-of-way in any district,
provided that:
(a) Written Village permission is required for any sign installed in
a Village street right-of-way for a period of more than seven
days.
(b) Permission from Kenosha County or the State of Wisconsin may
be required for such signs installed in the right-of-way of
county trunk highways or state trunk highways, respectively.
(2) Permitted on any Village owned land in any district; provided that
written permission is obtained from the Village and that the size
and location is approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
J. Personal message sign.
(1) Permitted as a freestanding sign in any residential or agricultural
district [but see Subsection J(8) below for personal message signs
permitted in place of certain background commercial advertising
signs].
§ 420-75 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-75
344:921
(2) Maximum number at one time: one per property.
(3) Maximum area: nine square feet per face.
(4) Maximum height: four feet.
(5) Maximum duration: 10 days.
(6) Maximum number per calendar year: six.
(7) Minimum setback: two feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
(8) May be substituted as a nonfreestanding sign in any zoning district
for any permitted background commercial advertising sign that is
permitted there, subject to the applicable regulations for the
particular type of sign involved, aggregate permitted background
commercial advertising sign area restrictions, and the restrictions
stated above for duration, number at one time and number per
calendar year in Subsection J(5), (2) and (6), respectively.
K. Private warning sign.
(1) Permitted in any zoning district.
(2) Maximum area: four square feet.
(3) Maximum height: four feet.
(4) Minimum setback: none.
L. Real estate signs.
(1) Permitted in any zoning district.
(2) Maximum number: one per property for each street or highway
frontage.
(3) Maximum area: nine square feet per face.
(4) Maximum height: five feet.
(5) Minimum setback: two feet from any public street and highway
right-of-way lines.
(6) Shall be removed upon completion of the transaction.
M. Window sign (nonilluminated).
(1) Permitted in any zoning district.
(2) Shall be placed on the inside of a window of a principal building.
(3) Maximum area: such signs shall not exceed 30% of the area of any
window.
§ 420-75 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-75
344:922
§ 420-76. Signs allowed only with sign permit.
The following types of signs are permitted only pursuant to and in full
conformity with a validly issued sign permit or sign special exception
permit, the applicable requirements stated below and all other applicable
requirements of this article:
(4) Total maximum area per building in any residential district: 10
square feet.
(5) Total maximum area per building (or per store or other unit in a
building with two or more occupants): 30 square feet.
A. Agricultural business identification sign.
(1) Permitted in any agricultural district.
(2) Maximum number: one per property.
(3) Maximum height: six feet if located adjacent to an arterial street or
highway; four feet if adjacent to a nonarterial street.
(4) Maximum area: 36 square feet per face.
(5) Minimum setback: 10 feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
(6) May be illuminated.
(7) Landscaping shall extend a minimum of three feet in every
direction from the base or other support structure of the sign.
(8) May be placed on two supports or on a solid or solid-appearing
base directly supporting a minimum of 75% of the sign display. The
height of the base or supports below the bottom of the sign display
shall not exceed three feet.
B. Bulletin board sign.
(1) Permitted in any business, institutional, PR-2 or PR-3 district.
[Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(2) Maximum area: nine square feet.
(3) Shall be mounted on the wall of a principal building adjacent to the
entrance.
(4) Changeable copy sign is permitted.
(5) May be illuminated.
C. Canopy sign.
§ 420-75 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-76
344:923
(1) Permitted in any business, manufacturing, institutional, PR-2, PR-3
or multifamily residential district. [Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-23]
(2) Limited to one line of copy upon the border of the awning or
canopy.
(3) No repetitious wording or display is permitted on any portion of the
canopy or awning facing in the same direction.
(4) Shall not be placed on the curved or angle portion of the canopy or
awning.
D. Changeable copy sign. A changeable copy sign is only permitted as or
as part of the following signs: primary monument sign, drive-through
customer sign, bulletin board sign, wall sign, projecting sign and official
public sign. (See § 420-66 of this chapter.)
E. Coming soon sign.
(1) Permitted in any business, manufacturing, institutional, PR-2, PR-3
or agricultural district. [Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(2) Maximum number: one per property (or one per store or other unit
in a building with more than one occupant).
(3) Maximum area: 20 square feet.
(4) Maximum duration: 90 days.
(5) Shall be securely attached to the exterior wall of the building so as
to remain flush against the wall and not flap in the wind.
(6) Shall not be illuminated.
(7) Shall be located on a building wall below an elevation which is 35
feet above grade.
(8) Shall be removed upon occupancy unless continued as a temporary
banner sign, subject to the requirements of Subsection BB of this
section if continued as a temporary banner sign.
F. Commercial advertising sign. Without limitation, commercial
advertising signs are subject to regulations relating to particular types
of commercial advertising signs, e.g., primary monument signs, and to
regulations limiting the aggregate permitted background of
commercial advertising sign area (see § 420-78K) and limiting the use
of freestanding signs as background commercial advertising signs (see
§ 420-78V).
G. Community banner sign.
(1) Permitted in any zoning district in a public street or highway rightof-
way.
§ 420-76 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-76
344:924
(2) Maximum area: 40 square feet.
(3) Maximum height: six square feet.
(4) Number, size, location and duration of such signs are subject to
approval by the Village Administrator, on an as-reasonably-needed
basis, subject to the basic requirements that the sign is safe and
advertises a special event (excluding commercial promotional
events at a merchant's place of business or at a shopping center or
mall) that is open to the public and of interest to a substantial
portion of the community.
(5) Larger, over-the-street community banner signs are a special
exception (see § 420-64B) which the Zoning Administrator must
find are not a substantial distraction to motorists and are
reasonably safe under the circumstances. [Amended 5-4-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-23]
H. Decorative pole sign.
(1) Permitted as a substitute for a primary monument sign in a
situation where a primary monument sign is not physically
practicable [see Subsection T(13) of this section].
(2) Shall not be placed so that the sign projects above a surface that is
intended for vehicular traffic.
(3) Maximum area: nine square feet per face.
(4) Minimum clearance: 8.5 feet.
(5) Maximum height: 12 feet.
(6) Minimum setback: two feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
(7) Shall be fastened to, projected or suspended from a decorative pole
of wrought iron or other similar material.
(8) May be illuminated.
I. Drive-through customer information sign.
(1) Permitted in any business, manufacturing, institutional or
agricultural district.
(2) Maximum number: as approved by the Zoning Administrator, based
on reasonable need.
(3) Maximum area: 36 square feet per side, with a total of 72 square
feet for both sides.
(4) Maximum height: eight feet.
§ 420-76 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-76
344:925
(5) Area and height actually permitted: as approved by the Zoning
Administrator, based upon reasonable need.
(6) Shall be addressed to customers who are already on site and shall
not be addressed to passing motorists.
(7) Changeable copy signs, electronic changing message signs and
electronic scrolling signs are permitted.
J. Electronic changing message sign. An electronic changing message
sign is only permitted as or as part of a primary monument sign,
freeway sign, wall sign, projecting sign, or drive-through customer
information sign. The message in an electronic changing message sign
shall not change more frequently than once every three seconds. Such a
sign shall not have the appearance of flashing or pulsing. (See § 420-66
of this chapter.)
K. Electronic scrolling sign. An electronic scrolling sign is only permitted
as or as part of a primary monument sign, freeway sign, wall sign,
projecting sign, or drive-through customer information sign. Such a
sign shall not have the appearance of flashing or pulsing. (See § 420-66
of this chapter.)
L. Farm identification sign.
(1) Permitted in any agricultural district.
(2) Maximum number: one per property.
(3) Maximum area: 24 square feet per face.
(4) Maximum height: six feet.
(5) Minimum setback: five feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
M. Freestanding sign. Without limitation, a freestanding sign may be used
as a primary monument sign (or substituted decorative pole sign),
secondary monument sign, freeway sign, various other identification
signs, official public sign, on-site information sign, public interest sign,
and various temporary signs but is restricted for other commercial
advertising purposes (see § 420-78V of this chapter).
N. Freeway sign.
(1) Permitted in any B-3 or B-4 District only for the following uses:
gasoline filling stations with or without convenience stores,
restaurants, hotels, motels, and also major shopping centers,
shopping malls or other major retail stores or outlets which,
individually or collectively as a unified development, exceed
100,000 square feet in building floor area, provided that the sign is
located within 1,000 feet from the main traveled lanes of I-94.
(2) Maximum number: one per property.
§ 420-76 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-76
344:926
(3) Maximum area: 300 square feet per face; alternatively, 300 square
feet may be added to any wall sign(s) on the property.
(4) An electronic changing message sign or an electronic scrolling sign
may be incorporated into the sign.
(5) Maximum height: 45 feet.
(6) Minimum setback: 20 feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
(7) May be illuminated, internally only.
(8) The sign installer shall provide written verification to the Village
Zoning Administrator upon installation that the sign complies with
the sign permit requirements.
O. Home occupation sign.
(1) Permitted in any agricultural or residential district, provided that
an approved home occupation permit pursuant to Article VII of this
chapter has been issued.
(2) Maximum number: one per property.
(3) Shall be mounted on the wall at the entrance to the principal or
accessory structure used in conjunction with such home
occupation.
(4) Shall not project more than six inches from the wall and shall not
be placed on or over a mailbox or mailbox enclosure.
(5) Maximum area: four square feet.
P. Model home sign. [Amended 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-48]
(1) Permitted in any residential district wherein a conditional use
permit has been approved for such use.
(2) Maximum number: one per property.
(3) Maximum area: 16 square feet per face.
(4) Maximum height: six feet.
(5) Minimum setback: five feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
(6) Shall be a wooden or composite material sign mounted on two
wooden or composite material decorative posts with tops or other
sign or decorative post materials as approved by the Zoning
Administrator. The height of the base or supports below the bottom
of the sign display shall not exceed three feet.
(7) Colors shall be complementary to the model home.
§ 420-76 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-76
344:927
(8) Shall not be illuminated.
(9) Shall be removed upon expiration of conditional use permit for said
use or when the home is no longer used as a model home.
Q. Multifamily residential development identification sign.
(1) Permitted in any R-9, R-10, R-11 or PR-1 District. [Amended
5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(2) Maximum number: one such sign may be permitted per
development, except that if there is more than one entrance to such
development from an arterial street or highway, then an additional
sign may be approved at each such entrance.
(3) Minimum setback: two feet from any public street right-of-way line
if located adjacent to a nonarterial Village street or five feet from
any public street or highway right-of-way line if located adjacent to
an arterial street or highway.
(4) Permitted within a boulevard island at the entrance to a
development, subject to the following requirements:
(a) Shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from the back of the curb
of the center boulevard island adjacent to the intersecting
street or highway;
(b) Shall be located a minimum of four feet from the back of the
curb of the center boulevard island adjacent to the street in
which the boulevard island is located; and
(c) A maintenance agreement and an indemnification and hold
harmless agreement shall be entered into with the Village
which are satisfactory to the Village.
(5) Maximum height: eight feet.
(6) Maximum area: 36 square feet per face.
(7) Landscaping shall extend a minimum of three feet in every
direction from the base or other support structure of the sign,
except if the sign is located in a boulevard island, then the
landscaping shall not extend closer than two feet from the back of
the curb of the boulevard island.
(8) May be illuminated.
(9) May be placed on two supports or may be placed on a solidappearing
decorative base which supports a minimum of 75% of
the display of the sign.
(10) The sign supports or base shall be constructed of materials that
complement the materials used in the development.
§ 420-76 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-76
344:928
(11) Maximum height of base under display: four feet.
R. Nonresidential development identification sign.
(1) Permitted in any business, manufacturing, park and recreational or
institutional district.
(2) Maximum number: one sign may be permitted per unified
development including at least 100 acres, exclusive of public street
and highway right-of-way, except that if there is more than one
primary entrance to said development from an arterial street or
highway, additional sign(s) may be approved at each entrance from
such an arterial street or highway.
(3) Minimum setback: 10 feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
(4) Maximum height: eight feet.
(5) Maximum area: 160 square feet per face.
(6) Landscaping shall extend a minimum of five feet in every direction
from the base or other support structure of the sign.
(7) May be illuminated.
S. On-site information sign.
(1) Permitted in any zoning district.
(2) May be in the form of a wall sign or a freestanding single-sided or
two-sided sign (pedestrian-oriented signs may have up to four
sides, provided that they do not exceed four feet in thickness).
(3) Maximum height: four feet for a freestanding sign.
(4) Maximum area: 32 square feet per face, 64 square feet total for a
freestanding sign.
(5) Minimum setback: five feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way lines.
(6) May be illuminated, internally only.
(7) The number, size and location of such signs are subject to approval
of the Village Zoning Administrator, based on reasonable need.
T. Primary monument sign.
(1) Permitted in any business, manufacturing, institutional, PR-2 or
PR-3 district. [Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(2) One sign is required for each property improved with one or more
principal buildings and used for any business, manufacturing,
§ 420-76 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-76
344:929
institutional, or recreational purpose or use, except as provided in
Subsection T(13) and (14) below.
(3) Maximum number: one per property; provided, however, a second
primary monument sign is permitted in the following instances:
[Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(a) If the property is more than five acres and has frontage and
primary entrances on more than one street or highway and the
distance between such signs is a minimum of 600 feet as
measured along the street or highway right-of-way lines, and
further provided that a second primary monument sign may be
permitted in a shared driveway situation pursuant to
Subsection Y(4) of this section without compliance with the
foregoing requirements.
(b) If the property is located in a business, manufacturing,
institutional, PR-2 or PR-3 district and has frontage on more
than one street or highway, wherein one street frontage is on
an arterial street or highway with no access and the second
primary monument sign fronts on the arterial street or
highway, and further provided that a second primary
monument sign may be permitted in a shared driveway
situation pursuant to Subsection Y(4) of this section without
compliance with the foregoing requirements.
(4) A changeable copy sign, electronic changing message sign or
electronic scrolling sign is permitted.
(5) Maximum area: 130 square feet per face, except: [Amended
3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-18; 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(a) If located in the B-1 Business District, the maximum area is 36
square feet per face; or
(b) if a second primary monument sign is located in a
manufacturing, institutional, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5, PR-2 or PR-3
district pursuant to Subsection T(3)(b) above, the maximum
area is 48 square feet.
(c) If the property has frontage on a state trunk highway, the
maximum area is 160 square feet per face. [Added 11-2-2009
by Ord. No. 09-56]
(6) Maximum height: 10 feet, except: [Amended 3-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-18; 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(a) If located in the B-1 Business District, the maximum height is
four feet; or
(b) If a second primary monument sign is located in a
manufacturing, institutional, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5, PR-2 or PR-3
§ 420-76 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-76
344:930
district pursuant to Subsection T(3)(b) above, the maximum
height is eight feet.
(c) If the property has frontage on a state trunk highway, the
maximum height is 16 feet. [Added 11-2-2009 by Ord. No.
09-56]
(7) Minimum setback distance: 15 feet from any public street or
highway right-of-way line.
(8) Shall include the street address of each principal building on the
property (or each principal building served by a shared driveway
entrance), including the street number(s) and the name of the
street, but such address(es) may be placed on the base of the sign
(where they will not count toward the maximum area of the sign
display).
(9) Landscaping shall extend a minimum of five feet in every direction
from the base or other support structure of the sign.
(10) May be illuminated.
(11) Shall be placed on a solid-appearing decorative base which
supports a minimum of 75% of the horizontal dimension of the sign
display.
(12) The base of the sign shall:
(a) Have a height that does not exceed the vertical dimension of
the sign display.
(b) Not extend to either side of the sign display by a distance
exceeding 1/2 of the horizontal dimension of the sign display,
or extend above the level of the top of the sign display by a
distance exceeding 1/2 of the vertical dimension of the sign
display.
(13)No primary monument sign shall be required if the physical
constraints of the property render such a sign physically
impracticable. In such situations, a wall sign, projecting sign or
decorative pole sign may be permitted as a substitute for a primary
monument sign, but the maximum area of a substitute wall sign
shall be the maximum area for one face of the primary monument
sign.
(14) A primary monument sign is not required in a B-1 District; however,
the maximum area of one face of the primary monument sign may
be added to the aggregate permitted commercial advertising sign
area.
(15) May be three-dimensional.
U. Projecting sign.
§ 420-76 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-76
344:931
(1) Permitted in any business, manufacturing, institutional, PR-2 or
PR-3 district. [Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(2) Maximum area: 12 square feet per face.
(3) Maximum number: one per business, person or entity on the
property.
(4) A changeable copy sign, an electronic changing message sign or an
electronic scrolling message sign is permitted.
(5) Minimum clearance: 8.5 feet above any surface intended for
pedestrian traffic; 10 feet above any surface intended for vehicular
traffic.
(6) Maximum height: 16 feet.
(7) May be illuminated.
(8) Minimum setback: two feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
(9) The sign installer shall provide written verification to the Village
Zoning Administrator upon installation that the sign complies with
all requirements of the sign permit.
V. Public interest sign.
(1) Permitted in any zoning district.
(2) Maximum height: 10 feet.
(3) Minimum setback: 10 feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
(4) Maximum area: 48 square feet per face and 96 square feet total.
(5) May be three-dimensional in that the thickness may exceed four
feet.
(6) May be illuminated.
(7) Shall be supported by no more than two supports.
(8) Minimal disturbance to the wetlands, floodplain or other natural
features.
(9) The location, size and number of such signs are subject to approval
of the Zoning Administrator, based on reasonable need.
W. Real estate marketing sign.
(1) Permitted in any residential, business, manufacturing, institutional,
park and recreational or agricultural district.
§ 420-76 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-76
344:932
(2) Permitted in a residential district only on a parcel of at least five
acres.
(3) Maximum number: one sign per each street or highway frontage of
the property where the sign is located.
(4) Maximum area: 48 square feet per face.
(5) Shall be located on the property to which it relates.
(6) Maximum height: 10 feet.
(7) Maximum duration: two years, and an extension may be permitted
for a period not to exceed five years total; provided, however, that
such sign shall be removed promptly upon the completion of the
transaction.
(8) Minimum setback: 15 feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
(9) No changeable copy, electronic changing message sign or
electronic scrolling sign is permitted.
(10) May be illuminated.
X. Roof sign.
(1) Permitted in any business, manufacturing, institutional, PR-2, PR-3
or agricultural district. [Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(2) Shall be mounted on or against the roof of a building and shall not
extend more than 12 inches from the surface of such roof.
(3) Shall not actually extend above or beyond any edge of the roof
behind it and shall not appear to so extend from the perspective of
the intended viewers.
(4) May be illuminated.
(5) The sign installer shall provide written verification to the Village
Zoning Administrator upon installation that the sign complies with
all permit requirements.
Y. Secondary monument sign.
(1) Permitted in any business, manufacturing, institutional, PR-2 or
PR-3 district. [Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(2) Maximum number: one sign permitted on the property for each
primary entrance from a street or highway, less the number of
primary monument signs on the property.
(3) The sign shall be located no more than 15 feet from a primary
entrance driveway, as measured from the back of the curb of the
driveway.
§ 420-76 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-76
344:933
(4) If a primary entrance driveway serves as a shared access driveway
for two or more properties, only one shared secondary monument
sign is permitted adjacent to such driveway; if the shared sign is
appropriately a primary monument sign for any of the properties
sharing the sign, it may be a primary monument sign even though
one or more of the other properties are not entitled to a primary
monument sign at that location.
(5) Maximum height: four feet. [Amended 3-3-2008 by Ord. No.
08-18]
(6) Minimum setback from any public street or highway right-of-way
line: six feet. [Amended 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-18]
(7) Maximum area: 24 square feet per face. [Amended 3-3-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-18]
(8) Landscaping: three feet in every direction from the sign base or
other supporting structure.
(9) May be illuminated.
(10) May be placed on two supports or may be placed on a solid or solidappearing
base which supports a minimum of 75% of the horizontal
dimension of the sign display. The sign supports or base shall be
constructed of materials complementary to the materials used in
the buildings and structures on the property where the sign is
located. The supports or base may not exceed three feet in height
beneath the sign display.
Z. Single-family/two-family residential development identification sign.
(1) Permitted in any C-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-8,
R-12 or PR-1 District. [Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(2) Maximum number: one such sign may be permitted per
development, except that if there is more than one entrance to such
development from an arterial street or highway, an additional sign
is permitted at each such entrance.
(3) Minimum setback: two feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line if located adjacent to a nonarterial street or five feet if
located adjacent to an arterial street or highway.
(4) Permitted within a boulevard island at the entrance to a
development, subject to the following requirements:
(a) Shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from the back of the curb
of the boulevard island adjacent to the intersecting street or
highway;
§ 420-76 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-76
344:934
(b) Shall be located a minimum of three feet from the back of the
curb of the boulevard island adjacent to the street in which the
boulevard island is located; and
(c) A maintenance agreement and an indemnification and hold
harmless agreement shall be entered into with the Village
which are satisfactory to the Village.
(5) Maximum height: six feet.
(6) Maximum area: 24 square feet per face.
(7) Landscaping shall extend a minimum of three feet in every
direction from the base or other support structure of the sign,
except that if the sign is located in a boulevard island, then the
landscaping shall not extend closer than two feet from the back of
the curb of the boulevard island.
(8) May be illuminated.
(9) May be placed on two supports or may be placed on a solidappearing
decorative base which supports a minimum of 75% of
the display of the sign.
(10) The sign supports or base shall be constructed of materials that
complement the materials used in the development. In no case shall
the sign supports or base under the sign display exceed four feet in
height.
AA. Special event sign or device.
(1) Permitted in any residential, business, manufacturing, institutional,
park and recreational or agricultural district.
(2) Minimum setback from any public street or highway right-of-way
line: 15 feet.
(3) Maximum duration: for a period not to exceed 21 days prior to the
special event and shall be removed within seven days after the
event.
(4) May be illuminated.
(5) Maximum number per calendar year: four, except in a PR-3 and I-1
District, where there is no limit. [Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No.
09-23]
BB. Temporary banner sign.
(1) Permitted in any business, manufacturing, institutional, PR-2, PR-3
or agricultural district. [Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(2) A complete sign application for a wall sign, canopy sign or
projecting sign pursuant to § 420-62 of this chapter shall have been
§ 420-76 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-76
344:935
approved and a permit issued for such a sign prior to issuance of a
temporary banner sign.
(3) Maximum number: one such per business, person or other entity
located or operating on the property.
(4) Shall be securely attached to the exterior wall of the building so as
to remain flush against the wall and not flap in the wind.
(5) Shall be located on a building wall below an elevation which is 35
feet above grade.
(6) Maximum area: 20 square feet.
(7) May not be illuminated.
(8) Maximum duration: 21 days, at which time the wall sign shall be
installed and the temporary banner shall be removed.
CC. Temporary development sign.
(1) Permitted in any residential, business, manufacturing, institutional,
park and recreational or agricultural district.
(2) Permitted in a residential district only on a parcel of at least five
acres.
(3) Maximum number: one sign per each street or highway frontage of
the property where the sign is located.
(4) Maximum area: 48 square feet per face.
(5) Shall be located on the property to which it relates.
(6) Maximum height: 10 feet.
(7) Maximum duration: two years, and an extension may be permitted
for a period not to exceed five years total; provided, however, that
such sign shall be removed prior to occupancy of any principal
building on the property.
(8) Minimum setback: 15 feet from any public street or highway rightof-
way line.
(9) May be illuminated.
DD. Wall sign. [Amended 1-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
(1) Permitted in any business, manufacturing, institutional, park and
recreational or agricultural district. Refer to the § 420-78K related
to the aggregate permitted background commercial advertising
sign area to determine the total area allowed.
§ 420-76 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-76
344:936
(2) Shall be securely mounted on the exterior wall of a building and
shall not extend more than 12 inches from the building's wall
surface.
(3) Shall not actually or appear to extend above or beyond any wall
edge.
(4) Shall not be placed upon or cover any architectural feature, and
shall be set back a minimum of six inches from the edge of the
fascia, architectural feature or exterior building wall.
(5) Shall not extend past an individual tenant's internal leasable
storefront space (within a multitenant building) unless specifically
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator due to undue
hardship or unique building configuration.
(6) Only channel-type or pin-mounted letters shall be allowed;
however, a symbol or company logo may be allowed if approved by
the Village Zoning Administrator.
(7) Box/cabinet signs may be allowed if approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator.
(8) No sign raceways are allowed, and no visible electrical
"crossovers" are allowed.
(9) A changeable copy sign, electronic changing message sign or
electronic scrolling sign is permitted.
(10) May be illuminated. If illuminated, the sign may be internally,
externally, or halo-type illumination. The following types of signs/
sign illumination shall not be permitted unless approved by the
Village Zoning Administrator on a case-by-case basis, including,
but are not limited to: (a) External neon outlining illumination; or
(b) Background painting of the building façade.
(11) All exterior building walls/facades where former signage was
placed shall be patched and/or repaired as a condition of any new
wall sign permit approval. All exterior building walls/facades shall
be maintained in a state of good repair at all times.
(12) The sign installer shall provide written verification to the Village
Zoning Administrator upon installation of the sign that said sign
complies with the sign permit.
EE. Window sign (illuminated).
(1) Permitted in any business, manufacturing, institutional, or parkrecreational
district. [Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-23]
(2) Shall be on the inside of a window.
(3) Maximum number: one per building or per store or other unit in a
building having more than one occupant.
§ 420-76 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-76
344:937
§ 420-77. Signs allowed with special exception permit.
§ 420-78. General sign regulations.
(4) Maximum area: nine square feet and occupying no more than 30%
of the window area.
A. See § 420-76G of this chapter relating to community banner signs that
are suspended across a public street.
B. See § 420-78L of this chapter relating to signs for multi-occupant
buildings that straddle tax key parcel boundary lines.
C. See § 420-78AA of this chapter relating to signs for nonconforming
uses.
A. Coordinated, complementary signs. The commercial advertising and
on-site information signs located on each property shall be coordinated
for purposes of functionality and aesthetic appeal, and the design and
materials of such signs shall be complementary to the use of the
property, to the design and materials of the buildings and other
structures on the property, and to the other commercial advertising
signs and on-site information signs on the property. This subsection is
not intended to limit the use of any logo or trademark on signs or to
require that the colors appearing in a particular logo or trademark must
be replicated throughout the signs on the property where such a logo or
trademark is displayed.
B. One face. A sign shall not have more than one face unless expressly
authorized by this article.
C. Safe, functional and attractive. All signs shall be designed, installed
and/or constructed so as to be safe, functional and attractive.
D. Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a safe, attractive and well
cared for condition and shall be promptly repaired, restored, repainted,
replaced or cured as needed.
E. Waiving cured violations. The curing of an illegal sign or a violation of
the provisions of this article shall not bar the Village from pursuing all
legal remedies with respect to any prior violations, but the Village
Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to waive, in writing, prior
violations provided that a complete cure of such violations has been
effected and that all costs incurred by the Village in connection with
such violations and such cure, including, without limitation, any actual
attorney fees, have been paid in full.
F. Intentional violation. The failure to cure a violation of this article within
30 days of service of a notice of violation shall be deemed to constitute
an intentional violation. The filing during such thirty-day period of a
complete application for a sign permit or a special exception sign
permit required to cure the violation shall extend such period to 60
§ 420-76 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-78
344:938
days after the permit application is approved, provided that the
application is approved and that the permit is issued and that the cure
is completed within such sixty-day period.
G. Minimum forfeiture for intentional violation. The minimum forfeiture
for an intentional violation of this article shall be $250, and each day
that an intentional violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate
and distinct intentional violation.
H. Illegal signs. Any illegal sign shall be promptly removed or otherwise
cured so as to eliminate any violation of this article. Any illegal sign
shall be subject to removal by the Village, at the cost of the owner, if
such sign is not removed or otherwise cured within 30 days after
service of a notice of violation. The filing during such thirty-day period
of a complete application for a sign permit or a special exception sign
permit required to cure the violation shall extend such period 60 days
after the permit application is approved, provided that the application
is approved and that the permit is issued and that the cure is completed
within such sixty-day period.
I. Effect of sign variance. A previously issued sign variance shall not be
interpreted as immunizing a sign from subsequent amendments of this
article or of any other applicable provisions of this chapter, to the extent
that the effect of such amendments is to make the sign nonconforming.
J. Primary monument sign. Every property improved with a principal
building that is used for any business, manufacturing, institutional or
recreational purpose shall have a primary monument sign. Every
primary monument sign shall include the street address of the property
on which it is located, which shall be in letters and numerals at least
three inches in height and at least 18 inches above the surface of the
ground. If required, a primary monument sign shall be a condition
precedent to occupancy.
K. Aggregate permitted background commercial advertising sign area.
(1) Except as is otherwise specifically provided in this article, the
aggregate permitted background commercial advertising sign area
allowed on a property used for any business, manufacturing,
institutional, park or recreational or agricultural purpose shall be
as follows: [Amended 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 05-31]
Building Floor Area
(square feet)
Sign Area
(square feet)
0 to 999.9 20
1,000 to 4,999.9 75
5,000 to 9,999.9 150
10,000 to 19,999.9 200
20,000 to 99,999.9 250
§ 420-78 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-78
344:939
Building Floor Area
(square feet)
Sign Area
(square feet)
100,000 to 199,999.9 300
200,000 or more 600
(2) Note that not all commercial advertising signs are counted in
determining the aggregate permitted background commercial
advertising sign area, pursuant to the definition of "aggregate
permitted background commercial advertising sign area" in
§ 420-59 of this chapter. In a situation where more than one
principal building is located on the property and the buildings are
not or will not be occupied by the same business or other entity, the
aggregate permitted background commercial advertising sign area
may, at the option of the owner, be applied on a per-building basis.
In a situation where a single building is or will be occupied by more
than one store, business or other entity, each having its own
dedicated entrance, the aggregate permitted background
commercial advertising sign area allowance may, at the option of
the owner, be applied on a per-store or other unit basis, in which
event the allowance shall be based on the interior qualifying floor
area exclusively occupied by each such store or other entity. Once
such option is exercised, it can be reversed only if all of the
background commercial advertising signage on the property is
brought into conformance. No new commercial advertising sign
may be permitted if the property on which the sign is proposed to
be located has more than the aggregate permitted background
commercial advertising sign area.
L. Signs for buildings straddling tax key parcel boundaries without side
setbacks. A special exception sign permit shall be required for the
installation, construction or modification of any commercial advertising
sign (including, without limitation, a modification of the message or
other display) on a property on which is located a shopping center or
shopping mall building, or any other building occupied by multiple
businesses or other entities, which straddles a tax key parcel boundary
without side yard setbacks, unless such tax key parcels are combined
into a single tax key parcel; or the property is zoned for planned
development, and a requirement of the planned development zoning is
coordinated and complementary signs in accordance with Subsection A
of this section; or the property is subject to a covenant running with the
land requiring coordinated and complementary signs in accordance
with Subsection A of this section, which has been approved by and is
enforceable by the Village. A condition of any such special exception
permit shall be that the subject sign shall be and shall continue to be
coordinated and complementary.
M. Materials. All nontemporary signs, and all temporary signs having a
height greater than four feet that are intended to be in place for 120
days or more, shall be constructed of sound, high-strength,
§ 420-78 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-78
344:940
appropriately sized, attractive materials that are resistant to rust,
corrosion, rot or unattractive weathering to ensure safe construction.
N. Wind pressure requirements. All nontemporary signs, and all temporary
freestanding signs having a height greater than four feet, shall be
designed and constructed to withstand wind pressure of not less than
40 pounds per square foot of surface area.
O. Temporary occupancy or obstruction of public space. The temporary
occupancy or obstruction of a sidewalk, public street or highway rightof-
way, or other public property during construction, removal, repair,
alteration, or maintenance of a sign is permitted with written approval
of the Village or other body having jurisdiction, provided that the space
occupied or obstructed is fenced off or otherwise appropriately
isolated, that any required temporary warning signs or devices are
installed and that all other applicable conditions or requirements are
satisfied.
P. Obsolete signs.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, any
obsolete sign that has been obsolete for more than 30 days is illegal
and a violation of this article.
(2) If an otherwise conforming sign becomes obsolete, it shall be
promptly removed, or the sign display shall be promptly modified to
make it nonobsolete, or the display area of the sign shall be
appropriately blanked in a safe, stable and attractive fashion. Such
a sign that is blanked for more than six months shall be promptly
removed. The Zoning Administrator may extend this six-month
period for up to an additional six months on good cause shown and
upon receipt of a cash deposit or satisfactory letter of credit in an
amount sufficient to pay for the removal of the sign and a written
agreement of the owner authorizing the Village to remove the sign
if it is not modified pursuant to a valid permit during such
additional period to make it nonobsolete and conforming.
(3) If a nonconforming accessory sign becomes obsolete, it shall be
promptly removed or otherwise cured. In curing such a sign, all
nonconformities with or violations of this article shall be
eliminated.
(4) If a nonconforming principal use, principal structure of off-site sign
becomes obsolete, it shall be promptly removed, or the sign display
shall be promptly modified to make it nonobsolete, or the display
area of the sign shall be appropriately blanked in a safe, stable and
attractive fashion. Such a sign that is blanked for more than 12
months shall be promptly removed.
Q. Dilapidated signs.
§ 420-78 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-78
344:941
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, any
dilapidated sign that has been dilapidated for more than 30 days is
illegal and a violation of this article.
(2) Subject to Subsection T of this section relating to nonconformities,
any dilapidated sign shall promptly be restored to nondilapidated
condition.
R. Zoning Administrator. The Village Zoning Administrator shall have the
authority and duty to interpret and apply the provisions of this article in
the first instance.
S. Application to planned development districts. The provisions of this
article shall automatically be incorporated by reference into any zoning
ordinance establishing or amending the regulations applicable to a
planned development zoning district except to the extent that the
Village Board specifically approves in such ordinance other or different
regulations relating to signs.
T. Nonconformities. The following regulations shall apply to and govern
signs which are themselves a valid nonconforming use, or a valid
nonconforming accessory sign, or a sign which relates to a valid
nonconforming use:
(1) A principal use sign, principal structure sign or off-site sign which
is itself a valid nonconforming use shall be allowed to continue
subject to the regulations of § 420-140 of this chapter, relating to
nonconforming uses, and all applicable requirements of this article.
(2) A valid nonconforming accessory sign shall be allowed to continue,
subject to the applicable requirements of this article, until such
sign becomes obsolete or becomes an illegal sign or a violation of
this article for any other reason. At that point, the sign must be
cured and any violation or nonconformity must be eliminated. Such
signs shall not have valid nonconforming use status, and the right
to continue such signs shall not necessarily run with the land.
(3) At such time as the cumulative cost of modifications to a
nonconforming accessory sign exceeds 50% of the cost of replacing
the sign, such sign shall become illegal and shall be removed or
otherwise cured. Any such cure shall eliminate all nonconformities
with or violations of this article.
(4) Any nonconforming accessory sign that is destroyed or damaged to
the extent of 50% of the cost of replacing the sign shall be illegal
and shall be removed or otherwise cured. Any such cure shall
eliminate all nonconformities with or violations of this article.
(5) Any permit issued with respect to a nonconforming accessory sign
shall expressly state that the permit is issued for a nonconforming
accessory sign and that neither the permit nor the work done nor
§ 420-78 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-78
344:942
the expense incurred pursuant to such permit will change the
status of such sign.
(6) Any application for a sign permit for an accessory sign relating to
an allegedly valid nonconforming use shall be treated and
processed as an application for a special exception sign permit.
[Amended 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 09-01]
(a) The regulations of this article relating to accessory signs that
would be appropriate for the nonconforming use if it were
located in an appropriate zoning district shall be utilized as a
guide in acting upon any such application for an accessory
sign, and the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
impose conditions which are more stringent than such
regulations if it specifically finds that:
[1] Such conditions are required to avoid a nuisance, to
protect the value of neighboring properties from
significant diminution or otherwise to avoid serious
interference with the rights and reasonable expectations
of owners and users of property within the zoning district
where the nonconforming use exists which would
otherwise result from the proposed sign; and
[2] The imposition of such conditions will not substantially
interfere with the right of the nonconforming use to
continue.
(b) No special exception permit for an accessory sign relating to a
nonconforming use shall be granted unless the Zoning
Administrator specifically finds that:
[1] The use is a valid nonconforming use, regarding which the
owner or applicant has the burden of proof with respect to
all elements of nonconforming use status, by a
preponderance of the evidence (such a finding does not
estop or otherwise bar the Village from making a
subsequent determination that the use is not a valid
nonconforming use, either because of subsequent events
or circumstances or because of new evidence regarding
prior events or circumstances); and
[2] The permit will not allow and is not associated with an
expansion, extension or change in the nature of the
nonconforming use.
(c) Any such special exception sign permit shall be expressly
conditioned upon continuation of the status of the principal use
to which the sign relates as a valid nonconforming use and
shall expressly provide that any rights acquired by virtue of the
permit shall terminate automatically upon the termination of
valid nonconforming use status of such principal use.
§ 420-78 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-78
344:943
U. Indemnification for sign installed, constructed or modified in Village
street right-of-way. Any person who applies for a permit to install,
construct, or modify a sign in the right-of-way of any Village street shall
offer to enter into a written agreement with the Village, satisfactory in
form to the Village Attorney, agreeing to indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Village, its officers, agents and employees for, from and
against any and all causes of action, claims or demands of any person
arising out of or relating to such sign or its location in the Village rightof-
way or any work done on or in connection with such sign, and all
related liability or costs (including reasonable attorney fees) incurred
by the Village.
V. Freestanding signs. No freestanding sign may be used for any of the
aggregate permitted background commercial advertising sign area
allowed pursuant to the definition of "aggregate permitted background
commercial advertising sign area" in § 420-59 of this chapter.
W. Standard minimum setback distances. The following standard minimum
setback distances shall apply to all signs:
(1) Five feet from any wetland or floodplain, unless specifically
permitted by the wetland or floodplain provisions of this chapter.
(2) Seventy-five feet from the ordinary high-water mark of any body of
navigable water.
(3) The distance from any side or rear property line equal to the height
of the sign.
X. Reasonable need. Whenever this article provides that signs may be
permitted based upon reasonable need, the following considerations
shall apply, without limitation:
(1) Whether the signs are excessive in terms of number, size or
repetition.
(2) Whether the signs will add substantially to a cluttered sense about
the site.
(3) Whether the signs are addressed to the appropriate audience
under the circumstances.
(4) Whether the signs present information that will be useful and
helpful to the public.
(5) Whether the signs are appropriately located in light of their type,
message and the physical layout of the site.
Y. Wall sign or canopy sign for a particular business or other entity in a
multi-occupant building. A wall sign or canopy sign for a particular
business or other entity that has an obvious storefront area and its own
dedicated entrance in a multi-occupant building shall not extend past
the storefront area of the business or other entity so advertised.
§ 420-78 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-78
344:944
Z. Corner sign. In any situation where the maximum allowable dimensions
of a sign are affected by whether or not it is located adjacent to an
arterial street or highway, and a sign is located at the corner of an
intersection and is essentially equidistant from the two intersecting
streets or highways, and one of the intersecting streets or highways is
arterial and the other is not, the sign shall be deemed to be located
adjacent to an arterial street or highway.
AA. Signs for nonconforming use. Notwithstanding any provisions of this
article relating to the zoning districts in which certain types of signs
may be permitted, it is the intent of this article that a nonconforming
use may generally be permitted to have the same types of signs that it
could have if it were a conforming use, but such signs require a special
exception sign permit and are subject to more stringent regulation
pursuant to Subsection T of this section..
BB. Sign required for unit in unified development. A wall sign or a
temporary banner sign is a condition precedent to occupancy of a store
or other unit in a unified development that is or will be occupied by
more than one business or other entity, if such store or other unit has its
own dedicated entrance, and if the owner has exercised the option to
apply the aggregate permitted background commercial advertising sign
area on a per-store or other unit basis.
CC. Service of notice of violation. Any notice of violation of this article shall
be served on the person or entity occupying the property where the
sign is located in the manner of serving a summons pursuant to
§ 801.11, Wis. Stats., and a copy of such notice shall promptly be mailed
by first class United States mail to the last known address of the owner
of such property and, if the owner or user of the sign is not the owner of
the property, to the last known address of the owner or user of the sign.
If there is no person occupying the property where the sign is located,
or if service cannot be made pursuant to § 801.11, Wis. Stats., with
reasonable effort, the mailed notice(s) shall suffice.
§ 420-78 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-78
344:945

ARTICLE XI
Fences
§ 420-79. Zoning permit required; exception.
No person shall construct, repair, replace, install, enlarge, or alter any
fence, as defined by this chapter, unless a valid zoning permit for a fence
has first been issued pursuant to this chapter and such permit has neither
expired nor been suspended or revoked, except as provided in § 420-80. If
work has commenced or is completed without proper permits, the Village
may take the appropriate actions to prosecute the violation of this chapter.
(See § 420-22 of this chapter for additional information related to a zoning
permit for a fence, including but not limited to preconditions, application
requirements, incomplete applications, approval or denial of an application,
issuance of a permit, binding nature of application, acceptance of permit
conditions, time limits, assignment, inspections required, suspension,
revocation or voiding a permit, circularity, plan changes, plans on file,
invalid permits and disclaimer.)
§ 420-80. Fences permitted without zoning permit.
The following types of fences are permitted as specified without a zoning
permit subject to the following restrictions and provided that said fence
does not in any way interfere with traffic visibility, does not block, redirect
or cause a drainage problem for the adjacent or downstream properties,
and is not located within any utility easement(s) without written permission
from the applicable utility company:
§ 420-81. Standards for fences.
A. A snow fence shall be permitted in all districts when comprised of
wooden pickets bound together by wire and not exceeding four feet in
height and removed between May 1 and November 1 of each year. No
privately owned snow fence shall extend into the road right-of-way line.
B. Agricultural field fences shall not require a permit and shall not extend
into the road right-of-way. Such fences shall be allowed only in any
agricultural district. An agricultural field fence is used to provide
enclosure for agricultural animals or fields in any agricultural zoning
district. An agricultural field fence may be constructed of fieldstone,
wood or wire and may be electric or may incorporate barbed wire. Any
other type of fence constructed in any agricultural districts shall follow
the regulations pursuant to § 420-81A below. [Amended 3-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-17; 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-27]
C. Decorative fences not exceeding two feet in height shall be permitted in
all districts.
D. Underground electrical fences are permitted in any agricultural,
residential or C-2 District.
§ 420-79 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-81
344:947
A. Residential fences. A residential fence is used to provide enclosure of
all or a portion of the property for privacy or security in any residential,
agricultural, or conservancy district, subject to the following
requirements:
(1) Said fence may be constructed of brick, field stone, wood, wrought
iron, chain link (with a minimum thickness of nine gauge and a top
support), or other appropriate material approved by the Zoning
Administrator; however, a residential fence shall not be an
agricultural field fence or electric fence or incorporate razor or
barbed wire.
(2) It shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner(s) to ensure
that the following setbacks are met:
(a) Said fence may be located on the side or rear property lines.
(b) Said fence may be located in a shore yard, provided that it is
not located on the water side of the ordinary high-water mark
of said navigable waterway. Said fence shall not block, redirect
or impede the flow of water or drainage within the area.
(c) Said fence may be placed within a wetland, provided that there
is minimal disturbance to the wetlands.
(d) Said fence shall be set back a minimum of two feet from any
Village right-of-way.
(e) Said fence shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any
private road as measured from the outer edge of the gravel
shoulder or back of curb.
(3) Said fence shall not be located within the vision triangle, as defined
by this chapter.121
(4) The fence height shall include all elevations, including berms,
above the overall standard grade of the property, excluding
architectural fineals.
(5) Said fence shall not be higher than six feet if located in the rear
yard, rear street yard and/or side street yard.
(6) Said fence shall not be higher than four feet if located within a front
street yard.
(7) Concrete or brick pillars located between fence sections may be
permitted to a height of six feet in a front street yard.
(8) Said fence shall not be located within a utility easement(s) without
written permission from the applicable utility company.
121. Editor's Note: See § 420-44, Vision triangle.
§ 420-81 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-81
344:948
(9) Said fence shall not be located within a drainage easement or other
easement without written permission from the easement grantor
and the Village.
(10) Said fence shall not block, redirect or cause a drainage problem for
the adjacent or downstream properties.
(11) Said fence shall be in compliance with any structural requirements
of any local, county and state codes.
(12) The property owner(s) is responsible for ensuring that said fence is
designed and constructed so as to resist any wind load to which
said fence may be subject.
(13) Every person or legal entity residing or located in the Village of
Pleasant Prairie is prohibited from possessing or harboring a wolfdog
hybrid in the Village unless he or it meets the following
criteria:
(a) Written proof from the property owner/occupant that a legally
licensed wolf-dog hybrid is kept on said property shall be
submitted. A wolf-dog hybrid is defined as an animal formed of
the union of a dog and wolf species and possessing physical
characteristics typically attributed thereto.
(b) Any licensed wolf-dog hybrid shall be kept in an enclosure in
the rear or side of a principal structure of at least 1,600 square
feet surrounded by a fence seven feet high with an overhang of
fencing angling into the fenced area. No wolf-dog hybrid shall
be kept in the front or side street yard of any property.
(c) A barrier or wall shall be placed a minimum of two feet below
grade inside the pen beneath the vertical fencing to prevent
the wolf-dog hybrid from digging out along the fence.
(d) A six-foot-high solid child-proof barrier fence shall be installed
not less than six feet away from the fenced enclosure to
prevent the possibility of children reaching through the fence
to touch the animal(s).
(e) If such referenced property no longer has a licensed wolf-dog
hybrid for more than 12 consecutive months, the seven-foothigh
fence shall become a nonconforming accessory structure,
and the fence shall be removed or reconstructed to conform to
the provisions of this chapter.
(14) All structural and support components of a fence shall face away
from adjacent properties. Fence sections being replaced due to
damage/maintenance may be replaced in a similar fashion to the
original installation with approval of the Zoning Administrator.
[Added 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
§ 420-81 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-81
344:949
(15) Fences shall be installed with the finished side facing the adjacent
property or public right-of-way. Fence sections being replaced due
to damage/maintenance may be replaced in a similar fashion to the
original installation with approval of the Zoning Administrator.
[Added 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
B. Commercial fences. A commercial fence is used to provide enclosure,
screening or security for all or a portion of a property in any business,
manufacturing, institutional or park and recreational district, subject to
the following requirements:
(1) Said fence may be constructed of brick, field stones, wood, wrought
iron, chain link (with a minimum thickness of nine gauge and a top
support) or other appropriate material approved by the Zoning
Administrator; however, a commercial fence shall not be an
agricultural field fence nor an electric fence but may incorporate
razor or barbed wire only as deemed necessary by the Village
Zoning Administrator.
(2) It shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner to ensure
that the following setbacks are met:
(a) Said fence may be located on the side or rear property lines.
(b) Said fence may be located in any street yard only upon
approval by the Village Zoning Administrator, provided that
said fence is set back a minimum of 15 feet from any public
right-of-way.
(c) Said fence may be located in any street yard only upon
approval by the Village Zoning Administrator, provided that
said fence is set back a minimum of 20 feet from any private
road as measured from the outer edge of the gravel shoulder or
back of curb.
(d) Said fence may be located in a shore yard, provided that it is
not located on the water side of the ordinary high-water mark
of said navigable waterway. Said fence shall not block, redirect
or impede the flow of water or drainage within the area.
(e) Said fence may be placed within a wetland, provided that there
is minimal disturbance to the wetlands.
(f) Said fence shall not be placed within the vision triangle, as
defined by this chapter.122
(3) Said fence shall not be higher than 10 feet. The fence height shall
include all elevations, including berms, above the overall standard
grade of the property.
122. Editor's Note: See § 420-44, Vision triangle.
§ 420-81 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-81
344:950
§ 420-82. Dilapidated or hazardous fences.
When a fence is declared by the Zoning Administrator, Assistant Zoning
Administrator or Deputy Zoning Administrator to be dilapidated or
hazardous, the Zoning Administrator may order such fence removed or
repaired, and if it is not removed or repaired within a reasonable time after
notice to the owner, the Village may remove the same and charge the cost
thereof to the owner(s). Fences in violation of this chapter shall, upon their
repair or replacement, be repaired or replaced to meet the requirements of
this chapter.
(4) No fence shall be placed within any utility easement(s) without
written permission from the applicable utility company.
(5) Said fence shall not be located within a drainage easement.
(6) Said fence shall not be located within any other easement without
written permission from the easement grantor and the Village.
(7) No fence shall block, redirect or cause a drainage problem for the
adjacent or downstream properties.
(8) Said fence shall be in compliance with any structural requirements
of any local, county and state codes.
(9) The property owner(s) is responsible for ensuring that said fence is
designed and constructed so as to resist any wind load to which
said fence may be subject.
(10) The Village Zoning Administrator may require a fence to be
installed along the rear or side property line of a property located
within a business or manufacturing district that abuts a property
located within a residential district. Said fence shall be constructed
of a solid material, including brick, wood, concrete or field stone,
and shall be a minimum of six feet high with the good side of the
fence facing the property located within the residential district.
§ 420-81 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-82
344:951

ARTICLE XII
Swimming Pools
§ 420-83. Zoning permit required.
No person shall construct, repair, replace, install, enlarge, or alter any
swimming pool, as defined by this chapter, unless a valid zoning permit
for a swimming pool has first been issued pursuant to this chapter and
such permit has neither expired nor been suspended or revoked. If work
has commenced or is completed without proper permits, the Village may
take the appropriate actions to prosecute the violation of this chapter. (See
§ 420-22 of this chapter for additional information related to a zoning permit
for a swimming pool, including but not limited to preconditions, application
requirements, incomplete applications, approval or denial of an application,
issuance of a permit, binding nature of application, acceptance of permit
conditions, time limits, assignment, inspections required, suspension,
revocation or voiding a permit, circularity, plan changes, plans on file,
invalid permits and disclaimer.)
§ 420-84. Standards for swimming pools.
A swimming pool may be installed in all districts except the C-1, C-3 or FPO
District subject to the following requirements:
A. All reasonable precautions should be taken by the property owner(s) to
protect the users of the swimming pool from injury or accident.
Convenient means of ingress and egress should be provided, and the
depth of the water and any irregularities in the bottom should be clearly
indicated. Safety equipment, such as but not limited to life buoys, life
hooks and first aid kits, should be provided and be readily accessible.
B. Said swimming pool shall not be filled with any amount of water until
the required swimming pool enclosure pursuant to Subsection F has
been properly installed and inspected.
C. It shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner(s) to ensure that
the following setbacks are met:
(1) Said swimming pool, including the pumps, filters, pool water
disinfection equipment and all other accessories, shall be located a
minimum of eight feet from any side or rear property line.
(2) A swimming pool shall be located a minimum of eight feet from any
principal or accessory structure; however a hot tub shall be located
a minimum of two feet from any principal or accessory structure.
[Amended 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 05-49]
(3) Said swimming pool shall comply with any and all state, county or
Village regulations with respect to the distances from an on-site
sewage disposal system or private well(s).
(4) Said swimming pool shall not be located within a front street yard.
§ 420-83 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-84
344:953
(5) Said swimming pool may be located within a side street yard or a
rear street yard, as defined by this chapter, provided that said
swimming pool is located a minimum of 15 feet from the property
line adjacent to the right-of-way.
(6) A swimming pool shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from the
ordinary high-water mark of any navigable body of water.
[Amended 2-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-10; 7-17-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-32]
(7) Said swimming pool shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any
field-delineated wetlands.
D. Said swimming pool that incorporates a deck shall meet the
requirements of § 420-87 of this chapter.
E. If a swimming pool is located within an approved principal structure or
an accessory structure, then said structure shall meet all of the
appropriate setback requirements for that structure.
F. If the swimming pool is located outside of an approved principal or
accessory structure, then one of the following swimming pool
enclosures shall be installed and maintained on the property:
[Amended 10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 06-50]
(1) A four-foot-high residential fence constructed pursuant to
§ 420-81A shall be installed that is located in the rear, side and/or
rear street yard that completely surrounds the swimming pool.
(2) A deck with a railing or a railing/fence attached to the outer edge of
the swimming pool shall be installed that completely surrounds the
swimming pool, provided that the following requirements are met:
(a) The height of the railing/fence shall be a minimum of four feet,
as measured from the finished yard grade to the top of the
railing/fence; and
(b) The yard grade around the perimeter of the swimming pool
shall remain level or slope downward away from the swimming
pool a minimum of five feet from the base of the swimming
pool; and
(c) The ladder or steps used as a means of ingress/egress to the
swimming pool shall be enclosed with one of the following:
[1] A railing/fence with a self-closing and self-locking
mechanism that is a minimum of four feet in height as
measured from the finished yard grade to the top of the
railing/fence and the yard grade shall remain level or slope
downward away from the swimming pool a minimum of
five feet from the base of the swimming pool; or
§ 420-84 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-84
344:954
[2] A railing/fence that is a minimum of four feet in height as
measured from the top step of the ladder to the top of the
railing/fence which shall have a self-closing and selflocking
mechanism; or
[3] The ladder or steps that shall be hinged at the top and
capable of being raised out of the reach of children with a
self-locking mechanism, wherein the self-locking
mechanism is a minimum of four feet as measured from
the finished yard grade; or
[4] A ladder or steps that is covered with a self-enclosing and
self-latching barrier.
(3) If the outer wall of the swimming pool is a minimum of four feet in
height, as measured from the finished yard grade to the top of the
swimming pool, and the yard grade around the perimeter of the
swimming pool remains level or slopes downward away from the
swimming pool a minimum of five feet from the base of the
swimming pool, then a railing/fence as specified above in
Subsection F(1) and (2) is not required; provided, however, that the
ladder or steps used as a means of ingress/egress to the swimming
pool shall be enclosed with one of the following:
(a) A railing/fence with a self-closing and self-locking mechanism
that is a minimum of four feet in height as measured from the
finished yard grade to the top of the railing/fence, and the yard
grade shall remain level or slope downward away from the
swimming pool a minimum of five feet from the base of the
swimming pool; or
(b) A railing/fence that is a minimum of four feet in height as
measured from the top step of the ladder to the top of the
railing/fence, which shall have a self-closing and self-locking
mechanism; or
(c) A ladder or steps that shall be hinged at the top and capable of
being raised out of the reach of children with a self-locking
mechanism, wherein the self-locking mechanism is a minimum
of four feet as measured from the finished yard grade; or
(d) The ladder or steps that shall be covered with a self-enclosing
and self-latching barrier.
(4) For hot tubs only: A fitted cover that is capable of supporting a
minimum of 100 pounds shall be securely fastened to the outer
edge of the hot tub.
G. Every gate or other opening in the fence or deck enclosing the
swimming pool, except an opening to the dwelling or other main
building of the premises, shall be kept securely closed and locked at all
times when the owner(s) or occupant(s) of the property is not present at
§ 420-84 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-84
344:955
§ 420-85. Dilapidated or hazardous swimming pools.
When a swimming pool is declared by the Zoning Administrator, Assistant
Zoning Administrator or Deputy Zoning Administrator to be dilapidated or
hazardous, the Administrator may order such swimming pool removed or
repaired, and if it is not removed or repaired within a reasonable time after
notice to the owner(s), the Village may remove the same and charge the
cost thereof to the owner(s). Swimming pools in violation of this chapter
shall, upon their repair or replacement, be repaired or replaced to meet the
requirements of this chapter
such swimming pool. All such gates shall be equipped with self-closing
and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate.
H. Any lighting installed in connection with the pool shall be shielded and
directed downward onto the yard or pool; the light shall not glare onto
adjacent properties or roadways.
I. No water drained from a pool shall be discharged over or near any
septic tank, septic field or well or onto adjacent properties.
J. Said swimming pool shall be in compliance of the National Electrical
Code.
K. Said swimming pool shall not be located within a utility easement(s)
without written permission from the applicable utility company.
L. Said swimming pool shall not be located within a drainage easement.
M. Said swimming pool shall not be located within any other easement
without written permission from the easement grantor and the Village.
N. Said swimming pool shall not block, redirect or cause a drainage
problem for the adjacent or downstream properties.
§ 420-84 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-85
344:956
ARTICLE XIII
Other Accessory Structures
§ 420-86. Residential detached garages; gardening, tool or storage
sheds; gazebos; farm-related structures, excluding silos and storage
bins. [Amended 2-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-10; 3-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-18]
A. Zoning permit required. No person shall construct, repair, replace,
install, enlarge, or alter any detached accessory structure specified
below unless a valid zoning permit for said structure has first been
issued pursuant to this chapter and such permit has neither expired nor
been suspended or revoked. If work has commenced or is completed
without proper permits, the Village may take the appropriate actions to
prosecute the violation of this chapter. Detached garages; gardening,
tool or storage sheds; and/or gazebos constructed of canvas, plastic or
other similar materials are prohibited. (See § 420-22 of this chapter for
additional information related to a zoning permit for a detached garage;
gardening, tool or storage shed; or gazebo, including but not limited to
preconditions, application requirements, incomplete applications,
approval or denial of an application, issuance of a permit, binding
nature of application, acceptance of permit conditions, time limits,
assignment, inspections required, suspension, revocation of or voiding
a permit, circularity, plan changes, plans on file, invalid permits and
disclaimer.)
B. Standards for detached garages; gardening, tool or storage sheds; and
gazebos within the residential districts listed below, and other farmrelated
accessory structures, excluding silos and storage bins, which
are only allowed within the A-2, A-3 and AGO Districts. [Amended
9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-27; 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06]
(1) In the C-2, A-2, A-3, AGO, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5, R-6, R-7,
R-8 and R-12 Zoning Districts, the following is required:
(a) If the structure is 150 square feet or less in area (first floor
area not to exceed 150 square feet), then the following shall be
required:
[1] Said structure shall only be located in a side yard, rear
yard or rear street yard;
[2] Said structure shall be a minimum of 10 feet from a
principal structure;
[3] Said structure shall be a minimum of:
[a] Five feet from any other accessory structure that is
less than 1,000 square feet in size;
[b] Ten feet from any other accessory structure that is
between 1,001 and 2,000 square feet in size; and
§ 420-86 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-86
344:957
[c] Twenty-five feet from any other accessory structure
that is greater than 2,000 square feet in size;
[4] Said structure shall be a minimum of three feet from any
side or rear lot line;
[5] Said structure shall be a minimum of five feet from any
rear street lot line adjacent to a Village right-of-way and
shall be a minimum of 15 feet from any rear street lot line
adjacent to a county or state right-of-way;
[6] Said structure shall not exceed 15 feet in height as
measured from the grade at the base of the structure to
the highest roof ridge;
[7] Said structure shall not be used for human habitation or
animal shelter, except in the A-2, A-3 and AGO Districts,
where said structure may be used for an animal shelter for
the animals which are only allowed in the said agricultural
districts;
[8] Said structure shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway.
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[9] Said structure shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from
wetlands on said property and at least 10 feet from
wetlands on adjacent properties; and
[10] In no case shall an individual detached accessory structure
exceed the first floor square foot area of the principal
structure (excluding an attached garage or deck) or
exceed the height of the principal structure on said
property.
(b) If the structure is between 151 square feet and 600 square feet
in area (first floor area not to exceed 600 square feet), then the
following shall be required:
[1] Said structure shall only be located in a side yard, rear
yard or rear street yard;
[2] Said structure shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from
a principal structure;
[3] Said structure shall be a minimum of:
[a] Five feet from any other accessory structure that is
less than 1,000 square feet in size;
[b] Ten feet from any other accessory structure that is
between 1,001 and 2,000 square feet in size; and
§ 420-86 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-86
344:958
[c] Twenty-five feet from any other accessory structure
that is greater than 2,000 square feet in size;
[4] Said structure shall be located a minimum of five feet from
any side or rear lot line;
[5] Said structure shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any rear
street lot line and shall be a minimum of 20 feet from any
rear street lot line adjacent to a county or state right-ofway;
[6] Said structure shall not exceed 15 feet in height as
measured from the grade at the base of the structure to
the highest roof ridge;
[7] Said structure shall not be used for human habitation or
animal shelter, except in the A-2, A-3 and AGO Districts,
where said structure may be used for an animal shelter for
the animals which are only allowed in the said agricultural
districts;
[8] Said structure shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway,
except a minimum of a fifty-foot setback is required from
the ordinary high-water mark of Lake Michigan.
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-31]
[9] Said structure shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from
wetlands on said property and at least 10 feet from
wetlands on adjacent properties; and
[10] In no case shall an individual detached accessory structure
exceed the first floor square foot area of the principal
structure (excluding an attached garage or deck) or
exceed the height of the principal structure on said
property.
(c) If the structure is between 601 square feet and 1,000 square
feet in area (first floor area not to exceed 1,000 square feet),
then the following shall be required:
[1] Said structure shall only be located in a side yard, rear
yard or rear street yard, except if located within an A-2 or
AGO District;
[2] Said structure shall be a minimum of 10 feet from a
principal structure;
[3] Said structure shall be a minimum of:
[a] Five feet from any other accessory structure that is
less than 1,000 square feet in size;
§ 420-86 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-86
344:959
[b] Ten feet from any other accessory structure that is
between 1,001 and 2,000 square feet in size; and
[c] Twenty-five feet from any other accessory structure
that is greater than 2,000 square feet in size;
[4] Said structure shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any side
or rear lot line;
[5] Said structure shall be a minimum of 20 feet from any rear
street lot line adjacent to a Village right-of-way and shall
be a minimum of 40 feet from any rear street lot line
adjacent to a county or state right-of-way;
[6] Said structure shall not be used for human habitation or
animal shelter, except in the A-2, A-3 and AGO Districts,
where said structure may be used for an animal shelter for
the animals which are only allowed in the said agricultural
districts;
[7] Said structure shall not exceed 20 feet in height, except as
provided below:
[a] In the A-3 District where the lot is greater than five
acres, said structure shall not exceed 50 feet in
height;
[b] In the A-2 or AGO District where the lot is a minimum
of five acres, said structure shall not exceed 50 feet in
height;
[c] In the A-2 or AGO District where the lot is greater than
10 acres, said structure shall not exceed 100 feet in
height;
[8] Said structure shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway,
except a minimum of a fifty-foot setback is required from
the ordinary high-water mark of Lake Michigan.
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[9] Said structure shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from
wetlands on said property and a minimum of 10 feet from
wetlands on adjacent properties; and
[10] In no case shall an individual detached accessory structure
exceed the first floor square foot area of the principal
structure (excluding an attached garage or deck), except
in the A-2, A-3 and AGO Districts.
[11] In no case shall an individual detached accessory structure
exceed the height of the principal structure on said
property, except in the A-2, A-3 and AGO District, where
§ 420-86 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-86
344:960
the maximum height complies with Subsection B(1)(c)[7]
above.
(d) If the structure is between 1,001 square feet and 1,500 square
feet in area (first floor area not to exceed 1,500 square feet),
then the following shall be required:
[1] The lot shall be a minimum of 20,000 square feet;
[2] Said structure shall only be located in a side yard or rear
yard, except if located within an A-2 or AGO District;
[3] Said structure shall be a minimum of 15 feet from a
principal structure;
[4] Said structure shall be a minimum of:
[a] Five feet from any other accessory structure that is
less than 1,000 square feet in size;
[b] Ten feet from any other accessory structure that is
between 1,001 and 2,000 square feet in size; and
[c] Twenty-five feet from any other accessory structure
that is greater than 2,000 square feet in size;
[5] Said structure shall be a minimum of 15 feet from any side
or rear lot line;
[6] Said structure shall not be used for human habitation or
animal shelter, except in the A-2, A-3 and AGO Districts,
where said structure may be used for an animal shelter for
the animals which are only allowed in the said agricultural
districts;
[7] Said structure shall not exceed 20 feet in height, except as
provided below:
[a] In the A-3 District where the lot is greater than five
acres, said structure shall not exceed 50 feet in
height;
[b] In the A-2 or AGO District where the lot is a minimum
of five acres, said structure shall not exceed 50 feet in
height;
[c] In the A-2 or AGO District where the lot is greater than
10 acres, said structure shall not exceed 100 feet in
height;
[8] Said structure shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway,
except a minimum of a fifty-foot setback is required from
§ 420-86 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-86
344:961
the ordinary high-water mark of Lake Michigan.
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[9] Said structure shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from
wetlands on said property and a minimum of 10 feet from
wetlands on adjacent properties; and
[10] In no case shall an individual detached accessory structure
exceed the first floor square foot area of the principal
structure (excluding an attached garage or deck), except
in the A-2, A-3 and AGO Districts.
[11] In no case shall an individual detached accessory structure
exceed the height of the principal structure on said
property, except in the A-2, A-3, APO and AGO Districts,
where the maximum height complies with Subsection
B(1)(d)[7] above.
(e) If the structure is between 1,501 square feet and 2,000 square
feet in area (first floor area not to exceed 2,000 square feet),
then the following shall be required:
[1] The lot shall be a minimum of one acre (43,560 square
feet);
[2] Said structure shall only be located in a side yard or rear
yard, except if located within an A-2 or AGO District;
[3] Said structure shall be a minimum of 15 feet from a
principal structure;
[4] Said structure shall be a minimum of:
[a] Five feet from any other accessory structure that is
less than 1,000 square feet in size;
[b] Ten feet from any other accessory structure that is
between 1,001 and 2,000 square feet in size; and
[c] Twenty-five feet from any other accessory structure
that is greater than 2,000 square feet in size;
[5] Said structure shall be a minimum of 15 feet from any side
or rear lot line in any C-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-6 and
R-6 District and a minimum of 25 feet from any side or rear
lot line in any A-2, A-3 and AGO Districts.
[6] Said structure shall not be used for human habitation or
animal shelter, except in the A-2, A-3 and AGO Districts,
where said structure may be used for an animal shelter for
the animals which are only allowed in the said agricultural
districts;
§ 420-86 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-86
344:962
[7] Said structure shall not exceed 20 feet in height, except as
provided below:
[a] In the A-3 District where the lot is greater than five
acres, said structure shall not exceed 50 feet in
height;
[b] In the A-2 or AGO District where the lot is a minimum
of five acres, said structure shall not exceed 75 feet in
height;
[c] In the A-2 or AGO District where the lot is greater than
10 acres, said structure shall not exceed 100 feet in
height;
[8] Said structure shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway,
except a minimum of a fifty-foot setback is required from
the ordinary high-water mark of Lake Michigan.
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[9] Said structure shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from
wetlands on said property and at least 10 feet from
wetlands on adjacent properties; and
[10] In no case shall an individual detached accessory structure
exceed the first floor square foot area of the principal
structure (excluding an attached garage or deck), except
in the A-2, A-3 or AGO District.
[11] In no case shall an individual detached accessory structure
exceed the height of the principal structure on said
property, except in the A-2, A-3 and AGO Districts, where
the maximum height complies with Subsection B(1)(e)[7]
above.
(f) If the structure is between 2,000 square feet and 5,000 square
feet in area (first floor area not to exceed 5,000 square feet),
then the following shall be required:
[1] The lot shall be zoned A-2, A-3 or AGO and be a minimum
of five acres (217,800 square feet);
[2] Said structure shall only be located in a side yard or rear
yard, except if located within an A-2 or AGO District;
[3] Said structure shall be a minimum of 20 feet from a
principal structure;
[4] Said structure shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any
other accessory structure;
§ 420-86 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-86
344:963
[5] Said structure shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any side
lot line and a minimum of 50 feet from any rear lot line;
[6] Said structure shall not be used for human habitation;
[7] Said structure may be used for an animal shelter for
animals specifically allowed in the A-2, A-3 or AGO
District;
[8] Said structure shall not exceed 50 feet in height in the A-3
District or 100 feet in the A-2 or AGO District;
[9] Said structure shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway,
except a minimum of a fifty-foot setback is required from
the ordinary high-water mark of Lake Michigan; and
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[10] Said structure shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from
wetlands on said property.
(g) If the structure is larger than 5,000 square feet in area (first
floor area not to exceed 5,000 square feet), then the following
shall be required:
[1] The lot shall be zoned A-2 or AGO and be a minimum of 10
acres (435,600 square feet);
[2] Said structure shall be a minimum of 20 feet from a
principal structure;
[3] Said structure shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any
other accessory structure;
[4] Said structure shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any side
lot line and a minimum of 50 feet from the rear lot line;
[5] Said structure shall not be used for human habitation;
[6] Said structure may be used for an animal shelter for
animals specifically allowed in the A-2 or AGO District;
[7] Said structure shall not exceed 100 feet in height;
[8] Said structure shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway,
except a minimum of a fifty-foot setback is required from
the ordinary high-water mark of Lake Michigan; and
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[9] Said structure shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from
wetlands on said property and at least 10 feet from
wetlands on adjacent properties.
§ 420-86 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-86
344:964
(2) In the R-9, R-10 and R-11 Zoning Districts the following is required:
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(a) A structure that is 600 square feet or less in area (first floor
area not to exceed 600 square feet) shall be located in a side
yard or rear yard, provided that the structure is at least 10 feet
from a principal structure, at least five feet from any other
accessory structure, and at least five feet from any lot line;
shall not be used for human habitation or animal shelter; shall
be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the ordinary high-water
mark of a navigable waterway, except a minimum of a fifty-foot
setback is required from the ordinary high-water mark of Lake
Michigan; shall be located at least 25 feet from wetlands on
said property and at least 10 feet from wetlands on adjacent
properties; and shall not extend 20 feet in height.
(b) A structure that is between 601 square feet in area and 1,000
square feet in area (first floor area not to exceed 1,000 square
feet) shall be located in a side yard or rear yard, provided that
the structure is at least 15 feet from a principal structure, at
least 10 feet from any other accessory structure, and at least
20 feet from any lot line; shall not be used for human habitation
or animal shelter; shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway, except
a minimum of a fifty-foot setback is required from the ordinary
high-water mark of Lake Michigan; shall be located at least 25
feet from wetlands on said property and at least 10 feet from
wetlands on adjacent properties; and shall not extend 20 feet
in height.
(c) A structure that is between 1,001 square feet in area and 1,500
square feet in area (first floor area not to exceed 1,500 square
feet) shall be located in a side yard or rear yard, provided that
the structure is at least 15 feet from a principal structure, at
least 10 feet from any other accessory structure and at least 25
feet from any lot line; shall not be used for human habitation or
animal shelter; shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the
ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway, except a
minimum of a fifty-foot setback is required from the ordinary
high-water mark of Lake Michigan; shall be located at least 25
feet from wetlands on said property and at least 10 feet from
wetlands on adjacent properties; and shall not extend 20 feet
in height.
(d) A structure that is between 1,501 square feet in area and 2,000
square feet in area (first floor area not to exceed 2,000 square
feet) shall be located in a side yard or rear yard, provided that
the structure is at least 15 feet from a principal structure, at
least 10 feet from any other accessory structure and at least 30
feet from any lot line; shall not be used for human habitation or
animal shelter; shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the
§ 420-86 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-86
344:965
§ 420-87. Residential decks, porches, steps and stairs. [Amended
2-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-10; 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06; 7-17-2017
by Ord. No. 17-32; 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 17-51]
ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway, except a
minimum of a fifty-foot setback is required from the ordinary
high-water mark of Lake Michigan; shall be located at least 25
feet from wetlands on said property and at least 10 feet from
wetlands on adjacent properties; and shall not extend 20 feet
in height.
(e) In no case shall an individual structure exceed the first-floor
square foot area of the principal structure (excluding an
attached garage or deck) or exceed the height of the principal
structure on said property.
A. Zoning permit required. No person shall construct, repair, replace,
install, enlarge, or alter any deck or porch or steps or stairs unless a
valid zoning permit for said structure has first been issued pursuant to
this chapter and such permit has neither expired nor been suspended or
revoked. If work has commenced or is completed without proper
permits, the Village may take the appropriate actions to prosecute the
violation of this chapter. (See § 420-22 of this chapter for additional
information related to a zoning permit for said structure, including but
not limited to preconditions, application requirements, incomplete
applications, approval or denial of an application, issuance of a permit,
binding nature of application, acceptance of permit conditions, time
limits, assignment, inspections required, suspension, revocation or
voiding a permit, circularity, plan changes, plans on file, invalid permits
and disclaimer.)
B. Setback requirements for decks, porches, steps or stairs in any
agricultural district, C-2 Conservancy District or R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4,
R-4.5, R-5, R-6, R-8 or R-12 Residential Districts.
(1) Shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any rear property
line, provided that the structure is not located within any
easements.
(2) Shall be set back a minimum of three feet from any side property
line, provided that said structure is not located within any
easements.
(3) Shall be set back 10 feet from any wetland on the property and
three feet from wetlands on an adjacent property.
(4) May be located in a shore yard, provided that it is not located on
the water side of the ordinary high water mark of said navigable
waterway and further provided that said structure does not block,
redirect or impede the flow of water or drainage within the area,
§ 420-86 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-87
344:966
§ 420-88. Residential sport courts.
provided that said structure is not located within any easements
and is not located within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(5) Shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 35 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads in any agricultural district and in the R-1 and R-2 or
C-2 Districts, provided that said structure is not located within any
easements.
(6) Shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 25 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads in any agricultural district and in the R-3, R-4, R-4.5,
R-5, R-6, R-8 and R-12 Residential Districts, provided that said
structure is not located within any easements.
(7) Shall be set back a minimum of three feet from an adjacent
manufactured/mobile home or an adjacent deck, porch, steps and
stairs located within the R-12 District.
C. Setback requirements for decks, porches, steps or stairs in the R-7, R-9,
R-10 or R-11 Residential Districts:
(1) Shall meet the street, side and rear setback requirements as
specified in the underlying zoning district.
(2) Shall be set back 10 feet from any wetland on the property and
three feet from wetlands on an adjacent property.
(3) May be located in a shore yard, provided that it is not located on
the water side of the ordinary high water mark of said navigable
waterway and further provided that said structure does not block,
redirect or impede the flow of water or drainage within the area,
provided that said structure is not located within any easements
and is not located within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
A. Zoning permit required. No person shall construct, repair, replace,
install, enlarge, or alter any sport court unless a valid zoning permit for
said structure has first been issued pursuant to this chapter and such
permit has neither expired nor been suspended or revoked. If work has
commenced or is completed without proper permits, the Village may
take the appropriate actions to prosecute the violation of this chapter.
See § 420-22 of this chapter for additional information related to a
zoning permit for a sport court, including but not limited to
preconditions, application requirements, incomplete applications,
approval or denial of an application, issuance of a permit, binding
nature of application, acceptance of permit conditions, time limits,
assignment, inspections required, suspension, revocation or voiding a
permit, circularity, plan changes, plans on file, invalid permits and
disclaimer.
§ 420-87 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-88
344:967
§ 420-88.1. Roadside stands. [Added 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-19]
B. Standards for a sport court.
(1) One sport court is allowed per property.
(2) The sport court shall be located in the side or rear property yard,
provided that such court is 10 feet from the property line.
(3) All sport courts over 1,200 square feet shall be required to have a
ten-foot-high heavy-duty sport net or a fence surrounding the court.
(4) If any sport court is proposed to be lit, such lights shall be directed
downward and shielded so as not to shine or cause a glare onto
adjacent properties and/or roadways.
A. Zoning permit not required. A zoning permit is not required for a
roadside stand; however, no person shall construct, repair, replace,
install, enlarge, or alter any roadside stand unless the following
standards are met.
B. Standards for roadside stands.
(1) Allowed in any agricultural district.
(2) Number: one roadside stand per property.
(3) Size: 300 square feet maximum.
(4) Height: 15 feet maximum.
(5) Only products produced on site shall be sold at the roadside stand.
(6) Setbacks: five feet minimum to any property line.
(7) Said roadside stand shall be properly maintained and removed
from the property when no longer in use.
§ 420-88 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-88.1
344:968
ARTICLE XIV
Communication Structures
§ 420-89. Commercial communication structures. [Amended
7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44; 2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-05; 4-7-2014
by Ord. No. 14-08]
A. Purpose and intent. The Village may enact a Zoning Ordinance under
§ 62.23 of the Wisconsin State Statutes to regulate commercial
communication structures as defined herein.
(1) The purpose of this section is to regulate commercial
communication structures subject to the provisions and limitations
of this section and § 66.0404 of Wisconsin State Statutes.
(2) This section is intended to:
(a) Maintain and ensure that a nondiscriminatory, competitive and
broad range of telecommunications services and high-quality
telecommunications infrastructure, consistent with the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996 and Wisconsin State Statute
§ 66.0404, is provided to serve the community, as well as serve
as an important and effective part of the Village's law
enforcement, fire, rescue and emergency response network.
(b) Provide a process for obtaining necessary permits for
commercial communication structures while at the same time
protecting the interests of Village citizens.
(3) This section is not intended to regulate residential communication
structures. Residential communication structures are subject to
compliance with § 420-90 of this chapter.
B. Definitions. The definitions set out below shall apply to this section and
shall control with respect to commercial communication structures in
the event of any inconsistency between these definitions and the
definitions set forth in Article XXI of this chapter.
AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT PERMIT — A permit or site plan
approval from the City of Kenosha pursuant to Section 13 of the City of
Kenosha Zoning Ordinance related to any land in the Village of Pleasant
Prairie within the established approach, overflight or height overlay
districts.
ANTENNA — Communications equipment that transmits and receives
electromagnetic radio signals and is used in the provision of mobile
services.
APPLICATION — An application for a permit under this section to
engage in an activity specified in Subsection D(1) or Subsection E(1).
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Village that authorizes
an applicant to conduct construction activity that is consistent with the
Village's Building Code.
§ 420-89 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-89
344:969
CAMOUFLAGED MOBILE SERVICE SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A
mobile service support structure that is used for the purpose of making
it less obtrusive and/or more aesthetically pleasing with appropriate
materials and/or coloration that conceals the structure by making it
more difficult to see in that it blends in with the surrounding landscape.
A water tower, a transmission tower and a silo are examples of
camouflaged mobile support structure.
CLASS 1 CO-LOCATION — The placement of a new mobile service
facility on an existing support structure such that the owner of the
facility does not need to construct a free standing support structure for
the facility but does need to engage in substantial modification.
CLASS 2 CO-LOCATION — The placement of a new mobile service
facility on an existing support structure such that the owner of the
facility does not need to construct a freestanding support structure for
the facility or does not need to engage in substantial modification.
CO-LOCATION — Class 1 or Class 2 co-location or both.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION STRUCTURE — Includes the mobile
service support structure and the mobile service facility as defined in
this section.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION STRUCTURE PERMIT — A permit,
other than a building permit, or approval issued by the Village which
authorizes any of the following activities by an applicant:
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM — A network of spatially separated
antenna nodes that is connected to a common source via a transport
medium and that provides mobile service within a geographic area or
structure.
EQUIPMENT COMPOUND — An area surrounding or adjacent to the
base of an existing support structure within which is located mobile
service facilities.
EXISTING STRUCTURE — A support structure that exists at the time
a request for permission to place mobile service facilities on a support
structure is filed with the Village.
FALL ZONE — The area over which a mobile service support structure
is designed to collapse.
MOBILE SERVICE — Has the meaning given in 47 U.S.C. § 153(33).
MOBILE SERVICE FACILITY — The set of equipment and network
components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations,
power supplies, cabling, and associated equipment, that is necessary
(1) A Class 1 co-location.
(2) A Class 2 co-location.
(3) The construction of a mobile service support structure.
(4) The construction of a mobile service facility.
§ 420-89 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-89
344:970
to provide mobile service to a discrete geographic area, but does not
include the underlying support structure.
MOBILE SERVICE PROVIDER — A person/company who/that provides
mobile service.
MOBILE SERVICE SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure
that is designed to support a mobile service facility.
PROPAGATION MAP — A map that shows signal strength and other
engineering evidence from the proposed site in relation to existing and
other proposed mobile service support structures.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Has the meaning given in § 196.01(5), Wis. Stats.
SEARCH RING — A shape drawn on a map to indicate the general area
within which a mobile service support structure should be located to
meet radio frequency engineering requirements, taking into account
other factors, including topography and the demographics of the
service area.
SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION — The modification of a mobile service
support structure, including the mounting of an antenna on such a
structure, that does any of the following:
SUPPORT STRUCTURE — An existing or new structure that supports or
can support a mobile service facility, including a mobile service support
structure, utility pole, water tower, building, or other structure.
UTILITY POLE — A structure owned or operated by an alternative
telecommunications utility, as defined in § 196.01(1d); public utility,
as defined in § 196.01(5); telecommunications utility, as defined in
§ 196.01(10); political subdivision; or cooperative association organized
under Ch. 185, and that is designed specifically for and used to carry
For structures with an overall height of 200 feet or less, increases
in the overall height of the structure by more than 20 feet (as
measured from the original permitted height), unless a greater
height is necessary to avoid interference with an existing antenna.
(1)
For structures with an overall height of more than 200 feet,
increases in the overall height of the structure by 10% or more
(as measured from the original permitted height), unless a greater
protrusion is necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement
weather or to connect the antenna to the existing structure by
cable.
(2)
For structures with an increase in the width of the support
structure by 20 feet or more (as measured from the original
permitted width), unless a larger area is necessary for co-location.
The increase is measured at the level of the appurtenance added to
the structure as a result of the modification.
(3)
For increases in the square footage of an existing equipment
compound to a total area of more than 2,500 square feet.
(4)
§ 420-89 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-89
344:971
lines, cables, or wires for telecommunications service, as defined in
§ 182.017(1g)(cq); video service, as defined in § 66.0420(2)(y); for
electricity; or to provide light.123
C. Commercial communication structure permit required. No person shall
construct, repair, replace, install, enlarge, or alter any commercial
communication structure, as defined by this section, unless a valid
permit for said structure has first been issued pursuant to this section
and such permit has neither expired nor been suspended or revoked. If
work has commenced or is completed without proper permits, the
Village may take the appropriate action to prosecute the violation of
this chapter. See § 420-22 of this chapter for additional information
related to a zoning permit for a commercial communication structure,
including but not limited to preconditions, application requirements,
incomplete applications, approval or denial of an application, issuance
of a permit, binding nature of application, acceptance of permit
conditions, time limits, assignment, inspections required, suspension,
revocation or voiding a permit, circularity, plan changes, plans on file,
invalid permits and disclaimer.
D. New construction or a Class 1 co-location.
(1) Subject to the provisions and limitations of this section, the Village
has enacted this section of the Zoning Ordinance under § 62.23 of
the Wisconsin State Statutes to regulate and require the issuance
of a commercial communication structure permit for any of the
following activities:
(a) The siting and construction of a new mobile service support
structure and facilities.
(b) Class 1 co-location.
(2) Applications for a commercial communication structure permit for
activities described in Subsection D(1)(a) are made on forms
obtained from the Village's Community Development Department.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, each
applicant shall accurately and legibly complete the application
form and shall file it along with 10 full-sized sets of the plans and
other materials and information identified below, one set in which
all such plan sheets reduced to fit 11 inches by 17 inches for easy
handling, together with the commercial communication structure
permit fee, which shall be payable at the time of application.
(Required fees are set out in Article V of this chapter.) The Village
follows § 66.0404(2)(c), Wis. Stats., and prefers an application
include the following:
(a) Name, address, telephone number and fax number (and cell
phone number and e-mail address, if applicable) of the
123. Editor's Note: All references are to the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 420-89 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-89
344:972
applicant and of the project manager or principal contact
individual for purposes of the application.
(b) Whether the applicant is the owner of the subject real property
and, if not, either proof of the applicant's legal interest in the
subject real property (e.g., accepted offer to purchase, lease,
etc., which may be appropriately redacted to preserve
confidential information) or written authorization signed by the
owner for the applicant to act as the owner's agent in
connection with the application.
(c) Name, address, and telephone number (and fax number, cell
phone number and e-mail address, if applicable) of each owner,
developer, user or occupant of the site other than the
applicant.
(d) Street address or location of the subject site.
(e) Area of the subject site in acres or square feet.
(f) Tax parcel number(s) of any lot(s) or parcel(s) included within
the site.
(g) Current zoning district(s) of the site.
(h) Whether the site is located within the Airport Overlay District
and requires an Airport Overlay District permit from the City of
Kenosha and proper approvals/permits have been obtained.
(i) Whether the site is served by public sanitary sewer and public
water supply and, if not, where the closest public sanitary
sewer and public water facilities are located relative to the
site.
(j) All current principal and accessory uses of the site, whether
they are proposed to be continued, and all proposed principal
and accessory uses of the site.
(k) The gross floor area and height of each existing building on the
site and whether it is proposed to be continued, and the gross
floor area and height of each proposed structure or building.
(l) A detailed written operational plan description of the proposed
project or activity giving rise to the need for plan approval.
(m) If an application is to construct a new mobile service support
structure, an inventory, a propagation map and a listing of all
of the applicant's existing towers and antennas which are
located within the Village boundaries and within 2,650 feet of
the exterior of the Village boundaries. The inventory shall
specify the location, antenna height, and structure type of each
of the applicant's existing towers currently in operation and an
§ 420-89 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-89
344:973
indication of the ability of the existing structures to
accommodate additional co-location antennas.
(n) Plans indicating security measures (i.e., access, fencing,
lighting, cameras, Knox® padlock, etc.).
(o) If the application is to substantially modify an existing support
structure, a construction plan which describes the proposed
modifications to the support structure and the equipment and
network components, including antennas, transmitters,
receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related
equipment associated with the proposed modifications.
(p) If the application is to construct a new mobile service support
structure, a construction plan which describes the proposed
mobile service support structure and the equipment and
network components, including antennas, transmitters,
receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related
equipment, to be placed on or around the new mobile service
support structure.
(q) If an application is to construct a new mobile service support
structure, an explanation as to why the applicant chose the
proposed location and why the applicant did not choose colocation,
including a sworn statement from an individual who
has responsibility over the placement of the mobile service
support structure attesting that co-location within the
applicant's search ring would not result in the same mobile
service functionality, coverage, and capacity; is technically
infeasible; or is economically burdensome to the mobile service
provider. If the service area is inadequate, map the areas
where service is inadequate.
(r) All plans shall comply with the plan requirements described in
§ 420-57 of this chapter, specifically including:
[1] All plan sheets shall comply with the general standards set
forth in § 420-57B of this chapter.
[2] Title sheet pursuant to § 420-57D of this chapter;
[3] Survey pursuant to § 420-57E of this chapter;
[4] Site plan pursuant to § 420-57F of this chapter;
[5] Grading and drainage plan pursuant to § 420-57G of this
chapter;
[6] Construction plan pursuant to § 420-57H of this chapter;
[7] Lighting plan pursuant to § 420-57I of this chapter;
§ 420-89 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-89
344:974
[8] Landscape and open space plan pursuant to § 420-57J of
this chapter;
[9] Signage plan pursuant to § 420-57K of this chapter;
[10] Performance standard compliance plan pursuant to
§ 420-57M of this chapter; and
[11] Additional requirements pursuant to § 420-57N of this
chapter.
(s) With respect to any nonconforming structure on the site, proof
of legal nonconforming structure status (that the structure and
each addition to it was legal when it was built);
(t) For both Class 1 and Class 2 co-locations, provide written
approval to the Village from any homeowners' association or
commercial owner's association having review and approval
authority.
(u) A description of all local, county, state and federal permits or
approvals relating in any way to land use, buildings,
development control, land division, environmental protection,
sewer service, water service, stormwater management, streets
and highways or fire protection that are required for or with
respect to the project or activity for which site and operational
plan approval is sought and an appropriate citation to the
controlling statute, regulation or other law regarding each
such permit or approval; and
(v) A list of all documents, materials or information attached to the
application form.
(3) Waiver. The Village Zoning Administrator may waive in writing any
application requirement which is not necessary for the effective
review and determination of the application. Such waivers may be
issued at a preapplication conference or at any time during the
application or review process. A preapplication conference with the
Zoning Administrator or other Village zoning staff members is
required for the purpose of discussing the application
requirements, as they apply to a particular proposed project or
activity, and potential waivers of such requirements.
(4) Complete application. If the Village does not believe that the
application is complete, the Village shall notify the applicant in
writing, within 10 days of receiving the application, that the
application is not complete. The written notification shall specify in
detail the required information that was incomplete. An applicant
may resubmit an application as often as necessary until it is
complete.
§ 420-89 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-89
344:975
(5) Notice. Within 10 days of its receipt of a complete application, the
Village shall mail notice by first-class mail to the last known
address of the applicant, the owner of the subject lot or site, and
the owners of all real property located within 300 feet of said
property (interested parties). Failure of any person to receive
actual notice of the request shall not invalidate any action taken by
the Village. Interested parties may submit written comments to the
Zoning Administrator regarding the application within 20 days
from the date that the written notice is mailed.
(6) Review. Within 90 days of its receipt of a complete application, the
Village shall complete all of the following or the applicant may
consider the application approved, except that the applicant and
the Village may agree in writing to an extension of the ninety-day
period:
(a) Review the application to determine whether it complies with
all applicable aspects of the Village's zoning, building and fire
codes and subject to the limitations in this section.
(b) Make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the
application.
(c) Notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision.
(d) If the decision is to disapprove the application, include with the
written notification substantial evidence which supports the
decision.
(e) The Village may hire expert consultants to review any technical
information submitted with the application. Costs incurred by
the Village will be billed to the applicant, except the applicant
shall not be billed for any travel expenses incurred in the
consultant's review of the application materials.
(7) The Village may deny an application if an applicant refuses to
evaluate the feasibility of co-location within the applicant's search
ring and provide the sworn statement described under Subsection
D(2)(q).
(8) A party who is aggrieved by the final decision of the Village under
Subsection D(6)(b) may bring an action in the Circuit Court of
Kenosha County.
(9) Upon completion of the project, a letter of compliance shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Village Zoning Administrator to
verify the work has complied with all Village conditions and was
completed pursuant to the approved permit. The applicant shall
also provide any updated name and contact information for the
tower representative.
§ 420-89 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-89
344:976
(10) If the Village has in effect an ordinance that applies to the activities
described under Subsection D(1) and the ordinance is inconsistent
with § 66.0404 of Wisconsin State Statutes, then that portion of this
section does not apply to, and may not be enforced against, the
activity.
E. Class 2 co-location on existing support structures and other
modifications.
(1) Subject to the provisions and limitations of this section, the Village
has enacted this section of the Zoning Ordinance under § 62.23 to
regulate and require the issuance of a commercial communication
permit for the following activities:
(a) A Class 2 co-location.
(b) Any other modifications to a mobile service facility not
classified as a substantial modification.
(2) Complete application. The Village follows § 66.0404(3)(b), Wis.
Stats., and prefers that an applicant seeking a commercial
communication structure permit to engage in any activity listed in
Subsection E(1) submit an application containing all of the
information required under Subsection D(2) and (3). If any of the
required information is not in the application, the Village shall
notify the applicant in writing, within five days of receiving the
application, that the application is not complete. The written
notification shall specify in detail the required information that was
incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an application as often as
necessary until it is complete.
(3) Review. Within 45 days of its receipt of a complete application, the
Village shall complete all of the following or the applicant may
consider the application approved, except that the applicant and
the Village may agree in writing to an extension of the forty-fiveday
period:
(a) Make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the
application.
(b) Notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision.
(c) If the application is approved, issue the applicant the relevant
commercial communication structure permit.
(d) If the decision is to disapprove the application, include with the
written notification substantial evidence which supports the
decision.
(e) The Village may hire expert consultants to review any technical
information submitted with the application. Costs incurred by
the Village will be billed to the applicant, except the applicant
§ 420-89 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-89
344:977
shall not be billed for any travel expenses incurred in the
consultant's review of the application materials.
(4) A party who is aggrieved by the final decision of the Village under
Subsection E(3)(a) may bring an action in the Circuit Court of
Kenosha County.
(5) Upon completion of the project, a letter of compliance shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Village Zoning Administrator to
verify the work has complied with all Village conditions and was
completed pursuant to the approved permit. The applicant shall
also provide any updated name and contact information for the
tower representative.
F. Standards for commercial communication structures.
(1) If the site is located within the Airport Overlay District, then the
commercial communication structure shall comply with the
requirements of an Airport Overlay District Permit.
(2) A commercial communication structure is allowed in any zoning
district as a permitted principal use on lots that are a minimum of
one acre in size and having a minimum lot frontage on a public
street of 100 feet.
(3) A commercial communication structure is allowed in any
Agricultural, Institutional, Commercial, Manufacturing, PR-1 or
PR-2 Zoning District as a permitted accessory use, provided that
the lots and frontage on a public street meet the minimum lot area
and frontage requirements of the underlying zoning district or 2.5
acres in size and having a minimum lot frontage on a public street
of 100 feet, whichever is greater.
(4) A commercial communication structure is allowed in any
Agricultural, Institutional, Commercial, Manufacturing, PR-1 or
PR-2 Zoning District as a permitted accessory use mounted on a
building or other structure.
(5) Freestanding mobile support structures.
(a) All new freestanding mobile support structures constructed
after January 1, 2014, shall be separated by a minimum of
2,640 feet, except where:
[1] Co-location is not possible on the existing freestanding
mobile support structure that would be within 2,640 feet
of the new freestanding mobile support structure; or
[2] The proposed new freestanding mobile support structure
is a camouflaged mobile service support structure, as
defined in Subsection (B).
§ 420-89 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-89
344:978
(b) In addition, existing freestanding mobile support structures
constructed before January 1, 2014, may be reconstructed on
the same site without meeting the separation distance
requirement of 2,640 feet.
(6) Setbacks and height requirements. The height of any commercial
communication structure is measured from the base of the
structure at grade to its highest point, including any associated
aerials, projections or other attached apparatus. The setback
distance shall be measured from the furthest extent of the tower, its
aerials, guy wire anchor locations or other equipment or from the
foundation of a building.
(a) If located within any institutional, commercial or
manufacturing zoning district, then the setback of any
building/structure/equipment associated with a commercial
communication structure shall meet the minimum setback
requirements specified in the specific zoning district in which
it is being located.
(b) If located in any residential, park and recreational or
agricultural zoning district, then the setback of any building/
structure/equipment associated with a commercial
communication structure shall comply with the setback
requirements specified in the B-1 Neighborhood Business
District.
(c) Antennas, whips, panels, or satellite and/or digital dishes
attached to an existing building shall not exceed the height
allowed in the underlying zoning district.
(d) Antennas, whips, panels, or satellite and/or digital dishes
attached to an existing structure, such as water towers,
transmission towers, silos or other utility poles, shall not
extend more than 20 feet above the existing height of said
structure.
(e) Any building/structure/equipment associated with a
commercial communication structure shall not be located
within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(f) If an applicant provides the Village with an engineering
certification showing that a mobile service support structure,
or an existing structure, is designed to collapse within a
smaller area than the setback or fall zone area required in this
subsection, then the required setback shall be reduced unless
the Village provides the applicant with substantial evidence
that the engineering certification is flawed.
(7) Support structures shall be designed, engineered and constructed
to handle multiple carriers.
§ 420-89 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-89
344:979
(8) The building within the equipment compound shall be designed to
complement existing architecture in the area, and the fenced
equipment compound shall be landscaped with mature foundation
plants designed to enhance the facility. Any equipment allowed to
be located outside the building within the equipment compound
shall be screened from sight by mature landscaping and shall be
located or designed to minimize their visibility.
(9) Equipment compounds are required to be surrounded with a sixfoot-
high, vinyl-coated, chain-link fence pursuant to the
requirements of Article XI of this chapter, unless otherwise
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(10) All equipment at the base of the tower, except a backup generator,
is required to be located within a building that complies with the
standards set forth in § 420-57H of this chapter.
(11) If required to be lit, red or white lights shall be nonflashing and
nonpulsating, unless a different style of lighting is required by the
Wisconsin Division of Aeronautics or the Federal Aviation
Administration.
(12) Backup generators if present, shall be operated only during power
outages and for testing and maintenance purposes, shall be located
within the equipment enclosure and screened from public view.
(13) The Village does not warrant any communication structure against
design or structural failure. The Village does not certify that the
design is adequate for any tower, and the Village hereby accepts no
liability through the issuance of a commercial communication
permit.
(14) Commercial communication structures shall not interfere with or
obstruct existing or proposed public safety, fire-protection or
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) operation
telecommunication facilities. Any actual interference and/or
obstruction shall be corrected by the applicant at no cost to the
Village.
G. Limitations. With regard to an activity described in Subsection D(1) or
Subsection E(1), the Village may not do any of the following:
(1) Impose environmental testing, sampling, or monitoring
requirements, or other compliance measures for radio frequency
emissions, on mobile service facilities or mobile radio service
providers.
(2) Enact an ordinance imposing a moratorium on the permitting,
construction, or approval of any such activities.
(3) Enact an ordinance prohibiting the placement of a mobile service
support structure in particular locations within the Village.
§ 420-89 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-89
344:980
(4) Charge a mobile radio service provider any recurring fee for an
activity described in Subsection D(1) or Subsection E(1).
(5) Disapprove an application to conduct an activity described under
Subsection D(1) or Subsection E(1) based solely on aesthetic
concerns.
(6) Enact or enforce an ordinance related to radio frequency signal
strength or the adequacy of mobile service quality.
(7) Prohibit the placement of emergency power systems.
(8) Require that a mobile service support structure be placed on
property owned by the Village.
(9) Disapprove an application based solely on the height of the mobile
service support structure or on whether the structure requires
lighting.
(10) Condition approval of such activities on the agreement of the
structure or mobile service facility owner to provide space on or
near the structure for the use of or by the Village at less than the
market rate or to provide the Village other services via the
structure or facilities at less than the market rate.
(11) Limit the duration of any commercial communication structure
permit that is granted.
(12) Require an applicant to construct a distributed antenna system
instead of either constructing a new mobile service support
structure or engaging in co-location.
(13) Require that a mobile service support structure, existing structure,
or mobile service facilities have or be connected to backup battery
power.
(14) Condition the approval of an application on, or otherwise require,
the applicant's agreement to indemnify or insure the Village in
connection with the Village's exercise of its authority to approve
the application.
(15) Condition the approval of an application on, or otherwise require,
the applicant's agreement to permit the Village to place at or colocate
with the applicant's support structure any mobile service
facilities provided or operated by, whether in whole or in part, the
Village or an entity in which the Village has a governance,
competitive, economic, financial or other interest.
H. Abandonment, removal and security for removal.
(1) Abandonment. Any commercial communication structure that is
not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be
considered abandoned. Time may be extended upon review and
§ 420-89 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-89
344:981
approval of the Zoning Administrator, if the tower owner
demonstrates a good faith effort to secure new tenants. In such
circumstances, the following shall apply:
(a) The owner of such mobile service support structure and facility
shall remove such within 90 days of receipt of notice from the
Zoning Administrator notifying the owner of such
abandonment.
(b) If removal to the satisfaction of the Village does not occur
within 90 days, the Village may order removal utilizing the
established security for removal as provided below and
salvage.
(c) If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this
provision shall not become effective until all operation of the
tower cease. The owner shall notify the Zoning Administrator
when the facility is no longer in operation.
(2) Removal. It is the express policy of the Village and this section that
commercial communication structures be removed once they are
no longer in use and not a functional part of providing service and
that it is the mobile service support structure owners'
responsibility to remove such structure(s) and restore the site to its
original condition or a condition approved by the Zoning
Administrator. This restoration shall include the removal of any
subsurface structure or foundation, including concrete used to
support the structure down to 10 feet below the surface. After a
communication structure is no longer in operation, the tower
owner shall have 90 days to effect removal and restoration unless
weather prohibits such efforts. The commercial communication
structure owner shall record a document with the Kenosha County
Register of Deeds showing the existence of any subsurface
structure remaining below grade. Such recording shall accurately
set forth the location and describe the remaining structure. A copy
of the recorded document shall be provided to the Village.
(3) Security for removal. The owner of the commercial communication
structure shall provide to the Village, prior to issuance of a
commercial communication structure permit, a performance bond
in the amount of $20,000 or a bond equal to a written estimate from
a qualified tower removal contractor to guarantee throughout the
life of the structure that the structure will be removed when no
longer in operation. The Village will be named as the obligee in the
bond and must approve the bonding company.
I. Severability. If any provision of this section or its application to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or its applications of this section that can be given
effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions of this section are severable.
§ 420-89 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-90
344:982
§ 420-90. Residential communication structures.
A. Zoning permit required. No person shall construct, repair, replace,
install, enlarge, or alter any residential communication structure, as
defined by this chapter, unless a valid zoning permit for said structure
has first been issued pursuant to this chapter and such permit has
neither expired nor been suspended or revoked. If work has
commenced or is completed without proper permits, the Village may
take the appropriate actions to prosecute the violation of this chapter.
See § 420-22 of this chapter for additional information related to a
zoning permit for a residential communication structure, including but
not limited to preconditions, application requirements, incomplete
applications, approval or denial of an application, issuance of a permit,
binding nature of application, acceptance of permit conditions, time
limits, assignment, inspections required, suspension, revocation or
voiding a permit, circularity, plan changes, plans on file, invalid permits
and disclaimer.
B. Standards for residential communication structures.
(1) Radio and television transmission, receiving and relay towers, and
aerials, including amateur "ham" radio and satellite and/or digital
dishes attached to the permitted principal structure, may be
erected to a height which exceeds the height limit established for
said residential district, but in no instance shall the height exceed a
maximum height of 10 feet above the roofline of said structure as
measured from the roof ridge to the highest point of the antenna,
including any additional aerials or projections. No more than one
such structure may be attached to the permitted principal
structure.
(2) Freestanding radio and television transmission, receiving and relay
towers, and aerials, including amateur "ham" radio and satellite
and/or digital dishes, may be erected to a height which exceeds the
height limit established for said residential district, but in no
instance shall the height exceed the maximum height of 45 feet.
The height is measured from the base of the structure to its highest
point, including any additional aerials or projections. Said
structure shall be located in the side or rear yard; for structures
less than 35 feet in height, it shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any
side or rear property line; for structures between 36 feet and the
maximum height of 45 feet, it shall be a minimum of 15 feet from
any side or rear property line; and guy wires shall not be allowed.
The setback distance shall be measure from the furthest extent of
the tower, its aerials, projections, or other equipment. No more
than one such structure may be allowed on the property.
§ 420-90 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-90
344:983

ARTICLE XV
Shoreland Regulations
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
§ 420-91. Shoreland definition.
"Shoreland" means the area within the following distances from the
ordinary high-water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond
or flowage; 300 feet from a river, a stream; or to the landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
§ 420-92. Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District.
Pursuant to NR § 117.05(1)(b)1, the Village shall adopt an ordinance or
an amendment to an existing ordinance or zoning code which creates a
shoreland-wetland zoning district for all wetlands of five acres or more,
and all portions of wetlands of five acres or more, which are shown on the
final wetland inventory maps and which are located in shorelands within the
Village. The Village has the option and will continue to zone any wetlands
within the Village, including wetlands which are less than five acres in
size. The Village will continue to rezone any wetland, regardless of its size,
into either the C-1 Lowland Resource Conservancy District pursuant to
§ 420-128 of this chapter or the C-3 Natural and Scientific Area Resource
Conservancy District pursuant to § 420-130 of this chapter.
§ 420-93. Use, site and sanitary regulations.
In addition, to the requirements of this Article XV, all applicable use, site, or
sanitary restrictions and regulations within the underlying zoning district(s)
shall apply to shorelands.
§ 420-94. Buildings and other structures.
All buildings and structures, except navigational aids, docks, piers and boatlaunching
facilities, shall not be closer than the shore setback distance as
specified in each underlying zoning district of this chapter.
§ 420-95. Lot creation.
Any lots created by a subdivision after July 17, 2017 (date this ordinance
is adopted), shall be located a minimum of 35 feet from the ordinary
high-water mark of any navigable waterway, and said setback area be
located within a protected easement except, if the lot is part of an existing
residential subdivision, wherein the other lots in the subdivision abut the
navigable waterway, such as existing lots adjacent to Lake Michigan or Lake
Russo wherein similar property lines are maintained.
§ 420-96. Regulated activities in shoreland area requiring
stipulated shoreland permit.
§ 420-91 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-96
344:985
§ 420-97. Stipulated shoreland permits.
A. Tree cutting and shrubbery clearing. Tree cutting and shrubbery
clearing shall be limited to no closer than 35 feet of the ordinary highwater
mark of all navigable waters to prevent erosion and
sedimentation, to preserve and improve scenic qualities, and during
foliation to substantially screen any development from stream or lake
users unless adequate shore protection or shore stabilization is
provided. Paths and trails within 35 feet of the ordinary high-water
mark shall not exceed 10 feet in width and shall be so designed and
constructed as to result in the least removal and disruption of shoreland
cover and the minimum impairment of natural beauty.
B. Land disturbance. Land disturbance, such as installing shore protection
or shore stabilization, altering or enlarging of waterways, removing
stream or lake bed materials, channel clearing, dredging, lagooning,
grading, removing topsoil, filling, road cutting, ditching, and installing
soil and water conservation structures within 35 feet of any navigable
waterway. Any permits required by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shall be
submitted to the Village prior to the Village issuing any required
permits.
C. Shore protection along Lake Michigan. Prior to the issuance of a
building and zoning permit for the construction of a new dwelling or
building addition to an existing dwelling located on any lot abutting
Lake Michigan, shore protection shall be installed that satisfies the
requirements of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If there is existing shore protection
installed on the property, then a written letter, stamped and certified by
a professional engineer registered and licensed in Wisconsin, stating
that the existing shore protection is still serving its purpose to protect
and stabilize the property from further erosion, shall be submitted prior
to the issuance of the building and zoning permit. The property owner is
responsible to ensure that the shore protection is maintained and
continues to protect the property from further erosion.
D. Water withdrawal. Surface water withdrawal, diversion, or discharge
for irrigation shall comply with all state, federal and village
requirements.
A. Notwithstanding the other requirements set forth in this article, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue a stipulated shoreland permit for those
uses listed in § 420-96 above, provided that the use shall not be
susceptible to flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage,
adverse soil and topographic conditions or any other feature likely to be
harmful to the environment or the public interest.
B. Detailed plans and specifications shall be submitted with the required
application and application fee pursuant to Article V of this chapter. The
plans shall be prepared and certified by a Wisconsin-registered and -
§ 420-96 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-97
344:986
§ 420-98. Building permits issued within shore setback.
Pursuant to § 66.1036, Wis. Stats., if a building permit is issued for an
activity in the shore setback area to which § 59.692(1k)(a) or (b), Wis,
Stats., applies, then the Village shall provide a copy of the building permit
to the Kenosha County Clerk.
§ 420-99. Enforcement action.
The Village may not commence an enforcement action against a person who
owns a building or structure that is in violation of any Village shoreland
zoning standards in the chapter if the building or structure has been in
place for more than 10 years.
licensed land surveyor or a professional engineer registered and
licensed in Wisconsin.
C. The petitioner shall obtain all required permits from the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources and the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, if applicable, for the proposed project prior to the Zoning
Administrator issuing the stipulated shoreland permit.
D. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue the stipulated shoreland
permit until the applicant agrees in writing to the stipulations.
E. Upon completion of the project, a written certification signed and
sealed by the design engineer shall be provided to the Village certifying
that the project was constructed and completed as designed and in
accordance to the approved permitted plans.
§ 420-97 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-99
344:987

ARTICLE XVI
District Regulations
§ 420-100. Zoning districts established.
A. Establishment. For the purpose of this chapter, the Village of Pleasant
Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, is hereby divided into the following
districts:
(1) Basic zoning districts. [Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-13;
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-20; 6-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-23;
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06; 4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-13]
A-2 General Agricultural District
A-3 Limited Agricultural District
R-1 Rural Residential District
R-2 Urban Single-Family Residential District
R-3 Urban Single-Family Residential District
R-4 Urban Single-Family Residential District
R-4.5 Urban Single-Family Residential District
R-5 Urban Single-Family Residential District
R-6 Urban Single-Family Residential District
R-7 Multiple-Family Residential District
R-8 Urban Two-Family Residential District
R-9 Multiple-Family Residential District
R-10 Multiple-Family Residential District
R-11 Multiple-Family Residential District
R-12 Manufactured Home/Mobile Home Park Subdivision
Residential District
B-1 Neighborhood Business District
B-2 Community Business District
B-3 Regional Retail Business District
B-4 Freeway Service Business District
B-5 Freeway Office District
B-6 Freeway Oriented Business Center District
M-1 Limited Manufacturing District
M-2 General Manufacturing District
M-3 Mineral Extraction and Landfill District
M-4 Power Generating District
M-5 Production Manufacturing District
I-1 Institutional District
§ 420-100 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-100
344:989
§ 420-101. (Reserved)124
§ 420-102. A-2 General Agricultural District. [Amended 7-20-2009
by Ord. No. 09-44; 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-06]
PR-1 Neighborhood Park-Recreational District
PR-2 Community Park-Recreational District
PR-3 Regional Park-Recreational
C-1 Lowland Resource Conservancy District
C-2 Upland Resource Conservancy District
C-3 Natural and Scientific Area Resource Conservancy District
(2) Overlay districts. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-20;
9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-27]
FPO Floodplain Overlay District
AGO General Agricultural Overlay District
UHO Urban Land Holding Overlay District
LUSA Limited Urban Service Area Overlay District
PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District
(3) Planned development district.
B. District delineation. In determining which parcels of land shall be
located in the above districts so as to accomplish the intended purpose
of these districts, the Community Development Department and the
Plan Commission shall make use of, without limitation due to
enumeration, all pertinent resources, data, statistics, tables, charts and
maps relating to existing land use, adjacent land use, soils, future
development, and existing and proposed roads and utilities.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The A-2 General Agricultural
District is intended to provide for existing agricultural lands to continue
until such time as the land is proposed to be developed for urban
purposes pursuant to the Village's Comprehensive Plan. No such
district shall be established unless it is in compliance with adopted or
amended comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual plans.
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below
are allowed as permitted uses in the A-2 District, subject to the
requirements of this chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Apiculture (beekeeping) (per § 420-39).
124. Editor’s Note: Former § 420-101, A-1 Agricultural Preservation District, as amended, was
repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06.
§ 420-100 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-102
344:990
(2) Boarding and riding stables or academies (commercial) (per
§ 420-39).
(3) Community living arrangements having a capacity of eight or fewer
persons and which shall be in conformance with all state statutory
requirements.
(4) Contract sorting, grading and packaging of fruits and vegetables.
(5) Corn shelling.
(6) Equestrian trails.
(7) Dairy farming and general agriculture (per § 420-39).
(8) Floriculture (cultivation of ornamental flowering plants).
(9) Forest and game management.
(10) Foster family homes having fewer than four foster children and not
exceeding eight total occupants and which are in conformance with
all state statutory requirements.
(11) Grazing or pasturing of livestock (per § 420-39).
(12) Greenhouses, not including retail sales of plants and flowers,
excluding a roadside stand.
(13) Single-family dwelling, which may include a private garage or
carport attached to the dwelling.
(14) Hay baling.
(15) Livestock raising, except commercial feedlots and fur farms (per
§ 420-39).
(16) Orchards.
(17) Pea viners.
(18) Plant nurseries.
(19) Poultry raising, except commercial egg production and commercial
poultry feed (per § 420-39).
(20)Raising of grain, grass, mint and seed crops.
(21)Raising of tree fruits, nuts and berries.
(22) Sod farming.
(23) Threshing services.
(24) Vegetable raising.
(25) Viticulture (grape growing).
§ 420-102 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-102
344:991
(26) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the A-2 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
A-2 District and is free of potential problems requiring special
regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings
supporting any such decision. Any use so approved shall be subject to
all requirements of Subsection B above. Notwithstanding the foregoing
authorization, the following uses shall not be construed to be permitted
uses in the A-2 District:
(1) Any listed permitted use or conditional use specifically listed in any
other Zoning District that is not specifically listed in Subsection B
above.
(2) Any adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility.
(3) Any listed unspecified permitted use in any zoning district that is
not specifically listed in Subsection B above.
(4) Any use involving the serving or selling of alcoholic beverages.
(5) Anhydrous ammonia (bulk storage facility or retail sale).
(6) Composting (commercial).
(7) Egg production (commercial).
(8) Farm implement business.
(9) Feed lot (commercial).
(10) Fertilizer (production, sales, storage, mixing or blending).
(11) Fireworks (manufacturing, storage or sale).
(12) Flea markets.
(13) Fur-bearing animals (keeping or raising).
(14) Livestock sale facilities.
(15) Propane (bulk storage facility or retail sale).
(16) Refuse incineration.
(17) Slaughterhouse.
(18) Truck stop and/or truck service facility.
§ 420-102 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-102
344:992
(19)Wrecking, junk, demolition and scrap yards.
(20) Livestock sale facilities.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses in the A-2 District (as principal uses or accessory uses, as
appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX, if applicable, and all
other applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village
ordinances and codes:
(1) Air strips, landing fields and hangars for personal or agriculturalrelated
uses.
(2) Community living arrangements having nine but not more than 15
persons and in conformance with all state statutory requirements.
(3) Greenhouses for the retail sales of plants and flowers.
(4) Kennels.
(5) Veterinarian offices.
(6) Veterinarian emergency services office.
(7) Wind energy conversion systems.
(8) Transmission lines (electric power or natural gas).
E. Special licensed uses. Some uses require a special license approved by
the Village Board and may only be operated pursuant to and in
accordance with such license. The granting of a Village license by the
Village Board is not assured either by permitted use status or by the
granting of a conditional use permit or of any other permit or approval
under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in
this section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the A-2
District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance with
each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions are
applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the A-2 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the A-2 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the A-2 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
§ 420-102 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-102
344:993
the A-2 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time
when the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the A-2 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the A-2 District and
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
building in the A-2 District; provided, however, that the area of a
building occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory
uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which any
proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of
the time when the conditional use permit for such conditional use
or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed
only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the A-2 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 10-06 (March 15, 2010) and any related
accessory uses existing as of such date may be continued in the
same principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the A-2 District are allowed,
subject to all other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the A-2 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the A-2
District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in accordance
with a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this
chapter.
§ 420-102 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-102
344:994
(c) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is
properly an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make
written findings to support any such decision.
(2) Specific permitted accessory uses that are allowed in the A-2
District include:
(a) General farm buildings, including agricultural windmills,
barns, and sheds incidental to the agricultural use (per
§ 420-86).
(b) Silos and grain/storage bins, provided that the height does not
exceed 100 feet.
(c) Feedlots (not commercial and only for permitted farm uses).
(d) Storage, curing, drying, churning and packaging of products
and crops produced on the land; provided, however, that such
products are not processed on the land; and provided, further,
that such products are not commercially sold as part of a retail
business conducted on the land.
(e) Roadside stands (per § 420-88.1).
(f) Private garages; gardening, tool, and storage sheds; or
gazebos incidental to the residential use (per § 420-86).
(g) Home occupations (per Article VII).
(h) Driveways (per § 420-46).
(i) Swimming pools/hot tubs (per Article XII).
(j) Fences (per Article XI).
(k) Decks (per § 420-87).
(l) Sport courts (per § 420-88).
(m) Residential communication structures (per § 420-90).
(3) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
H. Temporary uses. Temporary uses may be allowed in the A-2 District
pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter.
I. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the A-2
District by this chapter as specified in the forgeoing sections are
prohibited in the A-2 District.
§ 420-102 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-102
344:995
J. Dimensional standards. Except as specifically provided in this chapter,
and without limitations, all uses, sites, buildings and structures in the
A-2 District shall comply with the following dimensional standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: 10 acres minimum; however, there is no minimum lot size
for transmission lines.
(2) Lot frontage. Lot frontage on a public street: 300 feet minimum;
however, no minimum lot frontage on a public street shall be
applicable to transmission lines.
(3) Single-family dwellings shall comply with the standards set forth in
§ 420-108F of the Village Zoning Ordinance.
(4) Setbacks:
(a) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(b) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35
feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways.
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(c) Side setback: 25 feet minimum.
(d) Rear setback: 50 feet minimum.
(e) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
K. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the A-2 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Number of principal single-family dwellings per lot: one maximum.
(2) Number of agricultural structures and detached accessory
buildings, excluding silo or storage bins per lot:
(a) On lots that are 10 or more acres: no limit.
(b) On lots that are less than 10 but at least five acres: five
maximum.
(c) On lots less than five acres: three maximum.
(3) Number of silo or storage bins per lot:
(a) On lots that are 10 or more acres: no limit.
(b) On lots that are less than 10 acres: five maximum.
§ 420-102 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-102
344:996
§ 420-103. A-3 Limited Agricultural District. [Amended 7-20-2009
by Ord. No. 09-44; 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-08]
(4) No structure or improvement may be built unless said structure or
improvement is consistent with agricultural uses specified in this
section.
(5) All accessory uses or structures shall be located on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(6) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(7) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, if applicable, any required conditional
use permit, any required license and all other applicable provisions
of this chapter and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
L. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the A-2 District shall comply with the following operational standards
to the extent applicable:
(1) Compliance with Article IX of this chapter is required for any
activities of the type specified in § 420-52A.
(2) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
M. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
N. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The A-3 Limited Agricultural
District is intended to provide an area for the development of hobby
farms and limited farming and related agricultural uses at densities not
to exceed one dwelling unit per five acres. No such A-3 District shall be
established unless it is in compliance with adopted or amended
comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual plans.
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below
are allowed as permitted uses in the A-3 District, subject to the
requirements of this chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Community living arrangements having a capacity of eight or fewer
persons and which shall be in conformance with all state statutory
requirements.
§ 420-102 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-103
344:997
(2) Foster family homes having fewer than four foster children and not
exceeding eight total occupants and which are in conformance with
all state statutory requirements.
(3) Single-family dwelling, which may include a private garage or
carport attached to the dwelling.
(4) Grazing or pasturing of livestock (per § 420-39).
(5) Greenhouses, not including retail sales of plants and flowers on site
(per § 420-86).
(6) Crop raising and orchards, not including retail sales of fruits or
vegetables on site, except for a roadside stand (per § 420-88.1).
(7) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the A-3 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
A-3 District and is free of potential problems requiring special
regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings
supporting any such decision. Any use so approved shall be subject to
all requirements of Subsection B above. Notwithstanding the foregoing
authorization, the following uses shall not be construed to be permitted
uses in the A-3 District:
(1) Any listed permitted use or conditional use specifically listed in any
other Zoning District that is not specifically listed in Subsection B
above.
(2) Any adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility.
(3) Any listed unspecified permitted use in any zoning district that is
not specifically listed in Subsection B above.
(4) Any use involving the serving or selling of alcoholic beverages.
(5) Anhydrous ammonia (bulk storage facility or retail sale).
(6) Composting (commercial).
(7) Egg production (commercial).
(8) Farm implement business.
(9) Feed lot (commercial).
(10) Fertilizer (production, sales, storage, mixing or blending).
§ 420-103 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-103
344:998
(11) Fireworks (manufacturing, storage or sale).
(12) Flea markets.
(13) Fur-bearing animals (keeping or raising).
(14) Livestock sale facilities.
(15) Propane (bulk storage facility or retail sale).
(16) Refuse incineration.
(17) Slaughterhouse.
(18) Truck stop and/or truck service facility.
(19)Wrecking, junk, demolition and scrap yards.
(20) Livestock sale facilities.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses in the A-3 District (as principal uses or accessory uses, as
appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX, if applicable, and all
other applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village
ordinances and codes:
(1) Community living arrangements having nine but not more than 15
persons and in conformance with all state statutory requirements.
(2) Transmission lines (electric power or natural gas).
E. Special licensed uses. Some uses require a special license approved by
the Village Board and may only be operated pursuant to and in
accordance with such license. The granting of a Village license by the
Village Board is not assured either by permitted use status or by the
granting of a conditional use permit or of any other permit or approval
under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in
this section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the A-3
District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance with
each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions are
applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the A-3 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the A-3 District.
§ 420-103 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-103
344:999
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the A-3 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the A-3 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time when
the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the A-3 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the A-3 District and
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
building in the A-3 District; provided, however, that the area of a
building occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory
uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which any
proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of
the time when the conditional use permit for such conditional use
or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed
only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the A-3 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 10-08 (March 15, 2010) and any related
accessory uses existing as of such date may be continued in the
same principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the A-3 District are allowed,
subject to all other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the A-3 District
are allowed.
§ 420-103 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-103
344:1000
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the A-3
District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in accordance
with a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this
chapter.
(c) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is
properly an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make
written findings to support any such decision.
(2) Specific permitted accessory uses that are allowed in the A-3
District include:
(a) General farm buildings, including agricultural windmills,
barns, and sheds incidental to the agricultural use (per
§ 420-86).
(b) Silos and grain/storage bins, provided that the height does not
exceed 100 feet.
(c) Feedlots (not commercial and only for permitted farm uses).
(d) Storage, curing, drying, churning and packaging of products
and crops produced on the land; provided, however, that such
products are not processed on the land; and provided, further,
that such products are not commercially sold as part of a retail
business conducted on the land.
(e) Roadside stands (per § 420-88.1).
(f) Home occupations (per Article VII).
(g) Driveways (per § 420-46).
(h) Swimming pools/hot tubs (per Article XII).
(i) Fences (per Article XI).
(j) Decks (per § 420-87).
(k) Sport courts (per § 420-88).
(l) Residential communication structures (per § 420-90).
(3) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
H. Temporary uses. Temporary uses may be allowed in the A-3 District
pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter.
I. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the A-3
District by this chapter as specified in the foregoing sections are
prohibited in the A-3 District.
§ 420-103 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-103
344:1001
J. Dimensional standards. Except as specifically provided in this chapter,
and without limitations, all uses, sites, buildings and structures in the
A-3 District shall comply with the following dimensional standards to
the extent applicable.
(1) Lot size: five acres minimum; however, there is no minimum lot size
for transmission lines.
(2) Lot frontage. Lot frontage on a public street: 300 feet minimum;
however, no minimum lot frontage on a public street shall be
applicable to transmission lines.
(3) Single-family dwellings shall comply with the standards set forth in
§ 420-108F of the Village Zoning Ordinance.
(4) Setbacks:
(a) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(b) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35
feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways.
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(c) Side setback: 25 feet minimum.
(d) Rear setback: 50 feet minimum.
(e) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
K. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the A-3 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Number of principal single-family dwellings per lot: one maximum.
(2) Number of agricultural structures and detached accessory
buildings, excluding silo or storage bins, per lot:
(a) On lots that are five or more acres: five maximum.
(b) On lots that are less than five acres: three maximum.
(3) Number of silo or storage bins per lot:
(a) On lots that are five or more acres: five maximum.
(b) On lots that are less than five acres: three maximum.
(4) No structure or improvement may be built unless said structure or
improvement is consistent with agricultural uses specified in this
section.
§ 420-103 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-103
344:1002
§ 420-104. (Reserved)125
§ 420-105. R-1 Rural Residential District.
(5) All accessory uses or structures shall be located on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(6) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(7) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, if applicable, any required conditional
use permit, any required license and all other applicable provisions
of this chapter and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
L. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the A-3 District shall comply with the following operational standards
to the extent applicable:
(1) Compliance with Article IX of this chapter is required for any
activities of the type specified in § 420-52A.
(2) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
M. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
N. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The R-1 Rural Residential District is
intended to provide for single-family residential development, in a
predominantly rural setting, at densities not to exceed 0.2 dwelling unit
per acre.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having a capacity
of eight or fewer persons and which shall be in conformance
with all state statutory requirements.
(b) Essential services.
125. Editor's Note: Former § 420-104, A-4 Agricultural Land Holding District, as amended, was
repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09.
§ 420-103 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-105
344:1003
(c) Foster family homes having fewer than four foster children and
not exceeding eight total occupants and which are in
conformance with all state statutory requirements.
(d) One single-family dwelling, which may include a private garage
or carport attached to the dwelling.
(e) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) No more than a total of three detached structures: private
garages; gardening, tool, and storage sheds; or gazebos
incidental to the residential use (per § 420-86).
(b) Home occupations (per Article VII).
(c) Driveways (per § 420-46).
(d) Swimming pools/hot tubs (per Article XII).
(e) Fences (per Article XI).
(f) Decks (per § 420-87).
(g) Sport courts (per § 420-88).
(h) Residential communication structures (per § 420-90).
(i) A maximum of four horses (per § 420-39).
(j) Bus shelters [per § 420-139B(1)(e)].
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see Article XVIII).
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having nine but
not more than 15 persons which shall be in conformance with
all state statutory requirements.
(b) Model single-family homes and related temporary real estate
sales offices or marketing centers located within the model
unit or as a separate structure [per § 420-148B(67)].
(c) (Reserved)126
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) No more than two household stables [per § 420-148B(44)].
126. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-105 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-105
344:1004
(b) Recreational facilities accessory to a development, such as
pools, clubhouses, recreational trails, walking trails and tot
lots located within common areas of the development, provided
that they are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood
and serve the needs of the residents.
(c) Guard houses and gate houses [per § 420-139B(1)(m)].
D. Unclassified uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or
conditional use shall be considered to be prohibited except as may be
otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter. In case of question as to
the classification of use, the question shall be submitted to the Village
Board for determination.
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a minimum area of five acres.
(2) All lots shall have a frontage of not less than 300 feet in width
unless located on a cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot
frontage may be reduced to 150 feet of frontage, provided that
there is at least 300 feet of width at the required building setback
line.
F. Single-family dwelling standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height,
except as provided in § 420-139A(5).
(2) The minimum floor area of a dwelling, excluding the garage, decks,
porches and basement, shall be 2,000 square feet with a minimum
first floor area of 1,500 square feet.
(3) The dwelling shall be set on an enclosed permanent foundation
unless the soil-bearing capacity, as determined by a structural
engineer, prohibits such foundation.
(4) Placement of the dwelling unit shall provide for proper drainage
away from the foundation and shall accommodate drainage on and
through the existing property by not negatively affecting the
existing drainage patterns or the capabilities of draining the
abutting properties.
(5) For all one-story dwellings, the length to width ratio of the dwelling
unit (excluded are decks, porches, bay windows, chimneys and any
projections less than 25 square feet), as measured at the
foundation, shall not be greater than two to one (i.e., the length
shall not be more than twice the width). The length of the dwelling
unit is that side of the dwelling that is the longest, and the width is
that side of the dwelling which is the shortest, as shown in
Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
§ 420-105 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-105
344:1005
§ 420-106. R-2 Urban Single-Family Residential District.
(6) The minimum width of the dwelling unit shall be 28 feet, as
measured at the foundation (excluded are decks, porches, bay
windows, chimneys and any projections less than 25 square feet).
The width is that side of the dwelling which is the shortest as
shown in Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
(7) The main roof of the dwelling shall have a minimum roof pitch of
4:12, and the eaves on the main roof shall extend beyond the
nearest vertical wall a minimum of one foot, or the roof pitch and/or
eave length may be reduced as approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 07-40;
11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-50]
(8) Permitted roof surface materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include wood shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or
wood shingles, clay tiles, concrete tiles, slate or other appropriate
roofing material as approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
(9) Permitted exterior materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include brick, stone, wood, masonry, concrete, stucco,
aluminum or vinyl siding or other appropriate siding material as
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator. The exterior siding
shall extend to the top of the foundation and be within six inches
above the final grade.
(10) The front facade of the structure shall be placed parallel to the
street property line, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads, except as provided for in § 420-139B(2)(a).
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 25 feet minimum.
(5) Rear setback: 50 feet minimum.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
§ 420-105 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-106
344:1006
A. Purpose and characteristics. The R-2 Urban Single-Family Residential
District is intended to provide for single-family residential development,
at densities not to exceed 1.1 dwelling units per net acre, served by
public sanitary sewerage facilities.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having a capacity
of eight or fewer persons and which shall be in conformance
with all state statutory requirements.
(b) Essential services.
(c) Foster family homes having fewer than four foster children and
not exceeding eight total occupants and which are in
conformance with all state statutory requirements.
(d) One single-family dwelling, which may include a private garage
or carport attached to the dwelling.
(e) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) No more than a total of three detached structures: private
garages; gardening, tool, and storage sheds; or gazebos
incidental to the residential use (per § 420-86).
(b) Home occupations (per Article VII).
(c) Driveways (per § 420-46).
(d) Swimming pools/hot tubs (per Article XII).
(e) Fences (per Article XI).
(f) Decks (per § 420-87).
(g) Sport courts (per § 420-88).
(h) Residential communication structures (per § 420-90).
(i) Bus shelters [per § 420-139B(1)(e)].
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see Article XVIII).
(1) Principal uses.
§ 420-106 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-106
344:1007
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having nine but
not more than 15 persons which shall be in conformance with
all state statutory requirements.
(b) Model single-family homes and related temporary real estate
sales offices or marketing centers located within the model
unit or as a separate structure [per § 420-148B(67)].
(c) (Reserved)127
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Recreational facilities accessory to a development, such as
pools, clubhouses, recreational trails, walking trails and tot
lots located within common areas of the development, provided
that they are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood
and serve the needs of the residents.
(b) Guard houses and gate houses [per § 420-139B(1)(m)].
D. Unclassified uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or
conditional use shall be considered to be prohibited except as may be
otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter. In case of question as to
the classification of use, the question shall be submitted to the Village
Board for determination.
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a minimum area of 40,000 square feet.
(2) All lots shall be not less than 150 feet in width unless located on a
cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot frontage may be reduced
to 75 feet of frontage, provided that there is at least 150 feet of
width at the required building setback line.
F. Single-family dwelling standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height,
except as provided in § 420-139A(5).
(2) The minimum floor area of a dwelling, excluding the garage, decks,
porches and basement, shall be 2,000 square feet with a minimum
first floor area of 1,500 square feet.
(3) The dwelling shall be set on an enclosed permanent foundation
unless the soil-bearing capacity, as determined by a structural
engineer, prohibits such foundation.
(4) Placement of the dwelling unit shall provide for proper drainage
away from the foundation and shall accommodate drainage on and
through the existing property by not negatively affecting the
127. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-106 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-106
344:1008
existing drainage patterns or the capabilities of draining the
abutting properties.
(5) For all one-story dwellings, the length to width ratio of the dwelling
unit (excluded are decks, porches, bay windows, chimneys and any
projections less than 25 square feet), as measured at the
foundation, shall not be greater than two to one (i.e., the length
shall not be more than twice the width). The length of the dwelling
unit is that side of the dwelling that is the longest, and the width is
that side of the dwelling which is the shortest, as shown in
Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
(6) The minimum width of the short side of a dwelling unit shall be 28
feet, as measured at the foundation (excluded are decks, porches,
bay windows, chimneys and any projections less than 25 square
feet). The width is that side of the dwelling which is the shortest as
shown in Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
(7) The main roof of the dwelling shall have a minimum roof pitch of
4:12, and the eaves on the main roof shall extend beyond the
nearest vertical wall a minimum of one foot, or the roof pitch and/or
eave length may be reduced as approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 07-40;
11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-50]
(8) Permitted roof surface materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include wood shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or
wood shingles, clay tiles, concrete tiles, slate or other appropriate
roofing material as approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
(9) Permitted exterior materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include brick, stone, wood, masonry, concrete, stucco,
aluminum or vinyl siding or other appropriate siding material as
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator. The exterior siding
shall extend to the top of the foundation and be within six inches
above the final grade.
(10) The front facade of the structure shall be placed parallel to the
street property line, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads, except as provided for in § 420-139B(2)(a).
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
§ 420-106 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-106
344:1009
§ 420-107. R-3 Urban Single-Family Residential District.
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 25 feet minimum.
(5) Rear setback: 50 feet minimum.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The R-3 Urban Single-Family Residential
District is intended to provide for single-family residential development,
at densities not to exceed 2.2 dwelling units per net acre, served only by
public sanitary sewage facilities.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having a capacity
of eight or fewer persons and which shall be in conformance
with all state statutory requirements.
(b) Essential services.
(c) Foster family homes having fewer than four foster children and
not exceeding eight total occupants and which are in
conformance with all state statutory requirements.
(d) One single-family dwelling, which may include a private garage
or carport attached to the dwelling.
(e) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) No more than a total of three detached structures: private
garages; gardening, tool, and storage sheds; or gazebos
incidental to the residential use (per § 420-86).
(b) Home occupations (per Article VII).
(c) Driveways (per § 420-46).
(d) Swimming pools/hot tubs (per Article XII).
(e) Fences (per Article XI).
(f) Decks (per § 420-87).
§ 420-106 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-107
344:1010
(g) Sport courts (per § 420-88).
(h) Residential communication structures (per § 420-90).
(i) Bus shelters [per § 420-139B(1)(e)].
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see Article XVIII).
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having nine but
not more than 15 persons which shall be in conformance with
all state statutory requirements.
(b) Model single-family homes and related temporary real estate
sales offices or marketing centers located within the model
unit or as a separate structure [per § 420-148B(67)].
(c) (Reserved)128
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Recreational facilities accessory to a development, such as
pools, clubhouses, recreational trails, walking trails and tot
lots located within common areas of the development, provided
that they are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood
and serve the needs of the residents.
(b) Guard houses and gate houses [per § 420-139B(1)(m)].
D. Unclassified uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or
conditional use shall be considered to be prohibited except as may be
otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter. In case of question as to
the classification of use, the question shall be submitted to the Village
Board for determination.
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet.
(2) All lots shall be not less than 100 feet in width unless located on a
cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot frontage may be reduced
to 50 feet of frontage, provided that there is at least 100 feet of
width at the required building setback line.
F. Single-family dwelling standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height,
except as provided in § 420-139A(5).
128. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-107 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-107
344:1011
(2) The minimum floor area of a dwelling, excluding the garage, decks,
porches and basement, shall be 1,400 square feet with a minimum
first floor area of 1,000 square feet.
(3) The dwelling shall be set on an enclosed permanent foundation
unless the soil-bearing capacity, as determined by a structural
engineer, prohibits such foundation.
(4) Placement of the dwelling unit shall provide for proper drainage
away from the foundation and shall accommodate drainage on and
through the existing property by not negatively affecting the
existing drainage patterns or the capabilities of draining the
abutting properties.
(5) For all one-story dwellings, the length to width ratio of the dwelling
unit (excluded are decks, porches, bay windows, chimneys and any
projections less than 25 square feet), as measured at the
foundation, shall not be greater than two to one (i.e., the length
shall not be more than twice the width). The length of the dwelling
unit is that side of the dwelling that is the longest, and the width is
that side of the dwelling which is the shortest, as shown in
Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
(6) The minimum width of the short side of a dwelling unit shall be 28
feet, as measured at the foundation (excluded are decks, porches,
bay windows, chimneys and any projections less than 25 square
feet). The width is that side of the dwelling which is the shortest as
shown in Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
(7) The main roof of the dwelling shall have a minimum roof pitch of
4:12, and the eaves on the main roof shall extend beyond the
nearest vertical wall a minimum of one foot, or the roof pitch and/or
eave length may be reduced as approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 07-40;
11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-50]
(8) Permitted roof surface materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include wood shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or
wood shingles, clay tiles, concrete tiles, slate or other appropriate
roofing material as approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
(9) Permitted exterior materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include brick, stone, wood, masonry, concrete, stucco,
aluminum or vinyl siding or other appropriate siding material as
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator. The exterior siding
shall extend to the top of the foundation and be within six inches
above the final grade.
(10) The front facade of the structure shall be placed parallel to the
street property line, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
§ 420-107 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-107
344:1012
§ 420-108. R-4 Urban Single-Family Residential District.
G. Setbacks
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads, except as provided for in § 420-139B(2)(a).
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 10 feet minimum, except that if an attached garage is
not constructed at the same time that the single-family dwelling is
constructed, then a fifteen-foot side setback shall be required on at
least one side.
(5) Rear setback: 25 feet minimum.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system: See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system: See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The R-4 Urban Single-Family Residential
District is intended to provide for single-family residential development,
at densities not exceeding 2.9 dwelling units per net acre, served by
public sanitary sewage facilities.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having a capacity
of eight or fewer persons and which shall be in conformance
with all state statutory requirements.
(b) Essential services.
(c) Foster family homes having fewer than four foster children and
not exceeding eight total occupants and which are in
conformance with all state statutory requirements.
(d) One single-family dwelling, which may include a private garage
or carport attached to the dwelling.
(e) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses.
§ 420-107 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-108
344:1013
(a) No more than a total of three detached structures: private
garages; gardening, tool, and storage sheds; or gazebos
incidental to the residential use (per § 420-86).
(b) Home occupations (per Article VII).
(c) Driveways (per § 420-46).
(d) Swimming pools/hot tubs (per Article XII).
(e) Fences (per Article XI).
(f) Decks (per § 420-87).
(g) Sport courts (per § 420-88).
(h) Residential communication structures (per § 420-90).
(i) Bus shelters [per § 420-139B(1)(e)].
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see Article XVIII).
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having nine but
not more than 15 persons which shall be in conformance with
all state statutory requirements.
(b) Model single-family homes and related temporary real estate
sales offices or marketing centers located within the model
unit or as a separate structure [per § 420-148B(67)].
(c) (Reserved)129
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Recreational facilities accessory to a development, such as
pools, clubhouses, recreational trails, walking trails and tot
lots located within common areas of the development, provided
that they are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood
and serve the needs of the residents.
(b) Guard houses and gate houses [per § 420-139B(1)(m)].
D. Unclassified uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or
conditional use shall be considered to be prohibited except as may be
otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter. In case of question as to
the classification of use, the question shall be submitted to the Village
Board for determination.
129. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-108 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-108
344:1014
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a minimum of 15,000 square feet.
(2) All lots shall be not less than 90 feet in width unless located on a
cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot frontage may be reduced
to 45 feet of frontage, provided that there is at least 90 feet of
width at the required building setback line.
F. Single-family dwelling standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height,
except as provided in § 420-139A(5).
(2) The minimum floor area of a dwelling, excluding the garage, decks,
porches and basement, shall be 1,400 square feet with a minimum
first floor area of 1,000 square feet.
(3) The dwelling shall be set on an enclosed permanent foundation
unless the soil-bearing capacity, as determined by a structural
engineer, prohibits such foundation.
(4) Placement of the dwelling unit shall provide for proper drainage
away from the foundation and shall accommodate drainage on and
through the existing property by not negatively affecting the
existing drainage patterns or the capabilities of draining the
abutting properties.
(5) For all one-story dwellings, the length to width ratio of the dwelling
unit (excluded are decks, porches, bay windows, chimneys and any
projections less than 25 square feet), as measured at the
foundation, shall not be greater than two to one (i.e., the length
shall not be more than twice the width). The length of the dwelling
unit is that side of the dwelling that is the longest, and the width is
that side of the dwelling which is the shortest, as shown in
Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
(6) The minimum width of the short side of a dwelling unit shall be 28
feet, as measured at the foundation (excluded are decks, porches,
bay windows, chimneys and any projections less than 25 square
feet). The width is that side of the dwelling which is the shortest as
shown in Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
(7) The main roof of the dwelling shall have a minimum roof pitch of
4:12, and the eaves on the main roof shall extend beyond the
nearest vertical wall a minimum of one foot, or the roof pitch and/or
eave length may be reduced as approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 07-40;
11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-50]
(8) Permitted roof surface materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include wood shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or
§ 420-108 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-108
344:1015
§ 420-109. R-4.5 Urban Single-Family Residential District.
wood shingles, clay tiles, concrete tiles, slate or other appropriate
roofing material as approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
(9) Permitted exterior materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include brick, stone, wood, masonry, concrete, stucco,
aluminum or vinyl siding or other appropriate siding material as
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator. The exterior siding
shall extend to the top of the foundation and be within six inches
above the final grade.
(10) The front facade of the structure shall be placed parallel to the
street property line, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads, except as provided for in § 420-139B(2)(a).
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 10 feet minimum, except that if an attached garage is
not constructed at the same time that the single-family dwelling is
constructed, then a fifteen-foot side setback shall be required on at
least one side.
(5) Rear setback: 25 feet minimum.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The R-4.5 Urban Single-Family Residential
District is intended to provide for single-family residential development,
at densities not exceeding 3.5 dwelling units per net acre, served only
by public sanitary sewage facilities.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having a capacity
of eight or fewer persons and which shall be in conformance
with all state statutory requirements.
§ 420-108 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-109
344:1016
(b) Essential services.
(c) Foster family homes having fewer than four foster children and
not exceeding eight total occupants and which are in
conformance with all state statutory requirements.
(d) One single-family dwelling, which may include a private garage
or carport attached to the dwelling.
(e) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) No more than a total of three detached structures: private
garages, gardening, tool, and storage sheds; or gazebos
incidental to the residential use (per § 420-86).
(b) Home occupations (per Article VII).
(c) Driveways (per § 420-46).
(d) Swimming pools/hot tubs (per Article XII).
(e) Fences (per Article XI).
(f) Decks (per § 420-87)
(g) Sport courts (per § 420-88).
(h) Residential communication structures (per § 420-90).
(i) Boathouses [per § 420-139B(1)(d)].
(j) Davits [per § 420-139B(1)(h)].
(k) Bus shelters [per § 420-139B(1)(e)].
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see Article XVIII).
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having nine but
not more than 15 persons which shall be in conformance with
all state statutory requirements.
(b) Model single-family homes and related temporary real estate
sales offices or marketing centers located within the model
unit or as a separate structure [per § 420-148B(67)].
(c) (Reserved)130
130. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-109 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-109
344:1017
(2) Accessory uses.
(3) Recreational facilities accessory to a development, such as pools,
clubhouses, recreational trails, walking trails and tot lots located
within common areas of the development, provided that they are
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and serve the
needs of the residents.
(4) Guard houses and gate houses [per § 420-139B(1)(m)].
D. Unclassified uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or
conditional use shall be considered to be prohibited except as may be
otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter. In case of question as to
the classification of use, the question shall be submitted to the Village
Board for determination.
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a minimum of 12,500 square feet.
(2) All lots shall be not less than 80 feet in width unless located on a
cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot frontage may be reduced
to 45 feet of frontage, provided that there is at least 80 feet of
width at the required building setback line.
F. Single-family dwelling standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height,
except as provided in § 420-139A(5).
(2) The minimum floor area of a dwelling, excluding the garage, decks,
porches and basement, shall be 1,400 square feet with a minimum
first floor area of 1,000 square feet.
(3) The dwelling shall be set on an enclosed permanent foundation
unless the soil-bearing capacity, as determined by a structural
engineer, prohibits such foundation.
(4) Placement of the dwelling unit shall provide for proper drainage
away from the foundation and shall accommodate drainage on and
through the existing property by not negatively affecting the
existing drainage patterns or the capabilities of draining the
abutting properties.
(5) For all one-story dwellings, the length to width ratio of the dwelling
unit (excluded are decks, porches, bay windows, chimneys and any
projections less than 25 square feet), as measured at the
foundation, shall not be greater than two to one (i.e., the length
shall not be more than twice the width). The length of the dwelling
unit is that side of the dwelling that is the longest, and the width is
that side of the dwelling which is the shortest, as shown in
Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
§ 420-109 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-109
344:1018
(6) The minimum width of the short side of a dwelling unit shall be 26
feet, as measured at the foundation (excluded are decks, porches,
bay windows, chimneys and any projections less than 25 square
feet). The width is that side of the dwelling which is the shortest as
shown in Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
(7) The main roof of the dwelling shall have a minimum roof pitch of
4:12, and the eaves on the main roof shall extend beyond the
nearest vertical wall a minimum of one foot, or the roof pitch and/or
eave length may be reduced as approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No.
07-4011-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-50]
(8) Permitted roof surface materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include wood shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or
wood shingles, clay tiles, concrete tiles, slate or other appropriate
roofing material as approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
(9) Permitted exterior materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include brick, stone, wood, masonry, concrete, stucco,
aluminum or vinyl siding or other appropriate siding material as
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator. The exterior siding
shall extend to the top of the foundation and be within six inches
above the final grade.
(10) The front facade of the structure shall be placed parallel to the
street property line, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads, except as provided for in § 420-139B(2)(a).
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 10 feet minimum, except that if an attached garage is
not constructed at the same time that the single-family dwelling is
constructed, then a fifteen-foot side setback shall be required on at
least one side
(5) Rear setback: 25 feet minimum.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
§ 420-109 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-110
344:1019
§ 420-110. R-5 Urban Single-Family Residential District.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The R-5 Urban Single-Family Residential
District is intended to provide for single-family residential development,
at densities not exceeding 4.4 dwelling units per net acre, served by
public sanitary sewage facilities.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having a capacity
of eight or fewer persons and which shall be in conformance
with all state statutory requirements.
(b) Essential services.
(c) Foster family homes having fewer than four foster children and
not exceeding eight total occupants and which are in
conformance with all state statutory requirements.
(d) One single-family dwelling, which may include a private garage
or carport attached to the dwelling.
(e) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) No more than a total of three detached structures: private
garages; gardening, tool, and storage sheds; or gazebos
incidental to the residential use (per § 420-86).
(b) Home occupations (per Article VII).
(c) Driveways (per § 420-46).
(d) Swimming pools/hot tubs (per Article XII).
(e) Fences (per Article XI).
(f) Decks (per § 420-87).
(g) Sport courts (per § 420-88).
(h) Residential communication structures (per § 420-90).
(i) Boathouses [per § 420-139B(1)(d)].
(j) Davits [per § 420-139B(1)(h)].
(k) Bus shelters [per § 420-139B(1)(e)].
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see Article XVIII).
§ 420-110 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-110
344:1020
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having nine but
not more than 15 persons which shall be in conformance with
all state statutory requirements.
(b) Model single-family homes and related temporary real estate
sales offices or marketing centers located within the model
unit or as a separate structure [per § 420-148B(67)].
(c) (Reserved)131
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Recreational facilities accessory to a development, such as
pools, clubhouses, recreational trails, walking trails and tot
lots located within common areas of the development, provided
that they are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood
and serve the needs of the residents.
(b) Guard houses and gate houses [per § 420-139B(1)(m)].
D. Unclassified uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or
conditional use shall be considered to be prohibited except as may be
otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter. In case of question as to
the classification of use, the question shall be submitted to the Village
Board for determination.
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a minimum of 10,000 square feet.
(2) All lots shall be not less than 75 feet in width unless located on a
cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot frontage may be reduced
to 40 feet of frontage, provided that there is at least 75 feet of
width at the required building setback line.
F. Single-family dwelling standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height,
except as provided in § 420-139A(5).
(2) The minimum floor area of a dwelling, excluding the garage, decks,
porches and basement, shall be 1,200 square feet with a minimum
first floor area of 900 square feet.
(3) The dwelling shall be set on an enclosed permanent foundation
unless the soil-bearing capacity, as determined by a structural
engineer, prohibits such foundation.
131. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-110 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-110
344:1021
(4) Placement of the dwelling unit shall provide for proper drainage
away from the foundation and shall accommodate drainage on and
through the existing property by not negatively affecting the
existing drainage patterns or the capabilities of draining the
abutting properties.
(5) For all one-story dwellings, the length to width ratio of the dwelling
unit (excluded are decks, porches, bay windows, chimneys and any
projections less than 25 square feet), as measured at the
foundation, shall not be greater than two to one (i.e., the length
shall not be more than twice the width). The length of the dwelling
unit is that side of the dwelling that is the longest, and the width is
that side of the dwelling which is the shortest as shown in
Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
(6) The minimum width of the short side of a dwelling unit shall be 24
feet, as measured at the foundation (excluded are decks, porches,
bay windows, chimneys and any projections less than 25 square
feet). The width is that side of the dwelling which is the shortest as
shown in Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
(7) The main roof of the dwelling shall have a minimum roof pitch of
4:12, and the eaves on the main roof shall extend beyond the
nearest vertical wall a minimum of one foot, or the roof pitch and/or
eave length may be reduced as approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No.
07-4011-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-50]
(8) Permitted roof surface materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include wood shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or
wood shingles, clay tiles, concrete tiles, slate or other appropriate
roofing material as approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
(9) Permitted exterior materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include brick, stone, wood, masonry, concrete, stucco,
aluminum or vinyl siding or other appropriate siding material as
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator. The exterior siding
shall extend to the top of the foundation and be within six inches
above the final grade.
(10) The front facade of the structure shall be placed parallel to the
street property line, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads, except as provided for in § 420-139B(2)(a).
§ 420-110 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-110
344:1022
§ 420-111. R-6 Urban Single-Family Residential District.
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 10 feet minimum, except that if an attached garage is
not constructed at the same time that the single-family dwelling is
constructed, then a fifteen-foot side setback shall be required on at
least one side.
(5) Rear setback: 25 feet minimum.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The R-6 Urban Single-Family Residential
District is intended to accommodate existing single-family development
where densities may reach 7.3 dwelling units per net acre in order that
residences in these districts shall not be rendered nonconforming uses.
The district further provides for new development to fill in voids in
existing small lot subdivisions. All R-6 residential development should
preferably be served by public sanitary sewage systems. Any additional
lands or new subdivisions shall be considered for rezoning into this
district only if the parcel in question abuts a city of the second class and
furthermore abuts a residential subdivision located within the city of
the second class and only if the individual parcels in the
aforementioned subdivision are 6,000 square feet per unit or less and
served by public sanitary sewer.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having a capacity
of eight or fewer persons and which shall be in conformance
with all state statutory requirements.
(b) Essential services.
(c) Foster family homes having fewer than four foster children and
not exceeding eight total occupants and which are in
conformance with all state statutory requirements.
(d) One single-family dwelling, which may include a private garage
or carport attached to the dwelling.
§ 420-110 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-111
344:1023
(e) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) No more than a total of two detached structures: private
garages; gardening, tool, and storage sheds; or gazebos
incidental to the residential use (per § 420-86).
(b) Home occupations (per Article VII).
(c) Driveways (per § 420-46).
(d) Swimming pools/hot tubs (per Article XII).
(e) Fences (per Article XI).
(f) Decks (per Section 420-87).
(g) Sport courts (per § 420-88).
(h) Residential communication structures (per § 420-90).
(i) Bus shelters [per § 420-139B(1)(e)].
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see also Article XVIII).
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Community-based residential facility (CBRF) having nine but
not more than 15 persons which shall be in conformance with
all state statutory requirements.
(b) Model single-family homes and related temporary real estate
sales offices or marketing centers located within the model
unit or as a separate structure [per § 420-148B(67)].
(c) (Reserved)132
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Recreational facilities accessory to a development, such as
pools, clubhouses, recreational trails, walking trails and tot
lots located within common areas of the development, provided
that they are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood
and serve the needs of the residents.
(b) Guard houses and gate houses [per § 420-139B(1)(m)].
D. Unclassified uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or
conditional use shall be considered to be prohibited except as may be
132. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-111 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-111
344:1024
otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter. In case of question as to
the classification of use, the question shall be submitted to the Village
Board for determination.
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a minimum area of 6000 square feet.
(2) All lots shall be not less than 60 feet in width unless located on a
cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot frontage may be reduced
to 30 feet of frontage, provided that there is at least 60 feet of
width at the required building setback line
F. Single-family dwelling standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height,
except as provided in § 420-139A(5).
(2) The minimum floor area of a dwelling, excluding the garage, decks,
porches and basement, shall be 1,200 square feet with a minimum
first floor area of 700 square feet.
(3) The dwelling shall be set on an enclosed permanent foundation
unless the soil-bearing capacity, as determined by a structural
engineer, prohibits such foundation.
(4) Placement of the dwelling unit shall provide for proper drainage
away from the foundation and shall accommodate drainage on and
through the existing property by not negatively affecting the
existing drainage patterns or the capabilities of draining the
abutting properties.
(5) For all one-story dwellings, the length to width ratio of the dwelling
unit (excluded are decks, porches, bay windows, chimneys and any
projections less than 25 square feet), as measured at the
foundation, shall not be greater than two to one 1 (i.e., the length
shall not be more than twice the width). The length of the dwelling
unit is that side of the dwelling that is the longest, and the width is
that side of the dwelling which is the shortest, as shown in
Illustration 5 in Appendix a.
(6) The minimum width of the short side of a dwelling unit shall be 24
feet, as measured at the foundation (excluded are decks, porches,
bay windows, chimneys and any projections less than 25 square
feet). The width is that side of the dwelling which is the shortest as
shown in Illustration 5 in Appendix A.
(7) The main roof of the dwelling shall have a minimum roof pitch of
4:12, and the eaves on the main roof shall extend beyond the
nearest vertical wall a minimum of one foot, or the roof pitch and/or
eave length may be reduced as approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No.
07-4011-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-50]
§ 420-111 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-111
344:1025
§ 420-112. R-7 Multiple-Family Residential District.
(8) Permitted roof surface materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include wood shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or
wood shingles, clay tiles, concrete tiles, slate or other appropriate
roofing material as approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
(9) Permitted exterior materials (including accessory garages and
carports) include brick, stone, wood, masonry, concrete, stucco,
aluminum or vinyl siding or other appropriate siding material as
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator. The exterior siding
shall extend to the top of the foundation and be within six inches
above the final grade.
(10) The front facade of the structure shall be placed parallel to the
street property line, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads, except as provided for in § 420-139B(2)(a).
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: eight feet minimum, except that if an attached garage
is not constructed at the same time that the single-family dwelling
is constructed, then a fifteen-foot side setback shall be required on
at least one side.
(5) Rear setback: 25 feet minimum.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The R-7 Multiple-Family
Residential District is intended to provide for three-family residential
development wherein the net density shall not exceed 3.1 dwelling
units per acre.
B. Permitted uses/structures.
(1) Principal uses/structures.
(a) One three-family structure (three attached units), which may
include private garages attached to the structure.
§ 420-111 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-112
344:1026
(b) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses/structures, including but not limited to:
(a) No more than a total of two of the following detached
accessory buildings: private garages; gardening, tool, and
storage sheds; or gazebos incidental to the residential use per
§ 420-86.
(b) Home occupations per Article VII.
(c) Driveways per § 420-47.
(d) Fences per Article XI.
(e) Decks and porches per § 420-87.
(f) Residential communication structures per § 420-90.
(g) Bus shelters per § 420-139B(1)(e).
(h) Signs per Article X.
(i) Essential services, which may be constructed on the lot prior to
construction of the permitted principal structure.
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see Article XVIII).
(1) Principal uses/structures.
(a) Community living arrangements within a permitted principal
structure [see also § 420-148B(21)].
(b) Model three-family structure or unit and related temporary
real estate sales offices or marketing center located within the
model unit or as a separate structure [see also
§ 420-148B(65)].
(c) Common recreational facilities accessory to a multiple-family
complex which is planned and developed as a coordinated
whole and is unified by covenants running with the land and
not open to the general public, such as but not limited to inground
swimming pools, hot tubs, sport courts, clubhouses,
recreational trails, walking trails and tot lots located within the
common areas of the development, provided that they are
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and serve the
needs of the residents.
(d) (Reserved)133
133. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(d), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-112 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-112
344:1027
(2) Accessory uses/structures.
(a) Common recreational facilities accessory to a multiple-family
complex which is planned and developed as a coordinated
whole and is unified by covenants running with the land and
not open to the general public, such as but not limited to inground
swimming pools, hot tubs, sport courts, clubhouses,
recreational trails, walking trails and tot lots located within the
common areas of the development, provided that they are
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and serve the
needs of the residents.
(b) Guard houses and gate houses.
(c) (Reserved)134
(3) Unclassified uses and structures. It is recognized that it is neither
possible nor practical to list all of the permitted accessory uses and
structures that are compatible with those listed above in
Subsection B, and therefore it is intended that said list of accessory
uses and structures be only illustrative. Any individual aggrieved
by a failure to list a permitted accessory use or structure in said
subsection shall have the right to file a petition with the Village
Zoning Administrator for determination. The Village Zoning
Administrator, in making the determination, shall find that an
accessory use or structure is subordinate to the permitted principal
use of a structure, land or water, is located on the same lot or
parcel and serves a purpose customarily incidental to the permitted
principal use in said district.
D. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a minimum area of 40,000 square feet.
(2) All lots shall have a minimum frontage of 175 feet in width unless
located on a cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot frontage may
be reduced to 100 feet of frontage, provided that there is at least
175 feet of width at the required building setback line.
E. Design standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(2) The floor area of each dwelling unit, excluding garages, decks,
porches and basements, shall be a minimum of 1,400 square feet
with a minimum first floor area of 1,000 square feet.
(3) Placement of each structure shall provide for proper drainage away
from the foundation and shall accommodate drainage on and
through the existing property by not negatively affecting the
134. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-112 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-112
344:1028
existing drainage patterns or the capabilities of draining the
abutting properties.
(4) The main roof of the dwelling shall have a minimum roof pitch of
4:12, and the eaves on the main roof shall extend beyond the
nearest vertical wall a minimum of one foot, or the roof pitch and/or
eave length may be reduced as approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No.
07-4011-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-50]
(5) Permitted roof surface materials (including garages) include wood
shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or wood shingles, clay
tiles, concrete tiles, slate or other appropriate roofing material as
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
(6) Permitted exterior materials (including garages) include brick,
stone, masonry, concrete, stucco, wood, aluminum or vinyl siding or
other appropriate siding material as approved by the Village
Zoning Administrator. At a minimum, 50% of each wall surface,
excluding windows, doors and garage doors, shall be constructed
of brick, stone, masonry or concrete. The exterior siding shall
extend to the top of the foundation and be within six inches above
the final grade.
(7) The front facade of the structure shall be placed parallel to the
street property line, unless it is determined by the Zoning
Administrator that aesthetics, lot configuration, layout of the
neighboring structures, curve of the road or environmental
features on the lot prohibit the structure from being placed parallel
to the street property line.
(8) No more than three overhead garage doors shall face directly
toward a public right-of-way; this includes three single overhead
garage doors or one double and one single overhead garage door.
(9) All exterior additions or alterations shall be constructed of the
same or complementary colors and materials and in the same
architectural style as the principal structure.
(10) A minimum of 50% of the lot shall remain as open space.
F. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
§ 420-112 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-112
344:1029
§ 420-113. R-8 Urban Two-Family Residential District.
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 20 feet minimum.
(5) Rear setback: 40 feet minimum.
G. Authorized sanitary sewer system: See § 420-32 of this chapter.
H. Authorized water supply system: See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The R-8 Urban Two-Family
Residential District is intended to provide for two-family residential
development wherein the net density shall not exceed 4.4 dwelling
units per acre.
B. Permitted uses/structures
(1) Principal uses/structures.
(a) One two-family structure (two attached units) which may
include private garages attached to the dwellings.
(b) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses/structures, including but not limited to:
(a) No more than a total of two of the following detached
structures: private garages; gardening, tool, and storage
sheds; or gazebos incidental to the residential use per
§ 420-86.
(b) Home occupations per Article VII.
(c) Driveways per § 420-46.
(d) Swimming pools per Article XII.
(e) Fences per Article XI.
(f) Decks and porches per § 420-87.
(g) Residential communication structures per § 420-90.
(h) Bus shelters per § 420-139B(1)(e).
(i) Signs per Article X.
(j) Recreational equipment.
(k) Essential services, which may be constructed on the lot prior to
construction of the permitted principal structure.
§ 420-112 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-113
344:1030
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see Article XVIII).
(1) Principal uses/structures.
(a) Community living arrangements within a permitted principal
structure [see also § 420-148B(21)].
(b) Model two-family structure/unit and related temporary real
estate sales offices or marketing center located within the
model unit or as a separate structure [see also
§ 420-148B(65)].
(c) Common recreational facilities accessory to a two-family
complex which is planned and developed as a coordinated
whole and is unified by covenants running with the land and
not open to the general public, such as but not limited to inground
swimming pools, hot tubs, sport courts, clubhouses,
recreational trails, walking trails and tot lots located within the
common areas of the development, provided that they are
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and serve the
needs of the residents.
(d) (Reserved)135
(2) Accessory uses/structures.
(a) Common recreational facilities accessory to a two-family
complex which is planned and developed as a coordinated
whole and is unified by covenants running with the land and
not open to the general public, such as but not limited to inground
swimming pools, hot tubs, sport courts, clubhouses,
recreational trails, walking trails and tot lots located within the
common areas of the development, provided that they are
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and serve the
needs of the residents.
(b) Guard houses and gate houses.
(c) (Reserved)136
D. Unclassified uses. It is recognized that it is neither possible nor
practical to list all of the permitted accessory uses and structures that
are compatible with those listed above in Subsection B, and therefore it
is intended that said list of accessory uses and structures be only
illustrative. Any individual aggrieved by a failure to list a permitted
accessory use or structure in said subsection shall have the right to file
135. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(d), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
136. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-113 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-113
344:1031
a petition with the Village Zoning Administrator for determination. The
Village Zoning Administrator, in making the determination, shall find
that an accessory use or structure is subordinate to the permitted
principal use of a structure, land or water, is located on the same lot
or parcel and serves a purpose customarily incidental to the permitted
principal use in said district.
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet.
(2) All lots shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet in width unless
located on a cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot frontage may
be reduced to 50 feet of frontage, provided that there is at least 100
feet of width at the required building setback line.
F. Design standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(2) The minimum floor area of each two-family structure (excluding
garages, decks and porches) shall be 2,000 square feet or 1,000
square feet per unit, with the minimum first floor area of the
structure being 1,500 square feet.
(3) The structure shall be set on an enclosed permanent foundation
unless the soil-bearing capacity, as determined by a structural
engineer, prohibits such foundation.
(4) Placement of each structure shall provide for proper drainage away
from the foundation and shall accommodate drainage on and
through the existing property by not negatively affecting the
existing drainage patterns or the capabilities of draining the
abutting properties.
(5) The main roof of the dwelling shall have a minimum roof pitch of
4:12, and the eaves on the main roof shall extend beyond the
nearest vertical wall a minimum of one foot, or the roof pitch and/or
eave length may be reduced as approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No.
07-4011-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-50]
(6) Permitted roof surface materials (including garages) include wood
shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or wood shingles, clay
tiles, concrete tiles, slate or other appropriate roofing material as
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
(7) Permitted exterior materials (including garages) include brick,
stone, masonry, concrete, stucco, wood, aluminum or vinyl siding or
other appropriate siding material as approved by the Village
Zoning Administrator.
§ 420-113 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-113
344:1032
§ 420-114. R-9 Multiple-Family Residential District.
(8) The front facade of the structure shall be placed parallel to the
street property line, unless it is determined by the Zoning
Administrator that aesthetics, lot configuration, layout of the
neighboring structures, curve of the road or environmental
features on the lot prohibit the structure from being placed parallel
to the street property line.
(9) No more than four overhead garage doors per structure shall face
directly toward a public right-of-way; this includes four single
overhead garage doors or one double and two single overhead
garage doors or two double garage doors.
(10) All exterior additions or alterations shall be constructed of the
same or complementary colors and materials and in the same
architectural style as the principal structure.
(11) A minimum of 50% of the lot shall remain as open space.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 10 feet minimum.
(5) Rear setback: 30 feet minimum.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The R-9 Multiple-Family
Residential District is intended to provide for multiple-family residential
development wherein the net density shall not exceed four dwelling
units per acre.
B. Permitted uses/structures.
(1) Principal uses/structures.
(a) One multiple-family structure not to exceed four dwelling units
per structure, which may include private garages attached to
the structure.
§ 420-113 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-114
344:1033
(b) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses/structures, including but not limited to:
(a) No more than a total of two of the following detached
structures: private garages; gardening, tool, and storage
sheds; or gazebos incidental to the residential use per
§ 420-86.
(b) Home occupations per Article VII.
(c) Driveways per Section 420-47.
(d) Fences per Article XI.
(e) Decks and porches per § 420-87.
(f) Residential communication structures per § 420-90.
(g) Bus shelters per § 420-139B(1)(e).
(h) Signs per Article X.
(i) Essential services, which may be constructed on the lot prior to
construction of the permitted principal structure.
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see Article XVIII).
(1) Principal uses/structures.
(a) Community living arrangements within a permitted principal
structure [see also § 420-148B(21)].
(b) Model units and related temporary real estate sales offices or
marketing center located within the model unit or as a
separate structure [see also § 420-148B(65)].
(c) Common recreational facilities accessory to a multiple-family
complex which is planned and developed as a coordinated
whole and is unified by covenants running with the land and
not open to the general public, such as but not limited to inground
swimming pools, hot tubs, sport courts, clubhouses,
recreational trails, walking trails and tot lots located within the
common areas of the development, provided that they are
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and serve the
needs of the residents.
(d) (Reserved)137
137. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(d), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-114 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-114
344:1034
(2) Accessory uses/structures.
(a) Common recreational facilities accessory to a multiple-family
complex which is planned and developed as a coordinated
whole and is unified by covenants running with the land and
not open to the general public, such as but not limited to inground
swimming pools, hot tubs, sport courts, clubhouses,
recreational trails, walking trails and tot lots located within the
common areas of the development, provided that they are
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and serve the
needs of the residents.
(b) Guard houses and gate houses.
(c) (Reserved)138
D. Unclassified uses. It is recognized that it is neither possible nor
practical to list all of the permitted accessory uses and structures that
are compatible with those listed above in Subsection B, and therefore it
is intended that said list of accessory uses and structures be only
illustrative. Any individual aggrieved by a failure to list a permitted
accessory use or structure in said subsection shall have the right to file
a petition with the Village Zoning Administrator for determination. The
Village Zoning Administrator, in making the determination, shall find
that an accessory use or structure is subordinate to the permitted
principal use of a structure, land or water, is located on the same lot or
parcel and serves a purpose customarily incidental to the permitted
principal use in said district.
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a minimum area of 43,560 square feet (one acre).
(2) All lots shall have a minimum frontage of 200 feet in width unless
located on a cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot frontage may
be reduced to 100 feet of frontage, provided that there is at least
200 feet of width at the required building setback line.
F. Design standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(2) The units in each structure shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Efficiency or one-bedroom units shall have a minimum floor
area of 700 square feet;
(b) Two-bedroom units shall have a minimum floor area of 1,000
square feet; and
138. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-114 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-114
344:1035
(c) Three- or more bedroom units shall have a minimum floor area
of 1,200 square feet.
(3) Placement of each structure shall provide for proper drainage away
from the foundation and shall accommodate drainage on and
through the existing property by not negatively affecting the
existing drainage patterns or the capabilities of draining the
abutting properties.
(4) The main roof of the dwelling shall have a minimum roof pitch of
4:12, and the eaves on the main roof shall extend beyond the
nearest vertical wall a minimum of one foot, or the roof pitch and/or
eave length may be reduced as approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No.
07-4011-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-50]
(5) Permitted roof surface materials (including garages) include wood
shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or wood shingles, clay
tiles, concrete tiles, slate or other appropriate roofing material as
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
(6) Permitted exterior materials (including garages) include brick,
stone, masonry, concrete, stucco, wood, aluminum or vinyl siding or
other appropriate siding material as approved by the Village
Zoning Administrator. At a minimum, 50% of each wall surface,
excluding windows, doors and garage doors, shall be constructed
of brick, stone, masonry or concrete. The exterior siding shall
extend to the top of the foundation and be within six inches above
the final grade.
(7) The front facade of the structure shall be placed parallel to the
street property line, unless it is determined by the Zoning
Administrator that aesthetics, lot configuration, layout of the
neighboring structures, curve of the road or environmental
features on the lot prohibit the structure from being placed parallel
to the street property line.
(8) No overhead garage doors shall face directly toward any public
right-of-way.
(9) All exterior additions or alterations shall be constructed of the
same or complementary colors and materials and in the same
architectural style as the principal structure.
(10) A minimum of 25% of the lot shall remain as open space.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
§ 420-114 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-114
344:1036
§ 420-115. R-10 Multiple-Family Residential District.
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 20 feet minimum.
(5) Rear setback: 30 feet minimum.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The R-10 Multiple-Family
Residential District is intended to provide for multiple-family residential
development wherein the net density shall not exceed 5.3 dwelling
units per acre.
B. Permitted uses/structures.
(1) Principal uses/structures.
(a) One multiple-family structure not to exceed eight units per
structure, which may include private garages attached to the
structure.
(b) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses/structures, including but not limited to:
(a) No more than one of the following detached structures: private
garages per § 420-86.
(b) No more than two of the following detached structures:
gardening, tool, and storage sheds or gazebos incidental to the
residential use per § 420-86.
(c) Home occupations per Article VII.
(d) Driveways per § 420-47.
(e) Fences per Article XI.
(f) Decks and porches per § 420-87.
(g) Residential communication structures per § 420-90.
(h) Bus shelters per § 420-139B(1)(e).
§ 420-114 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-115
344:1037
(i) Signs per Article X.
(j) Essential services, which may be constructed on the lot prior to
construction of the permitted principal structure.
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see Article XVIII).
(1) Principal uses/structures.
(a) Community living arrangements within a permitted principal
structure [see also § 420-148B(21)].
(b) Model units and related temporary real estate sales offices or
marketing center located within the model unit or as a
separate structure.
(c) Common recreational facilities accessory to a multiple-family
complex which is planned and developed as a coordinated
whole and is unified by covenants running with the land and
not open to the general public, such as but not limited to inground
swimming pools, hot tubs, sport courts, clubhouses,
recreational trails, walking trails and tot lots located within the
common areas of the development, provided that they are
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and serve the
needs of the residents.
(d) (Reserved)139
(2) Accessory uses/structures.
(a) Common recreational facilities accessory to a multiple-family
complex which is planned and developed as a coordinated
whole and is unified by covenants running with the land and
not open to the general public, such as but not limited to inground
swimming pools, hot tubs, sport courts, clubhouses,
recreational trails, walking trails and tot lots located within the
common areas of the development, provided that they are
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and serve the
needs of the residents.
(b) Guard houses and gate houses.
(c) (Reserved)140
D. Unclassified uses. It is recognized that it is neither possible nor
practical to list all of the permitted accessory uses and structures that
are compatible with those listed above in Subsection B, and therefore it
139. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(d), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
140. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-115 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-115
344:1038
is intended that said list of accessory uses and structures be only
illustrative. Any individual aggrieved by a failure to list a permitted
accessory use or structure in said subsection shall have the right to
file a petition with the Village Zoning Administrator for determination.
The Village Zoning Administrator, in making the determination, shall
find that an accessory use or structure is subordinate to the permitted
principal use of a structure, land or water, is located on the same lot
or parcel and serves a purpose customarily incidental to the permitted
principal use in said district.
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a minimum area of 65,340 square feet (1.5 acres).
(2) All lots shall have a minimum frontage of 200 feet in width unless
located on a cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot frontage may
be reduced to 100 feet of frontage, provided that there is at least
200 feet of width at the required building setback line.
F. Design standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(2) The units in each structure shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Efficiency or one-bedroom units shall have a minimum floor
area of 700 square feet;
(b) Two-bedroom units shall have a minimum floor area of 1,000
square feet; and
(c) Three- or more bedroom units shall have a minimum floor area
of 1,200 square feet.
(3) Placement of each structure shall provide for proper drainage away
from the foundation and shall accommodate drainage on and
through the existing property by not negatively affecting the
existing drainage patterns or the capabilities of draining the
abutting properties.
(4) The main roof of the dwelling shall have a minimum roof pitch of
4:12, and the eaves on the main roof shall extend beyond the
nearest vertical wall a minimum of one foot, or the roof pitch and/or
eave length may be reduced as approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No.
07-4011-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-50]
(5) Permitted roof surface materials (including garages) include wood
shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or wood shingles, clay
tiles, concrete tiles, slate or other appropriate roofing material as
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
§ 420-115 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-115
344:1039
§ 420-116. R-11 Multiple-Family Residential District.
(6) Permitted exterior materials (including garages) include brick,
stone, masonry, concrete, stucco, wood, aluminum or vinyl siding or
other appropriate siding material as approved by the Village
Zoning Administrator. At a minimum, 50% of each wall surface,
excluding windows, doors and garage doors, shall be constructed
of brick, stone, masonry or concrete. The exterior siding shall
extend to the top of the foundation and be within six inches above
the final grade.
(7) The front facade of the structure shall be placed parallel to the
street property line, unless it is determined by the Zoning
Administrator that aesthetics, lot configuration, layout of the
neighboring structures, curve of the road or environmental
features on the lot prohibit the structure from being placed parallel
to the street property line.
(8) No overhead garage doors shall face directly toward a public rightof-
way.
(9) All exterior additions or alterations shall be constructed of the
same or complementary colors and materials and in the same
architectural style as the principal structure.
(10) A minimum of 25% of the lot shall remain as open space.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 25 feet minimum.
(5) Rear setback: 50 feet minimum.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The R-11 Multiple-Family
Residential District is intended to provide for multiple-family residential
development wherein the net density shall not exceed 9.6 dwelling
units per acre.
§ 420-115 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-116
344:1040
B. Permitted uses/structures.
(1) Principal uses/structures.
(a) One multifamily structure not to exceed 24 units per structure,
which shall include private garages attached to the structure.
(b) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses/structures, including but not limited to:
(a) No more than a total of three of the following detached
structures: private garages per § 420-86.
(b) No more than a total of two of the following detached
structures: gardening, tool, and storage sheds or gazebos
incidental to the residential use per § 420-86.
(c) Home occupations per Article VII.
(d) Driveways per § 420-47.
(e) Fences per Article XI.
(f) Decks and porches per § 420-87.
(g) Residential communication structures per § 420-90.
(h) Bus shelters per § 420-139B(1)(e).
(i) Signs per Article X.
(j) Essential services, which may be constructed on the lot prior to
construction of the permitted principal structure.
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see Article XVIII).
(1) Principal uses/structures.
(a) One multiple-family structure not to exceed 36 units per
structure, which shall include private garages attached to the
structure [see also § 420-148B(69)].
(b) Community living arrangements within a permitted principal
structure [see also § 420-148B(22)].
(c) Model units and related temporary real estate sales offices or
marketing center located within the model unit or as a
separate structure [see also § 420-148B(65)].
(d) Common recreational facilities accessory to a multiple-family
complex which is planned and developed as a coordinated
§ 420-116 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-116
344:1041
whole and is unified by covenants running with the land and
not open to the general public, such as but not limited to inground
swimming pools, hot tubs, sport courts, clubhouses,
recreational trails, walking trails and tot lots located within
the common areas of the development, provided that they are
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and serve the
needs of the residents.
(e) (Reserved)141
(2) Accessory uses/structures.
(a) Common recreational facilities accessory to a multiple-family
complex which is planned and developed as a coordinated
whole and is unified by covenants running with the land and
not open to the general public, such as but not limited to inground
swimming pools, hot tubs, sport courts, clubhouses,
recreational trails, walking trails and tot lots located within the
common areas of the development, provided that they are
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and serve the
needs of the residents.
(b) Guard houses and gate houses.
(c) (Reserved)142
D. Unclassified uses. It is recognized that it is neither possible nor
practical to list all of the permitted accessory uses and structures that
are compatible with those listed above in Subsection B, and therefore it
is intended that said list of accessory uses and structures be only
illustrative. Any individual aggrieved by a failure to list a permitted
accessory use or structure in said subsection shall have the right to file
a petition with the Village Zoning Administrator for determination. The
Village Zoning Administrator, in making the determination, shall find
that an accessory use or structure is subordinate to the permitted
principal use of a structure, land or water, is located on the same lot or
parcel and serves a purpose customarily incidental to the permitted
principal use in said district.
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a minimum area of 108,900 square feet (2.5 acres).
(2) All lots shall have a minimum frontage of 200 feet in width unless
located on a cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot frontage may
be reduced to 100 feet of frontage, provided that there is at least
200 feet of width at the required building setback line.
141. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(e), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
142. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-116 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-116
344:1042
F. Design standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(2) The units in each structure shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Efficiency or one-bedroom units shall have a minimum floor
area of 700 square feet;
(b) Two-bedroom units shall have a minimum floor area of 1,000
square feet; and
(c) Three- or more bedroom units shall have a minimum floor area
of 1,200 square feet.
(3) Placement of each structure shall provide for proper drainage away
from the foundation and shall accommodate drainage on and
through the existing property by not negatively affecting the
existing drainage patterns or the capabilities of draining the
abutting properties.
(4) The main roof of the dwelling shall have a minimum roof pitch of
4:12, and the eaves on the main roof shall extend beyond the
nearest vertical wall a minimum of one foot, or the roof pitch and/or
eave length may be reduced as approved by the Village Zoning
Administrator. [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No.
07-4011-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-50]
(5) Permitted roof surface materials (including garages) include wood
shakes, asphalt, fiberglass, composition or wood shingles, clay
tiles, concrete tiles, slate or other appropriate roofing material as
approved by the Village Zoning Administrator.
(6) Permitted exterior materials (including garages) include brick,
stone, masonry, concrete, stucco, wood, aluminum or vinyl siding or
other appropriate siding material as approved by the Village
Zoning Administrator. At a minimum, 50% of each wall surface,
excluding windows, doors and garage doors, shall be constructed
of brick, stone, masonry or concrete. The exterior siding shall
extend to the top of the foundation and be within six inches above
the final grade.
(7) The front facade of the structure shall be placed parallel to the
street property line, unless it is determined by the Zoning
Administrator that aesthetics, lot configuration, layout of the
neighboring structures, curve of the road or environmental
features on the lot prohibit the structure from being placed parallel
to the street property line.
(8) No overhead garage doors shall face directly toward a public rightof-
way.
§ 420-116 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-116
344:1043
§ 420-117. R-12 Manufactured Home/Mobile Home Park
Subdivision Residential District.
(9) All exterior additions or alterations shall be constructed of the
same or complementary colors and materials and in the same
architectural style as the principal structure.
(10) A minimum of 25% of the lot shall remain as open space.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 30 feet minimum.
(5) Rear setback: 50 feet minimum.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The R-12 Manufactured Home/Mobile
Home Park Subdivision Residential District is intended to provide for
the location of manufactured/mobile home parks and manufactured/
mobile home subdivisions in a residential setting that is compatible
with adjacent land uses.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Foster family homes having fewer than four foster children and
not exceeding eight total occupants and which are in
conformance with all state statutory requirements.
(b) Essential services.
(c) One individual manufactured/mobile home on a lot in a
manufactured/mobile home park or subdivision, which may
include a private garage or carport attached to the home.
(d) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(2) Accessory uses.
§ 420-116 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-117
344:1044
(a) No more than one detached gardening, tool or storage shed or
gazebo incidental to the residential use on a manufactured/
mobile home lot, provided that the storage building does not
exceed 150 square feet and subject to the requirements in
§ 420-86 of this chapter.
(b) Driveways (per § 420-46).
(c) Swimming pools (per Article XII).
(d) Decks (per § 420-87).
(e) Fences (per Article XI).
(f) Residential communication structures (per § 420-90).
(g) Bus shelters [per § 420-139B(1)(e)].
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are those uses that require a special
review and approval process because of their potential impact upon
adjacent properties (see Article XVIII).
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Manufactured/mobile home parks [per § 420-148B(64)].
(b) Manufactured/model mobile home and related temporary real
estate sales office located within the model unit [per
§ 420-148B(66)].
(c) (Reserved)143
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Recreational facilities accessory to a development, such as
pools, clubhouses, recreational trails, walking trails and tot
lots, provided that they are compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood and serve the needs of the residents.
(3) Guard houses and gate houses [per § 420-139B(1)(m)].
D. Unclassified uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or
conditional use shall be considered to be prohibited except as may be
otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter. In case of question as to
the classification of use, the question shall be submitted to the Village
Board for determination.
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots in a manufactured/mobile home park or subdivision shall have
a minimum of 7,700 square feet in area.
143. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(c), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-117 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-117
344:1045
(2) If the short side of the manufactured home/mobile home is parallel
to the roadway, then the lot shall not be less than 70 feet in
frontage width unless located on a cul-de-sac or curve, in which
case the lot frontage width may be reduced to 45 feet of frontage
width, provided that there is at least 70 feet of width at the
required building setback line and provided that the lot is at least
110 feet deep.
(3) If the long side of the manufactured home/mobile home is parallel
to the roadway, the lot shall not be less than 95 feet in frontage
width unless located on a cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot
frontage width may be reduced to 60 feet of frontage width,
provided that there is at least 95 feet of width at the required
building setback line and provided that the lot is at least 85 feet
deep.
F. Manufactured/mobile home standards.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 25 feet in height.
(2) The minimum floor area shall be 600 square feet, excluding the
garage, decks, and porches.
(3) The unit shall be set on a temporary foundation.
(4) Vented skirting of flame-resistant material for a manufactured/
mobile home is required. Areas enclosed by such skirting shall be
maintained so as not to provide a harborage for rodents or create a
fire hazard. The skirting material shall be of the same material and
style as the exterior siding and shall extend to the ground.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads, except as provided for in § 420-139B(2)(b).
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: not less than eight feet to the side lot line of the
manufactured/mobile home, except that if an attached garage or
carport is not constructed at the same time that the manufactured/
mobile home is constructed, then a fifteen-foot side setback shall
be required on at least one side; also except as provided for in
§ 420-139B(7).
§ 420-117 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-117
344:1046
§ 420-118. B-1 Neighborhood Business District.
(5) Rear setback: 20 feet minimum from the manufactured/mobile
home lot line.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The B-1 Neighborhood Business District is
intended to provide for a cluster of retail, service and office uses of a
type and at a scale designed to serve the needs of the surrounding
residential neighborhoods. B-1 Districts shall be located at the
intersection of two arterial streets or highways. The territory in each
B-1 District shall be contiguous (corner to corner shall be sufficient),
exclusive of intervening streets, highways, navigable waterways and
wetlands. The area of each B-1 District shall include at least one corner
of the intersection and at least five acres but not more than 20 acres,
both exclusive of intervening streets, highways, navigable waterways
and wetlands; provided, however, that parcels zoned to a business
classification as of January 1, 2002, which could appropriately be zoned
B-1 but for the minimum district area requirement may nevertheless be
zoned B-1. No such district shall be established unless it is in
compliance with duly adopted or amended comprehensive,
neighborhood and conceptual plans.
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses, and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below,
are allowed as permitted uses in the B-1 District, subject to the
requirements of Article IX of this chapter and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter and other Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Retail uses. The retail sale of any of the following goods or products
is a permitted use in the B-1 District: antiques; apparel; appliances;
art; art supplies; audio recordings; automotive supplies; bakery
goods; bicycles and accessories; books; camping supplies; candy;
cameras and photographic supplies; cards; carpets; cosmetics;
electronic equipment; eye glasses and related products; fabric;
firearms and accessories; flowers; frames; furniture and home
furnishings; gifts; glassware; groceries (with or without alcoholic
beverages as package goods in a grocery store or convenience
store); hardware; hobby and craft supplies; home improvement
supplies; ice cream; jewelry; kitchen and/or bathroom fixtures or
accessories; lawn and garden equipment and supplies (but not
including a nursery or greenhouse); luggage; novelties; marine
supplies; musical instruments and accessories; newspapers and
magazines; office supplies; paint; pets and pet supplies;
pharmaceuticals; prepared food not for consumption on the
premises; shoes and accessories; souvenirs; sporting goods;
sundries; telephones; tobacco; toys; and video recordings.
§ 420-117 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-118
344:1047
(2) Service uses. The following service uses are permitted uses in the
B-1 District: art gallery; audio recording rental; bakery (not selling
wholesale); barbershop; beauty salon; book rental; caterer;
coffeehouse; day spa; dance studio; dry cleaning; equipment rental;
equipment repair; financial institution; locksmith; mailing service;
photocopying center; photography studio; photographic
development and printing; physical fitness facility; restaurant
(whether or not alcoholic beverages are served or sold and with or
without a dedicated bar, but not including a drive-in restaurant, a
restaurant with a drive-through facility, a restaurant with outdoor
seating or a restaurant with a dedicated brewing facility); shoe
shine or repair service; skilled trade office, shop and/or retail
facility; tailor; tanning salon; ticket sales; travel agency; upholstery
shop; and video recording rental.
(3) Office or clinic uses. The following office or clinic uses are
permitted uses in the B-1 District: accounting; architectural;
dental; engineering; financial services; informational services;
insurance; legal; medical (but no ambulance service); and real
estate.
(4) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the B-1 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
B-1 District and is free of potential problems requiring special
regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings
supporting any such decision. Any use so approved shall be subject to
all requirements of Subsection B above. Notwithstanding the foregoing
authorization, and without limitation, the following uses shall not be
construed to be permitted uses in the B-1 District:
(1) Any listed permitted use in the B-2, B-3, B-4 or B-5 District that is
not listed in Subsection B above.
(2) Any listed conditional use in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or B-5 District.
(2.1) Convenient cash business. [Added 1-15-2007 by Ord. No.
07-01]
(3) Funeral home.
(4) Hotel.
(5) Motel.
(6) Indoor/outdoor flea market. [Amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No.
11-32]
(7) Pawnshop.
§ 420-118 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-118
344:1048
(8) Psychic/tarot card/astrology reading.
(9) Truck stop and/or truck service facility.
(10) Sale or storage of fireworks.
(11) Nursery.
(12) Greenhouse.
(13) Bakery selling wholesale.
(14) Adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility.
(15) Any use involving the serving or selling of alcoholic beverages that
is not specifically listed in Subsection B above.
(16)Wrecking, junk, demolition and scrap yards. [Added 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-10]
D. Conditional uses. The following listed uses may be permitted as
conditional uses in the B-1 District (as principal uses or accessory uses,
as appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and other Village ordinances and
codes:
(1) Service uses. The following service uses may be permitted as
conditional uses in the B-1 District:
(a) Car wash.
(b) Day-care facility, either for children or adults.
(c) Gasoline station.
(d) Restaurant (not including a drive-in restaurant or a restaurant
with a drive-through facility), whether or not alcoholic
beverages are served or sold, with or without a dedicated
brewing facility, with or without a dedicated bar, and with or
without outdoor seating.
(2) Miscellaneous uses. The following miscellaneous uses may be
permitted as conditional uses in the B-1 District:
(a) (Reserved)144
(b) Electric power substation or gas metering substation (only as a
principal use on its own lot).
144. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(2)(a), concerning commercial communication
antennas and like devices, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-118 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-118
344:1049
(c) (Reserved)145
(d) Transmission line (electric power or natural gas).
(e) Utility substation building (only as a principal use on its own
lot).
E. Special licensed uses. Uses requiring a Village adult-oriented use
license, cabaret license or liquor license granted by the Village Board
(including nonconforming uses) may only be conducted pursuant to and
in accordance with such a license.
(1) Without limitation, such uses include the following:
(a) Any restaurant in which alcoholic beverages are served or sold
(some are prohibited in the B-1 District).
(b) Any cabaret (prohibited in the B-1 District).
(c) Any tavern (prohibited in the B-1 District).
(d) Any liquor store (prohibited in the B-1 District).
(e) Any adult-oriented use, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult
movie theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or
adult viewing facility (all prohibited in the B-1 District). For
existing adult-oriented uses, see § 420-119E(1)(e), which is
incorporated by reference to the extent applicable.
(2) The granting of a Village license by the Village Board is not assured
either by permitted use status or by the granting of a conditional
use permit or of any other permit or approval under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the B-1
District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance with
each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions are
applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the B-1 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the B-1 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the B-1 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
145. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(2)(c), concerning freestanding commercial
communication structures, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-118 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-118
344:1050
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building
in the B-1 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time
when the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the B-1 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the B-1 District and
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
building in the B-1 District; provided, however, that the area of a
building occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory
uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which any other
use or any proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind
existing as of the time when the conditional use permit for such
conditional use or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall
be allowed only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional
use permit issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of
this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the B-1 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 03-23 (June 4, 2003), and any related
accessory uses as of such date, may be continued in the same
principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the B-1 District are allowed,
subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the B-1 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the B-1
District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in accordance
§ 420-118 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-118
344:1051
with a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this
chapter.
(2) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
(3) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
H. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the B-1
District by this chapter are prohibited in the B-1 District.
I. Dimensional standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and
structures in the B-1 District shall comply with the following
dimensional standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: one acre minimum, except that the minimum lot size for a
freestanding commercial communication structure or a utility
substation building shall be as prescribed by § 420-148B of this
chapter, and further provided that no minimum lot size shall be
applicable to a transmission line.
(2) Lot frontage on a public street: 150 feet minimum; provided,
however, that on a substantial curve the public street frontage may
be reduced as necessary to an absolute minimum of 100 feet if all
other requirements are satisfied, except that the minimum lot
frontage on a public street for a freestanding commercial
communication structure or a utility substation building shall be as
prescribed by § 420-148B of this chapter, and further provided that
no minimum lot frontage on a public street shall be applicable to a
transmission line.
(3) Open space: 30% minimum.
(4) Principal building standards:
(a) Gross floor area: 1,500 square feet minimum and 5,000 square
feet maximum, except that the minimum gross floor area for a
utility substation building shall be as prescribed by § 420-148B
of this chapter.
(b) Height: 35 feet maximum.
(c) Setbacks:
[1] Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads.
§ 420-118 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-118
344:1052
[2] Side setback: 25 feet minimum.
[3] Rear setback: 25 feet minimum.
[4] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[5] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
(5) Detached accessory building/trash enclosure standards:
(a) Gross floor area: 300 square feet maximum.
(b) Height: 15 feet maximum.
(c) Shall only be located in the side or rear yard.
(d) Setbacks:
[1] Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads.
[2] Side setback: 10 feet minimum.
[3] Rear setback: 10 feet minimum.
[4] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[5] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
(e) Distance between principal building and accessory building on
the same lot: 10 feet minimum.
J. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the B-1 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Number of principal structures per lot: one maximum; provided,
however, that attached buildings are allowed if the attachment is a
fire wall between each two attached buildings, with no pedestrian
openings, and that the horizontal distance of the attachment is at
least 75% of the length or width of one of each two attached
buildings and a minimum of 25 feet, and, without limitation, that
each such attached building individually satisfies the minimum
gross floor area restriction for principal buildings and that all such
buildings attached to one another collectively comply with any
maximum gross floor area restriction for principal buildings, and
further provided that one or more nonaccessory commercial
communication antennas, whips, panels or other similar
§ 420-118 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-118
344:1053
transmission or reception devices (but no towers) mounted on a
principal building or structure are allowed.
(2) Number of detached accessory buildings and/or detached trash
enclosures: one maximum (may be combined).
(3) All accessory uses or structures shall be on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(4) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter.
(5) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(6) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(7) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
K. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the B-1 District shall comply with the following operational standards
to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation (when the public is allowed to enter or remain
on site for business purposes), except for uses requiring a Village
liquor license: 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. maximum; for uses requiring
a Village liquor license: as provided in § 125.68(4), Wis. Stats.
(2) Hours for deliveries, or any other activities outside the principal
building that might cause a disturbance to neighboring residential
areas (e.g., outside loading or unloading, the arrival of deliveries,
idling of delivery trucks, beeping of backing vehicles, and garbage
pickup), except for snow removal: 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
maximum.
(3) Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter, all
business activities shall be conducted within a building.
(4) No outside storage or display of merchandise is allowed, except for
gasoline station and convenience store uses only and pursuant to
the following: [Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-47]
(a) A maximum of one, eight-foot-by-six-foot-by-three-foot [(L x H x
D) maximum size] outdoor ice storage bin is allowed per
parcel.
§ 420-118 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-118
344:1054
(b) A maximum of one, eight-foot-by-six-foot-by-four-foot [(L x H x
D) maximum size] outdoor liquid propane (LP) storage cage
shall be allowed per parcel.
(c) The ice storage bins and LP storage cages:
[1] Shall be located against a solid front or side wall of the
principal structure.
[2] Shall not be located against a rear or back wall of a
building.
[3] Shall not be located in front of windows or doorways and
shall not block or obstruct any windows or doorways.
[4] Shall not block or obstruct any walkways associated with
handicapped accessibility to the main entrance of the
building.
[5] Shall be maintained in a state of good repair; not dented,
crushed or bent.
[6] Shall not contain rust and shall not have peeling/chipped
paint.
[7] Shall not be allowed to have plastic banners, streamers or
other signage affixed, placed or attached to the containers.
[8] Are allowed limited signage on the exterior of the storage
units that is limited to the use therein (i.e., ice and LP gas
advertising signage).
(d) The LP storage cages:
[1] Shall be in compliance with the most current edition of the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 58
(Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code).
[2] Shall be protected by a bollard, raised sidewalk or some
other acceptable means to provide protection against
accidental vehicle impact or damage. The means of
protection shall be reviewed and approved, on a case-bycase
basis, by the Chief of the Fire & Rescue Department,
or his/her designee. The Chief of the Fire & Rescue
Department shall determine the location, spacing and the
quantity of the bollard(s). The means of protection shall
not obstruct or inhibit on-site vehicular or pedestrian
traffic flow.
(e) All LP containers/cylinders shall be stored inside the LP cages.
(5) No on-site residential uses are allowed.
§ 420-118 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-118
344:1055
§ 420-119. B-2 Community Business District.
(6) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(7) Each building, structure and site shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
L. Municipal services required. Except as otherwise specifically provided
in this chapter, and without limitation, no proposed new, reconstructed
or relocated principal building shall be permitted in the B-1 District
unless it is connected to the Village's public sewer and water systems,
and any existing principal building not already connected to the
Village's public sewer and water shall be so connected before any
addition is made to such building, or before any proposed change in the
use of such building is made from one use category to another (e.g.,
residential to business); and before any proposed use is commenced or
recommenced in such a building that has been vacant or unused for 12
consecutive months or longer.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The B-2 Community Business District is
intended to provide for a cluster of retail, service and office uses of a
type and at a scale designed to serve the entire community. B-2
Districts shall be located at the intersection of two arterial streets or
highways. The territory in each B-2 District shall be contiguous (corner
to corner shall be sufficient), exclusive of intervening streets, highways,
navigable waterways, wetlands and territory fronting on the same
street or highway that is within the limits of another municipality. The
area of each B-2 District shall include at least one corner of the
intersection and a minimum of five acres, both exclusive of intervening
streets, highways, navigable waterways, wetlands and territory
fronting on the same street or highway that is within the limits of
another municipality; provided, however, that parcels zoned to a
business classification as of January 1, 2002, which could appropriately
be zoned B-2 but for the minimum district area requirement may
nevertheless be zoned B-2. No such district shall be established unless
it is in compliance with duly adopted or amended comprehensive,
neighborhood and conceptual plans.
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses, and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below,
are allowed as permitted uses in the B-2 District, subject to the
§ 420-118 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-119
344:1056
requirements of Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Retail uses. The retail sale of any of the following goods or products
is a permitted use in the B-2 District: adult-oriented retail uses
(including, without limitation, an adult bookstore or an adult video
store); antiques; apparel; appliances; art; art supplies; audio
recordings; automotive supplies; bakery goods; bicycles and
accessories; books; camping supplies; candy; cameras and
photographic supplies; cards; carpets; cosmetics; electronic
equipment; eye glasses and related products; fabric; firearms and
accessories; flowers; frames; furniture and home furnishings; gifts;
glassware; groceries (with or without alcoholic beverages as
package goods in a supermarket, grocery store or convenience
store); hardware; hobby and craft supplies; home improvement
supplies; ice cream; jewelry; kitchen and/or bathroom fixtures or
accessories; lawn and garden equipment and supplies (but not
including a nursery or greenhouse); luggage; novelties; marine
supplies; musical instruments and accessories; newspapers and
magazines; office supplies; paint; pets and pet supplies;
pharmaceuticals; prepared food not for consumption on the
premises; shoes and accessories; souvenirs; sporting goods;
sundries; telephones; tobacco; toys; and video recordings.
(2) Service uses. The following service uses are permitted uses in the
B-2 District: adult-oriented service uses (including, without
limitation, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility); art gallery; audio recording rental; bakery (not selling
wholesale); barbershop; beauty salon; book rental; caterer;
coffeehouse; day spa; dance studio; dry cleaning; equipment rental;
equipment repair; financial institution; funeral home (without a
crematorium); hotel, with or without banquet and/or convention
facilities, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served or sold,
and with or without a dedicated bar; laundromat; library;
locksmith; mailing service; photocopying center; photography
studio; photographic development and printing; physical fitness
facility; restaurant (whether or not alcoholic beverages are served
or sold, and with or without a dedicated bar, with or with outdoor
seating, but not including a drive-in restaurant, a restaurant with a
drive-through facility, or a restaurant with a dedicated brewing
facility); shoe shine or repair service; skilled trade office, shop and/
or retail facility; tailor; tanning salon; ticket sales; travel agency;
upholstery shop; and video recording rental. [Amended
9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-44]
(3) Office or clinic uses. The following office or clinic uses are
permitted uses in the B-1 District: accounting; architectural;
dental; engineering; financial services; information services;
§ 420-119 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-119
344:1057
insurance; legal; medical (but no ambulance service); and real
estate.
(4) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the B-2 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
B-2 District and is free of potential problems requiring special
regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings
supporting any such decision. Any use so approved shall be subject to
all requirements of Subsection B above. Notwithstanding the foregoing
authorization, the following uses shall not be construed to be permitted
uses in the B-2 District:
(1) Any listed permitted use in the B-1, B-3, B-4 or B-5 District that is
not listed in Subsection B above.
(2) Any listed conditional use in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or B-5 District.
(3) Motel.
(4) Indoor/outdoor flea market. [Amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No.
11-32]
(5) Pawnshop.
(6) Psychic/tarot card/astrology reading.
(7) Truck stop and/or truck service facility.
(8) Sale or storage of fireworks.
(9) Nursery.
(10) Greenhouse.
(11) Bakery selling wholesale.
(12) Any use involving the serving or selling of alcoholic beverages that
is not specifically listed in Subsection B above.
(13)Wrecking, junk, demolition and scrap yards. [Added 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-10]
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses in the B-2 District (as principal uses or accessory uses, as
appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances
and codes:
§ 420-119 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-119
344:1058
(1) Retail uses. The following retail uses may be permitted as
conditional uses in the B-2 District:
(a) The retail sale of automobiles, trucks or recreational vehicles
(new or used).
(b) Liquor store (without a drive-through facility).
(c) Outdoor display or storage of merchandise related to a
principal indoor retail use, except as noted in § 420-119K(4).
[Amended 3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-19]
(2) Service uses. The following service uses may be permitted as
conditional uses in the B-2 District:
(a) Ambulance service.
(b) Automobile, truck or recreational vehicle rental.
(c) Cabaret.
(d) Car wash (as a principal use or, without limitation, as an
accessory use to a gasoline station).
(e) Club or lodge, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served
or sold.
(f) Concert facility, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served
or sold.
(f.1) Convenient cash business. [Added 1-15-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-01]
(g) Day-care facility, either for children or adults.
(h) Dinner theater, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served
or sold.
(i) Drive-in restaurant (in which alcoholic beverages are not
served or sold).
(j) Drive-through facility associated with any allowed service use,
except as otherwise specifically provided.
(k) Drive-in theater.
(l) Dry cabaret.
(m) Funeral home with a crematorium.
(n) Gasoline station.
(o) Indoor commercial recreational facility.
(p) Mini storage facility.
§ 420-119 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-119
344:1059
(q) Motor vehicle repair and service.
(r) Movie theater.
(s) Museum.
(t) Recording studio.
(u) Restaurant, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served or
sold, with or without outdoor seating and with or without a
dedicated bar (not including a drive-in restaurant), with one or
more of the following: a drive-through facility and/or a
dedicated brewing facility; provided, however, that no
alcoholic beverages shall be served or sold in or through any
drive-through facility. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No.
06-44]
(v) Tattoo studio.
(w) Tavern, with or without a dedicated brewing facility.
(x) Taxidermy.
(y) Taxi service.
(z) Theater.
(aa) Therapeutic massage.
(bb) Veterinarian office.
(cc) Veterinarian emergency services office. [Added 12-17-2007
by Ord. No. 07-58]
(3) Miscellaneous uses. The following miscellaneous uses may be
permitted as conditional uses in the B-2 District:
(a) (Reserved)146
(b) Electric power or gas metering substation (only as a principal
use on its own lot).
(c) (Reserved)147
(d) Transmission line (electric power or natural gas).
(e) Utility substation building (only as a principal use on its own
lot).
E. Special licensed uses. Uses requiring a Village adult-oriented use
license, cabaret license or liquor license granted by the Village Board
146. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(3)(a), concerning commercial communication
antennas and like devices, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
147. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(3)(c), concerning freestanding commercial
communication structures, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-119 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-119
344:1060
(including nonconforming uses) may only be conducted pursuant to and
in accordance with such a license.
(1) Without limitation, such uses include the following:
(a) Any restaurant in which alcoholic beverages are served or sold
(some are prohibited in the B-2 District).
(b) Any cabaret.
(c) Any tavern.
(d) Any liquor store.
(e) Any adult-oriented use, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult
movie theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or
adult viewing facility. In this chapter, an adult-oriented use
(e.g., an adult cabaret) is classified and treated as a separate
and distinct use from the closest type of non-adult-oriented use
(e.g., a cabaret).
[1] Adult-oriented uses are allowed in the B-2 District, subject
to the requirements of Article IX and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances
and codes, provided that at the time the application for
site and operational plan approval for the commencement
or expansion of such proposed adult-oriented use is
decided by the Village Plan Commission or Zoning
Administrator: [Amended 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-17]
[a] The physically separate defined area of the building in
which an adult-oriented use is proposed to be
commenced or expanded shall be not less than 300
feet in a direct line from the nearest lot line of any lot
on which any school, church or day-care center for
children is located or has a vested right to locate;
[b] The physically separate defined area of the building in
which an adult-oriented use is proposed to be
commenced or expanded shall be not less than 300
feet in a direct line from any land area zoned
residential (including street and railroad rights-ofway);
and
[c] The physically separate defined area of the building in
which an adult-oriented use is proposed to be
commenced or expanded shall be not less than 300
feet in a direct line from the physically separate
defined area of the building in which any separately
located adult-oriented use is located or has a vested
right to locate.
§ 420-119 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-119
344:1061
[2] In the event that a proposed adult-oriented use involves a
use which would otherwise require a conditional use
permit (e.g., a proposed adult cabaret, involving a cabaret
that would otherwise require a conditional use permit), the
requirement of an adult-oriented use license shall be
substituted for the requirement of a conditional use
permit. In the event that an existing use operating under a
conditional use permit proposes to become an adultoriented
use (e.g., a cabaret for which a conditional use
permit has been granted proposes to become an adult
cabaret), the conditional use permit for the existing use
shall automatically be terminated upon the granting of an
adult-oriented use license by the Village Board, so that the
adult-oriented use will not be subject to conditional use
permit requirements.
(2) The granting of a Village license by the Village Board is not assured
either by permitted use status or by the granting of a conditional
use permit or of any other permit or approval under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in
this section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the B-2
District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance with
each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions are
applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the B-2 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the B-2 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the B-2 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the B-2 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time when
the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the B-2 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the B-2 District and
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
§ 420-119 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-119
344:1062
building in the B-2 District; provided, however, that the area of a
building occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory
uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which any
proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as
of the time when the conditional use permit for such conditional
use or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed
only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the B-2 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 03-24 (June 4, 2003) and any related
accessory uses existing as of such date may be continued in the
same principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the B-2 District are allowed,
subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the B-2 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the B-2
District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in accordance
with a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this
chapter.
(c) Accessory uses to principal adult-oriented uses allowed in the
B-2 District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in
accordance with a Village adult-oriented use license.
(2) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
(3) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
§ 420-119 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-119
344:1063
H. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the B-2
District by this chapter are prohibited in the B-2 District.
I. Dimensional standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and
structures in the B-2 District shall comply with the following
dimensional standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: two acres minimum, except that the minimum lot size for a
freestanding commercial communication structure or a utility
substation building shall be as prescribed by § 420-148 of this
chapter; and further provided that no minimum lot size shall be
applicable to a transmission line.
(2) Lot frontage on a public street: 150 feet minimum; provided,
however, that on a substantial curve the public street frontage may
be reduced as necessary to an absolute minimum of 100 feet if all
other requirements are satisfied, except that the minimum lot
frontage on a public street for a freestanding commercial
communication structure or a utility substation building shall be as
prescribed by § 420-148 of this chapter, and further provided that
no minimum lot frontage on a public street shall be applicable to a
transmission line.
(3) Open space: 30% minimum.
(4) Principal building standards:
(a) Gross floor area: 4,000 square feet minimum and 25,000
square feet maximum, except that the minimum gross floor
area for a utility substation building shall be as prescribed by
§ 420-148 of this chapter, and except that the maximum gross
floor area for a hotel shall not exceed 100,000 square feet.
[Amended 2-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-04]
(b) Height: 35 feet maximum, except for a hotel which shall not
exceed 60 feet. [Amended 2-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-04]
(c) Setbacks:
[1] Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads.
[2] Side setback: 30 feet minimum.
[3] Rear setback: 30 feet minimum.
[4] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[5] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
§ 420-119 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-119
344:1064
(5) Detached accessory building/trash enclosure standards: detached
accessory buildings or trash enclosures are prohibited.
J. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the B-2 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Number of principal structures per lot: One maximum; provided,
however, that attached buildings are allowed if the attachment is a
fire wall between each two attached buildings, with no pedestrian
openings, and that the horizontal distance of the attachment is at
least 75% of the length or width of one of each two attached
buildings and a minimum of 75 feet, and, without limitation, that
each such attached building individually satisfies the minimum
gross floor area restriction for principal buildings and that all such
buildings attached to one another collectively comply with any
maximum gross floor area restriction for principal buildings, and
further provided that one or more commercial communication
antennas, whips, panels or other similar transmission or reception
devices (but no towers) mounted on a principal building or
structure are allowed.
(2) Number of detached accessory buildings and/or detached trash
enclosures: none (trash enclosure shall be part of the principal
building).
(3) All accessory uses or structures shall be on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(4) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter.
(5) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(6) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(7) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
K. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the B-2 District shall comply with the following operational standards
to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation (when the public is allowed to enter or remain
on site for business purposes), except for hotels, for veterinarian
§ 420-119 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-119
344:1065
emergency services with an approved conditional use permit, and
uses requiring a Village liquor license: 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight
maximum; for hotels: no limit; for uses requiring a Village liquor
license: as provided in § 125.68(4), Wis. Stats. [Amended
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-58]
(2) Hours for deliveries, or any other activities outside the principal
building that might cause a disturbance to neighboring residential
areas (e.g., outside loading or unloading, the arrival of deliveries,
idling of delivery trucks, beeping of backing vehicles, and garbage
pickup), except for snow removal: 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
maximum.
(3) Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter, all
business activities shall be conducted within a building.
(4) No outside storage or display of merchandise is allowed, except for
gasoline station and convenience store uses only and pursuant to
the following: [Amended 3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-19]
(a) A maximum of one eight-foot-by-six-foot-by-three-foot [(L x H x
D) maximum size] outdoor ice storage bin is allowed per
parcel.
(b) A maximum of one eight-foot-by-six-foot-by-four-foot [(L x H x
D) maximum size] outdoor liquid propane (LP) storage cage
shall be allowed per parcel.
(c) The ice storage bins and LP storage cages:
[1] Shall be located against a solid front or side wall of the
principal structure.
[2] Shall not be located against a rear or back wall of a
building.
[3] Shall not be located in front of windows or doorways and
shall not block or obstruct any windows or doorways.
[4] Shall not block or obstruct any walkways associated with
handicapped accessibility to the main entrance of the
building.
[5] Shall be maintained in a state of good repair; not dented,
crushed or bent.
[6] Shall not contain rust and shall not have peeling/chipped
paint.
[7] Shall not be allowed to have plastic banners, streamers or
other signage affixed, placed or attached to the containers.
§ 420-119 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-119
344:1066
[8] Are allowed limited signage on the exterior of the storage
units that is limited to the use therein (i.e., ice and LP gas
advertising signage).
(d) The LP storage cages:
[1] Shall be in compliance with the most current edition of the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 58
(Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code).
[2] Shall be protected by a bollard, raised sidewalk or some
other acceptable means to provide protection against
accidental vehicle impact or damage. The means of
protection shall be reviewed and approved, on a case-bycase
basis, by the Chief of the Fire & Rescue Department,
or his/her designee. The Chief of the Fire & Rescue
Department shall determine the location, spacing and the
quantity of the bollard(s). The means of protection shall
not obstruct or inhibit on-site vehicular or pedestrian
traffic flow. [Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-47]
(e) All LP containers/cylinders shall be stored inside the LP cages.
(f) Except as pursuant to Subsection D(1)(c) of this section.
(5) No on-site residential uses are allowed.
(6) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(7) Each site, building and structure shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
L. Municipal services required. Except as otherwise specifically provided
in this chapter, and without limitation, no proposed new, reconstructed
or relocated principal building shall be permitted in the B-2 District
unless it is connected to the Village's public sewer and water systems,
and any existing principal building not already connected to the
Village's public sewer and water systems shall be so connected before
any proposed addition is made to such building, or before any proposed
change in the use of such building is made from one use category to
another (e.g., residential to business), and before any proposed use is
§ 420-119 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-119
344:1067
§ 420-120. B-3 Regional Retail Business District.
commenced or recommenced in such a building that has been vacant or
unused for 12 consecutive months or longer.
A. The B-3 District. The B-3 Regional Retail Business District is intended
to provide for "big box" retail stores or regional retail shopping centers
to serve the needs of the region as well as the entire community. The
territory in each B-3 District shall be contiguous (corner to corner shall
be sufficient), exclusive of streets, highways, navigable waterways and
wetlands. The area of each B-3 District shall be at least 20 acres,
exclusive of streets, highways, navigable waterways and wetlands. No
such district shall be established unless it is in compliance with duly
adopted or amended comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual
plans.
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses, and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below,
are allowed as permitted uses in the B-3 District, subject to the
requirements of Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Retail uses. The retail sale of any of the following goods or products
is a permitted use in the B-3 District: antiques; apparel; appliances;
art; art supplies; audio recordings; automotive supplies; bakery
goods; bicycles and accessories; books; camping supplies; candy;
cameras and photographic supplies; cards; carpets; cosmetics;
electronic equipment; eye glasses and related products; fabric;
firearms and accessories; flowers; frames; furniture and home
furnishings; gifts; glassware; groceries (with or without alcoholic
beverages as package goods in a supermarket, grocery store or
convenience store); hardware; hobby and craft supplies; home
improvement supplies; ice cream; jewelry; kitchen and/or
bathroom fixtures or accessories; lawn and garden equipment and
supplies (but not including a nursery or greenhouse); luggage;
novelties; marine supplies; musical instruments and accessories;
newspapers and magazines; office supplies; paint; pets and pet
supplies; pharmaceuticals; prepared food not for consumption on
the premises; shoes and accessories; souvenirs; sporting goods;
sundries; telephones; tobacco; toys; and video recordings.
(2) Service uses in regional retail shopping centers. The following
service uses are permitted uses in regional retail shopping centers
in the B-3 District: art gallery; audio recording rental; bakery (not
selling wholesale); barbershop; beauty salon; book rental; caterer;
coffeehouse; day spa; dance studio; dry cleaning; equipment rental;
equipment repair; financial institution; locksmith; mailing service;
photocopying center; photography studio; photographic
development and printing; physical fitness facility; restaurant
(whether or not alcoholic beverages are served or sold, and with or
without a dedicated bar, but not including a drive-in restaurant, a
§ 420-119 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-120
344:1068
restaurant with a drive-through facility, a restaurant with outdoor
seating or a restaurant with a dedicated brewing facility); shoe
shine or repair service; tailor; tanning salon; ticket sales; travel
agency; upholstery shop; and video recording rental. [Amended
10-3-2005 by Ord. No. 05-43; 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-30]
(3) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the B-3 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
B-3 District, is proposed to be located in a regional retail shopping
center, if the use to which it is similar in character is a service use listed
in Subsection B(2) above, and if the use is free of potential problems
requiring special regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make
written findings supporting any such decision. Any use so approved
shall be subject to all requirements of Subsection B. Notwithstanding
the foregoing authorization, the following uses shall not be construed to
be permitted uses in the B-3 District:
(1) Any listed permitted use in the B-1, B-2, B-4 or B-5 District that is
not listed in Subsection B above.
(2) Any listed conditional uses in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or B-5 District.
(2.1)Convenient cash business. [Added 1-15-2007 by Ord. No.
07-01]
(3) Funeral home.
(4) (Reserved)148
(5) Motel.
(6) Indoor/outdoor flea market. [Amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No.
11-32]
(7) Pawnshop.
(8) Psychic/tarot card/astrology reading.
(9) Truck stop and/or truck service facility.
(10) Sale or storage of fireworks.
(11) Nursery.
(12) Greenhouse.
148. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), listing a hotel as an unspecified permitted use, was
repealed 1-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05.
§ 420-120 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-120
344:1069
(13) Bakery selling wholesale.
(14) Adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility.
(15) Any use involving the serving or selling of alcoholic beverages that
is not specifically listed in Subsection B above.
(16)Wrecking, junk, demolition and scrap yards. [Added 4-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-10]
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses in the B-3 District (as principal uses or accessory uses, as
appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances
and codes:
(1) Retail uses. The following retail uses may be permitted as
conditional uses in the B-3 District:
(a) Liquor store (without a drive-through facility) located within a
regional retail shopping center.
(2) Service uses. The following service uses may be permitted as
conditional uses in the B-3 District:
(a) Restaurant located within a regional retail shopping center,
whether or not alcoholic beverages are served or sold, with or
without outdoor seating, and with or without a dedicated bar
(not including a drive-in restaurant or a restaurant with a
drive-through facility), and/or with a dedicated brewing facility.
[Amended 10-3-2005 by Ord. No. 05-43]
(b) Movie theater.
(c) Tavern located within a regional retail shopping center.
(d) Hotel. [Added 1-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
(e) Cabaret or a dry cabaret. [Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No.
10-30]
(3) Miscellaneous uses. The following miscellaneous uses may be
permitted as conditional uses in the B-3 District:
(a) (Reserved)149
149. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(3)(a), concerning commercial communication
antennas and like devices, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-120 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-120
344:1070
(b) Electric power substation or gas metering substation (only as a
principal use on its own lot).
(c) (Reserved)150
(d) Transmission line (electric power or natural gas).
(e) Utility substation building (only as a principal use on its own
lot).
E. Special licensed uses. Uses requiring a Village adult-oriented use
license, cabaret license or liquor license granted by the Village Board
(including nonconforming uses) may only be conducted pursuant to and
in accordance with such a license.
(1) Without limitation, such uses include the following:
(a) Any restaurant in which alcoholic beverages are served or sold
(some are prohibited in the B-3 District).
(b) Any cabaret (prohibited in the B-3 District).
(c) Any tavern (some are prohibited in the B-3 District).
(d) Any liquor store (some are prohibited in the B-3 District).
(e) Any adult-oriented use, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult
movie theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or
adult viewing facility (all prohibited in the B-3 District). For
existing adult-oriented uses, see § 420-119E(1)(e), which is
incorporated by reference to the extent applicable.
(2) The granting of a Village license by the Village Board is not assured
either by permitted use status or by the granting of a conditional
use permit or of any other permit or approval under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in
this section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the B-3
District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance with
each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions are
applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the B-3 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the B-3 District.
150. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(3)(c), concerning freestanding commercial
communication structures, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-120 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-120
344:1071
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the B-3 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the B-3 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time when
the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the B-3 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the B-3 District and
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
building in the B-3 District; provided, however, that the area of a
building occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory
uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which any
proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of
the time when the conditional use permit for such conditional use
or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed
only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the B-3 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 03-25 (June 4, 2003) and any related
accessory uses existing as of such date may be continued in the
same principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the B-3 District are allowed,
subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the B-3 District
are allowed.
§ 420-120 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-120
344:1072
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the B-3
District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in accordance
with a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this
chapter.
(2) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
(3) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
H. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the B-3
District by this chapter are prohibited in the B-3 District.
I. Dimensional standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and
structures in the B-3 District shall comply with the following
dimensional standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: 10 acres minimum, except that the minimum lot size for a
freestanding commercial communication structure or a utility
substation building shall be as prescribed by § 420-148 of this
chapter, and further provided that no minimum lot size shall be
applicable to a transmission line.
(2) Lot frontage on a public street: 600 feet minimum; provided,
however, that on a substantial curve the public street frontage may
be reduced as necessary to an absolute minimum of 400 feet if all
other requirements are satisfied, except that the minimum lot
frontage on a public street for a freestanding commercial
communication structure or a utility substation building shall be as
prescribed by § 420-148 of this chapter, and further provided that
no minimum lot frontage on a public street shall be applicable to a
transmission line.
(3) Open space: 25% minimum.
(4) Principal building standards:
(a) Gross floor area: 50,000 square feet minimum, except that the
minimum gross floor area for a utility substation building shall
be as prescribed by § 420-148 of this chapter, and except that a
hotel shall meet the following minimum requirements:
[Amended 1-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
[1] Three floors above grade;
[2] Fifteen thousand square feet of gross floor area per floor;
and
§ 420-120 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-120
344:1073
[3] Eighty guest rooms.
(b) Height: 40 feet maximum, except for a hotel, which shall not
exceed 90 feet. [Amended 1-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
(c) Setbacks:
[1] Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads.
[2] Side setback: 45 feet minimum.
[3] Rear setback: 45 feet minimum.
[4] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[5] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
(5) Detached accessory building/trash enclosure standards: detached
accessory buildings or trash enclosures are prohibited.
J. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the B-3 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Number of principal structures per lot: one maximum; provided,
however, that attached buildings are allowed if the attachment is a
fire wall between each two attached buildings, with no pedestrian
openings, and that the horizontal distance of the attachment is at
least 75% of the length or width of one of each two attached
buildings and a minimum of 100 feet, and, without limitation, that
each such attached building individually satisfies the minimum
gross floor area restriction for principal buildings and that all such
buildings attached to one another collectively comply with any
maximum gross floor area restriction for principal buildings, and
further provided that one or more commercial communication
antennas, whips, panels or other similar transmission or reception
devices (but no towers) mounted on a principal building or
structure are allowed.
(2) Number of detached accessory buildings and/or detached trash
enclosures: none (trash enclosure shall be part of the principal
building).
(3) All accessory uses or structures shall be on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(4) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter.
§ 420-120 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-120
344:1074
(5) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(6) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(7) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
K. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the B-3 District shall comply with the following operational standards
to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation (when the public is allowed to enter or remain
on site for business purposes), except for hotels and uses requiring
a Village liquor license: 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. maximum; for
hotels: no limit; for uses requiring a Village liquor license: as
provided in § 125.68(4), Wis. Stats.
(2) Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter, all
business activities shall be conducted within a building.
(3) No outside storage or display of merchandise is allowed.
(4) No on-site residential uses are allowed.
(5) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(6) Each building, structure and site shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(7) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
L. Municipal services required. Except as otherwise specifically provided
in this chapter, and without limitation, no proposed new, reconstructed
or relocated principal building shall be permitted in the B-3 District
unless it is connected to the Village's public sewer and water systems,
and any existing principal building not already connected to the
Village's public sewer and water systems shall be so connected before
any proposed addition is made to such building, or before any proposed
§ 420-120 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-120
344:1075
§ 420-121. B-4 Freeway Service Business District.
change in the use of such building is made from one use category to
another (e.g., residential to business), and before any proposed use is
commenced or recommenced in such a building that has been vacant or
unused for 12 consecutive months or longer.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The B-4 Freeway Service Business District
is intended to provide for a cluster of hotel, restaurant, gasoline station
and freeway convenience store uses to serve the needs of freeway
travelers as well as the community. B-4 Districts shall be located near
freeway interchanges. The territory in each B-4 District shall be
contiguous (corner to corner shall be sufficient), exclusive of streets,
highways, navigable waterways and wetlands. The area of each B-4
District shall include a minimum of 10 acres, exclusive of streets,
highways, navigable waterways and wetlands; provided, however, that
parcels zoned to a business classification as of January 1, 2002, which
could appropriately be zoned B-4 but for the minimum district area
requirements may nevertheless be zoned B-4. No such district shall be
established unless it is in compliance with duly adopted or amended
comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual plans.
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses are allowed as
permitted uses in the B-4 District, subject to the requirements of Article
IX and all other applicable provisions of this chapter and of other
Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Restaurant (not including a drive-in restaurant, a restaurant with a
drive-through facility or a restaurant with outdoor seating),
whether or not alcoholic beverages are served or sold, with or
without a dedicated brewing facility and with or without a
dedicated bar.
(2) Hotel, with or without banquet and/or convention facilities, and
whether or not alcoholic beverages are served or sold, and with or
without a dedicated bar.
(3) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses in the B-4 District (as principal uses or accessory uses, as
appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances
and codes:
(1) Service uses. The following service uses may be permitted as
conditional uses in the B-4 District:
(a) Drive-in restaurant (in which alcoholic beverages are not
served or sold).
§ 420-120 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-121
344:1076
(b) Gasoline station with or without a convenience store and/or a
car wash.
(c) Restaurant (not including a drive-in restaurant) with a drivethrough
facility and/or outdoor seating, whether or not
alcoholic beverages area served or sold, with or without a
dedicated brewing facility, and with or without a dedicated bar;
provided, however, that no alcoholic beverages shall be served
or sold in or through a drive-through facility.
(d) Freeway convenience store (with or without a drive-through
facility).
(e) Cabaret or a dry cabaret. [Added 5-17-2010 by Ord. No.
10-30]
(2) Miscellaneous uses. The following miscellaneous uses may be
permitted as conditional uses in the B-4 District:
(a) (Reserved)151
(b) Restaurants or gasoline stations open to the public during
hours not routinely allowed pursuant to Subsection J(1) below.
(c) Electric power substation or gas metering substation.
(d) (Reserved)152
(e) Transmission line (electric power or natural gas).
(f) Utility substation building (only as a principal use on its own
parcel).
D. Special licensed uses. Uses requiring a Village adult-oriented use
license, cabaret license or liquor license granted by the Village Board
(including nonconforming uses) may only be conducted pursuant to and
in accordance with such a license.
(1) Without limitation, such uses include the following:
(a) Any restaurant in which alcoholic beverages are served or sold
(some are prohibited in the B-4 District).
(b) Any cabaret (prohibited in the B-4 District).
(c) Any tavern (prohibited in the B-4 District).
(d) Any liquor store (prohibited in the B-4 District).
151. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(2)(a), concerning commercial communication
antennas and like devices, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
152. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(2)(d), concerning freestanding commercial
communication structures, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-121 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-121
344:1077
(e) Any adult-oriented use, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult
movie theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or
adult viewing facility (all prohibited in the B-4 District). For
existing adult-oriented uses, see § 420-119E(1)(e), which is
incorporated by reference to the extent applicable.
(2) The granting of a Village license by the Village Board is not assured
either by permitted use status or by the granting of a conditional
use permit or of any other permit or approval under this chapter.
E. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in
this section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the B-4
District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance with
the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions are applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the B-4 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the B-4 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the B-4 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the B-4 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time when
the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the B-4 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the B-4 District and
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
building in the B-4 District; provided, however, that the area of a
building occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory
uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which any
proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of
the time when the conditional use permit for such conditional use
or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed
only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 420-121 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-121
344:1078
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the B-4 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 03-26 (June 4, 2003) and any related
accessory uses existing as of such date may be continued in the
same principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
F. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the B-4 District are allowed,
subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the B-4 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the B-4
District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in accordance
with a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this
chapter.
(2) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
(3) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
G. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the B-4
District by this chapter are prohibited in the B-4 District. A convenient
cash business is prohibited in the B-4 District. [Amended 1-15-2007
by Ord. No. 07-01]
H. Dimensional standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and
structures in the B-4 District shall comply with the following
dimensional standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: 2.5 acres minimum, except that the minimum lot size for a
freestanding commercial communication structure or a utility
§ 420-121 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-121
344:1079
substation building shall be as prescribed by § 420-148 of this
chapter, and further provided that no minimum lot size shall be
applicable to a transmission line.
(2) Lot frontage on a public street: 150 feet minimum; provided,
however, that on a substantial curve the public street frontage may
be reduced as necessary to an absolute minimum of 100 feet if all
other requirements are satisfied, except that the minimum lot
frontage on a public street for a freestanding commercial
communication structure or a utility substation building shall be as
prescribed by § 420-148 of this chapter, and further provided that
no minimum lot frontage on a public street shall be applicable to a
transmission line.
(3) Open space: 25% minimum.
(4) Principal building standards:
(a) Gross floor area: 4,000 square feet minimum, except that the
minimum gross floor area for a utility substation building shall
be as prescribed by § 420-148 of this chapter, and except that a
hotel shall meet the following minimum requirements:
[1] Three floors above grade;
[2] Fifteen thousand square feet of gross floor area per floor;
and
[3] Eighty guest rooms.
(b) Height: 35 feet maximum, except for a hotel, which shall not
exceed 90 feet.
(c) Setbacks:
[1] Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads.
[2] Side setback: 45 feet minimum.
[3] Rear setback: 45 feet minimum.
[4] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[5] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
I. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the B-4 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
§ 420-121 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-121
344:1080
(1) Number of principal structures per lot: one maximum; provided,
however, that attached buildings are allowed if the attachment is a
fire wall between each two attached buildings, with no pedestrian
openings, and that the horizontal distance of the attachment is at
least 75% of the length or width of one of each two attached
buildings and a minimum of 25 feet, and, without limitation, that
each such attached building individually satisfies the minimum
gross floor area restriction for principal buildings and that all such
buildings attached to one another collectively comply with any
maximum gross floor area restriction for principal buildings, and
further provided that one or more commercial communication
antennas, whips, panels or other similar transmission or reception
devices (but no towers) mounted on a principal building or
structure are allowed.
(2) Number of detached accessory buildings and/or detached trash
enclosures: none (trash enclosure shall be part of the principal
building).
(3) All accessory uses or structures shall be on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(4) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter.
(5) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(6) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(7) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(8) Each use, site, building or structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
J. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the B-4 District shall comply with the following operational standards
to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation (when the public is allowed to enter or remain
on site for business purposes), except for hotels, uses requiring a
Village liquor license or restaurants or gasoline stations whose
hours are established by conditional use permit: 5:00 a.m. to 12:00
midnight maximum; for hotels: no limit; for uses requiring a Village
liquor license: as provided in § 125.68(4), Wis. Stats.; and for
gasoline stations and restaurants: up to 24 hours pursuant to a
conditional use permit.
§ 420-121 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-121
344:1081
(2) Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter, all
business activities shall be conducted within a building.
(3) No outside storage or display of merchandise is allowed, except for
gasoline station and convenience store uses only and pursuant to
the following: [Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-47]
(a) A maximum of one, eight-foot-by-six-foot-by-three-foot [(L x H x
D) maximum size] outdoor ice storage bin is allowed per
parcel.
(b) A maximum of one, eight-foot-by-six-foot-by-four-foot [(L x H x
D) maximum size] outdoor liquid propane (LP) storage cage
shall be allowed per parcel.
(c) The ice storage bins and LP storage cages:
[1] Shall be located against a solid front or side wall of the
principal structure.
[2] Shall not be located against a rear or back wall of a
building.
[3] Shall not be located in front of windows or doorways and
shall not block or obstruct any windows or doorways.
[4] Shall not block or obstruct any walkways associated with
handicapped accessibility to the main entrance of the
building.
[5] Shall be maintained in a state of good repair; not dented,
crushed or bent.
[6] Shall not contain rust and shall not have peeling/chipped
paint.
[7] Shall not be allowed to have plastic banners, streamers or
other signage affixed, placed or attached to the containers.
[8] Are allowed limited signage on the exterior of the storage
units that is limited to the use therein (i.e., ice and LP gas
advertising signage).
(d) The LP storage cages:
[1] Shall be in compliance with the most current edition of the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 58
(Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code).
[2] Shall be protected by a bollard, raised sidewalk or some
other acceptable means to provide protection against
accidental vehicle impact or damage. The means of
protection shall be reviewed and approved, on a case-bycase
basis, by the Chief of the Fire & Rescue Department,
§ 420-121 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-121
344:1082
§ 420-122. B-5 Freeway Office District.
or his/her designee. The Chief of the Fire & Rescue
Department shall determine the location, spacing and the
quantity of the bollard(s). The means of protection shall
not obstruct or inhibit on-site vehicular or pedestrian
traffic flow.
(e) All LP containers/cylinders shall be stored inside the LP cages.
(4) No on-site residential uses are allowed.
(5) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(6) Each building, structure and site shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(7) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
K. Municipal services required. Except as otherwise specifically provided
in this chapter, and without limitation, no proposed new, reconstructed
or relocated principal building shall be permitted in the B-4 District
unless it is connected to the Village's public sewer and water systems,
and any existing principal building not already connected to the
Village's public sewer and water systems shall be so connected before
any proposed addition is made to such building, or before any proposed
change in the use of such building is made from one use category to
another (e.g., residential to business), and before any proposed use is
commenced or recommenced in such a building that has been vacant or
unused for 12 consecutive months or longer.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The B-5 Freeway Office District is
intended to provide for corporate, business and professional office uses
at a community or regional level. B-5 Districts shall be located near
freeway interchanges. The territory in each B-5 District shall be
contiguous (corner to corner shall be sufficient), exclusive of
intervening streets, highways, navigable waterways and wetlands. The
area of each B-5 District shall be a minimum of 15 acres, exclusive of
intervening streets, highways, navigable waterways and wetlands. No
such district shall be established unless it is in compliance with duly
adopted or amended comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual
plans.
§ 420-121 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-122
344:1083
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses, and certain
auxiliary principal uses provided for in Subsection C below, are allowed
as permitted uses in the B-5 District, subject to the requirements of
Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this chapter and of other
Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Corporate, business and professional office uses.
(2) Day-care facility, either for children or adults.
(3) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Auxiliary permitted uses. The following listed auxiliary principal uses,
and certain unspecified auxiliary principal uses as approved pursuant
to Subsection C(3) below, are allowed as permitted uses in the B-5
District, provided that such uses are auxiliary to the permitted office
uses(s), in that they are located in the principal office building, and are
designed to serve the needs of the occupants of the principal office
building, and have no dedicated outside entrance to such building, and
have no signage visible from the exterior of such building, and further
provided that all auxiliary permitted uses in a principal office building
together shall not occupy more than 10% of the gross floor area of such
building, all subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances
and codes:
(1) Retail auxiliary uses. The retail sale of any of the following goods or
products shall be an auxiliary permitted use in a principal office
building in the B-5 District, provided that the limitations of this
Subsection C are satisfied: bakery goods; books; candy; cards; ice
cream; newspapers and magazines; office supplies;
pharmaceuticals; sundries; and tobacco.
(2) Service auxiliary uses. The following service uses shall be auxiliary
permitted uses in a principal office building in the B-5 District,
provided that the limitations of this Subsection C are satisfied:
barbershop; coffeehouse; dry-cleaning service; financial institution;
photocopying center; photograph developing and printing;
restaurant (not including a drive-in restaurant, a restaurant with
drive-through facility, a restaurant with outdoor seating, or a
restaurant serving or selling alcoholic beverages); and shoe shine
or repair service.
(3) Unspecified permitted auxiliary uses. The Zoning Administrator
shall have authority to approve, as an auxiliary permitted use, a
proposed principal use not listed in Subsection C(1) or (2) above, if
the proposed use is similar in character to one or more of the listed
auxiliary permitted uses in the B-5 District, satisfies all of the
limitations of this Subsection C above, and is free of potential
problems requiring special regulation. The Zoning Administrator
§ 420-122 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-122
344:1084
shall make written findings supporting any such decision.
Notwithstanding the foregoing authorization, the following uses
shall not be construed to be auxiliary permitted uses in the B-5
District:
(a) Any conditional use allowed in the B-1, B-2, B-3 or B-4 District
that is not specifically listed as allowed in this section.
(b) Any manufacturing of products, other than that which is
incidental to permitted research, development and testing
activities.
(c) Any distribution facility for goods or products.
(d) Any warehousing of goods or products.
(e) Any cabaret.
(f) Any dry cabaret.
(g) Any tavern.
(h) Any adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult
movie theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or
adult viewing facility.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses in the B-5 District pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII
of this chapter and subject to the requirements of Article IX and all
other applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village
ordinances and codes:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) (Reserved)153
(b) Electric power substation or gas metering substation (only as a
principal use on its own lot).
(c) (Reserved)154
(d) Transmission line (electric power or natural gas).
(e) Utility substation building (only as a principal use on its own
lot).
(2) Accessory uses (to a principal office use only):
(a) (Reserved)155
153. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(1)(a), concerning commercial communication
antennas and like devices, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
154. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(1)(c), concerning freestanding commercial
communication structures, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-122 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-122
344:1085
(b) Detached retreat center, with or without overnight stays, but
only for a single company or firm solely occupying a principal
office building (exclusive of the area occupied by auxiliary
permitted uses pursuant to Subsection C above) having a
minimum gross floor area of 100,000 square feet.
(c) Research, development and testing of products (which may
include prototype fabrication of products) or applied research,
but only for a single company or firm solely occupying a
principal office building (exclusive of the area occupied by
auxiliary permitted uses pursuant to Subsection C, above)
having a minimum gross floor area of 100,000 square feet,
provided that all such research, development and testing
activities together do not occupy more than 25% of the gross
floor area of such building.
E. Special licensed uses. Uses requiring a Village adult-oriented use
license, cabaret license or liquor license granted by the Village Board
(including nonconforming uses) may only be conducted pursuant to and
in accordance with such a license.
(1) Without limitation, such uses include the following:
(a) Any restaurant in which alcoholic beverages are served or sold
(some are prohibited in the B-5 District).
(b) Any cabaret (prohibited in the B-5 District).
(c) Any tavern (prohibited in the B-5 District).
(d) Any liquor store (prohibited in the B-5 District).
(e) Any adult-oriented use, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult
movie theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or
adult viewing facility (all prohibited in the B-5 District). For
existing adult-oriented uses, see § 420-119E(1)(e), which is
incorporated by reference to the extent applicable.
(2) The granting of a Village license by the Village Board is not assured
either by permitted use status or by the granting of a conditional
use permit or of any other permit or approval under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in
this section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the B-5
District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance with
each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions are
applicable:
155. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(2)(a), concerning commercial communication
antennas and like devices, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-122 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-122
344:1086
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the B-5 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the B-5 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the B-5 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the B-5 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time when
the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the B-5 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the B-5 District and
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
building in the B-5 District; provided, however, that the area of a
building occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory
uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which any
proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of
the time when the conditional use permit for such conditional use
or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed
only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the B-5 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 03-27 (June 4, 2003) and any related
accessory uses existing as of such date may be continued in the
same principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the B-5 District are allowed,
§ 420-122 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-122
344:1087
subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the B-5 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the B-5
District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in accordance
with a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this
chapter.
(c) Without limitation, the following uses are allowed as accessory
uses in the B-5 District for a single company or firm solely
occupying a principal office building (exclusive of the area
occupied by auxiliary permitted uses pursuant to Subsection C
above) having a minimum of 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area: auditorium; cafeteria; conferencing facilities; day care
(for children or adults); entrance feature (which may include a
guard station, gate house, security checkpoint, or architectural
entrance gates); indoor and/or outdoor fitness/recreation
facilities; parking, either surface, underground or within an
attached parking structure; incidental retail sale of the
company's own products; training facilities; tour center; visitor
information center; and additional accessory uses allowed as
conditional uses in Subsection D(2) above.
(2) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
(3) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
H. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the B-5
District by this chapter are prohibited in the B-5 District. A convenient
cash business is prohibited in the B-5 District. [Amended 1-15-2007
by Ord. No. 07-01]
I. Dimensional standards: Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and
structures in the B-5 District shall comply with the following
dimensional standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: 2.5 acres minimum, except that the minimum lot size for a
freestanding commercial communication structure or a utility
substation building shall be as prescribed by § 420-148 of this
chapter, and further provided that no minimum lot size shall be
applicable to a transmission line.
§ 420-122 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-122
344:1088
(2) Lot frontage on a public street: 150 feet minimum; provided,
however, that on a substantial curve the public street frontage may
be reduced as necessary to an absolute minimum of 100 feet if all
other requirements are satisfied, except that the minimum lot
frontage on a public street for a freestanding commercial
communication structure or a utility substation building shall be as
prescribed by § 420-148 of this chapter, and further provided that
no minimum lot frontage on a public street shall be applicable to a
transmission line.
(3) Open space: 25% minimum.
(4) Principal office building standards:
(a) Each principal office building shall have a minimum of two
floors above grade.
(b) The gross floor area of a principal office building shall be a
minimum of 24,000 square feet, and each of the first two floors
above grade shall have a gross floor area of at least 10,000
square feet.
(c) The gross floor area for all auxiliary permitted uses within a
principal office building shall not exceed 10% of the gross floor
area of such building.
(d) The gross floor area occupied by research, development and/or
testing of products, and applied research activities, within a
principal office building shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor
area of such building.
(e) Height: 30 feet minimum.
(f) Setbacks:
[1] Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads.
[2] Side setback: 45 feet minimum.
[3] Rear setback: 45 feet minimum.
[4] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[5] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
(5) Detached office-related accessory building standards:
(a) Gross floor area:
[1] Detached retreat facility: 6,000 square feet maximum.
§ 420-122 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-122
344:1089
[2] Detached guard station/gate house: 300 square feet
maximum.
(b) Height:
[1] Detached retreat facility: 35 feet maximum.
[2] Detached guard station/gate house: 20 feet maximum.
(c) Detached retreat facility shall only be located in the side yard
or rear yard.
(d) Setbacks:
[1] Street setback for a detached retreat facility: minimum of
65 feet from arterial streets or highways and a minimum of
40 feet from nonarterial streets or private roads.
[2] Street setback for detached guard station/gate house: 20
feet minimum.
[3] Side setback: 45 feet minimum.
[4] Rear setback: 45 feet minimum.
[5] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[6] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
(6) Principal day-care building standards:
(a) The gross floor area of a principal day-care building shall be a
minimum gross floor area of 10,000 square feet.
(b) Height: 35 feet maximum.
(c) Setbacks:
[1] Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads.
[2] Side setback: 45 feet minimum.
[3] Rear setback: 45 feet minimum.
[4] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[5] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
(7) Distance between principal building and detached accessory
building on the same lot or parcel: 50 feet minimum.
§ 420-122 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-122
344:1090
J. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the B-5 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Number of principal structures per lot or parcel: one maximum;
provided, however, that attached buildings are allowed if the
attachment is a fire wall between each two attached buildings, with
no pedestrian openings, and that the horizontal distance of the
attachment is at least 75% of the length or width of one of each two
attached buildings and a minimum of 75 feet, and, without
limitation, that each such attached building individually satisfies
the minimum gross floor area restriction for principal buildings and
that all such buildings attached to one another collectively comply
with any maximum gross floor area restriction for principal
buildings, and further provided that one or more commercial
communication antennas, whips, panels or other similar
transmission or reception devices (but no towers) mounted on a
principal building or structure are allowed.
(2) Number of detached accessory buildings:
(a) One detached retreat center, in accordance with Subsection
D(2)(b) above.
(b) One detached guard station/gate house, in accordance with
Subsection G(3) above.
(3) All trash enclosures shall be part of the principal building or
accessory building.
(4) All accessory uses or structures shall be on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(5) A day-care facility may have a fenced recreational area with
accessory recreational structures.
(6) All loading facilities shall be inside the principal building.
(7) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter.
(8) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(9) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(10)No fences are allowed, except as may be required for a day-care
play area.
(11) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
§ 420-122 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-122
344:1091
§ 420-122.1. B-6 Freeway Oriented Business Center District. [Added
4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-14]
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
K. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the B-5 District shall comply with the following operational standards
to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation (when the public is allowed to enter or remain
on site for business purposes): 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight
maximum.
(2) Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter, all
business activities shall be conducted within a building.
(3) Auxiliary permitted uses located in a principal office building shall
satisfy the limitations set forth in Subsection C above.
(4) No outside storage or display of goods or merchandise is allowed.
(5) No on-site residential uses are allowed (overnight stays pursuant to
Subsection D(2)(b) shall not be considered a residential use).
(6) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(7) Each building, structure and site shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
L. Municipal services required. Except as otherwise specifically provided
in this chapter, and without limitation, no proposed new, reconstructed
or relocated principal building shall be permitted in the B-5 District
unless it is connected to the Village's public sewer and water systems,
and any existing principal building not already connected to the
Village's public sewer and water systems shall be so connected before
any proposed addition is made to such building, or before any proposed
change in the use of such building is made from one use category to
another (e.g., residential to business), and before any proposed use is
commenced or recommenced in such a building that has been vacant or
unused for 12 consecutive months or longer.
§ 420-122 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-122.1
344:1092
A. Purpose and characteristics. The B-6 Freeway Oriented Business
Center District is intended to provide for a cluster of businesses along
and adjacent to the freeway (IH-94) at a density where a full range of
urban services are available for office, retail, and customer services for
adjacent manufacturing and office park uses. The B-6 District shall be
located near freeway interchanges (within 4,000 feet of the travel lanes
of the freeway). The territory in each B-6 District shall be contiguous
(corner to corner shall be sufficient), exclusive of intervening streets,
highways, navigable waterways and wetlands. The area of each B-6
District shall be a minimum of 15 acres, exclusive of intervening
streets, highways, navigable waterways and wetlands. No such district
shall be established unless it is in compliance with duly adopted or
amended comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual plans.
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses, and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below,
are allowed as permitted uses in the B-6 District, subject to the
requirements of Article IX of this chapter and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Retail uses. The retail sale of any of the following goods or products
is a permitted use in the B-6 District: antiques; apparel; appliances;
art; art supplies; audio recordings; automotive supplies; bakery
goods; bicycles and accessories; books; camping supplies; candy;
cameras and photographic supplies; cards; carpets; cosmetics;
electronic equipment; eyeglasses and related products; fabric;
flowers; frames; furniture and home furnishings; gifts; glassware;
groceries (with or without alcoholic beverages as package goods in
a supermarket, grocery store or convenience store); hardware,
hobby and craft supplies; ice cream; jewelry; liquor (without a
drive-through facility); luggage; novelties; marine supplies; musical
instruments and accessories; newspapers and magazines; office
supplies; paint; pet supplies; pharmaceuticals; prepared food not
for consumption on the premises; shoes and accessories; souvenirs;
sporting goods; sundries; telephones; tobacco; toys; and video
recordings.
(2) Service uses. The following service uses are permitted uses in the
B-6 District: art gallery; audio recording rental; bakery (not selling
wholesale); barbershop; beauty salon; book rental; caterer;
coffeehouse; day-care facility, either for children or adults; day spa;
dance studio; dry cleaning; equipment rental; equipment repair;
financial institution; hotel, with or without banquet and/or
convention facilities, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served
or sold, and with or without a dedicated bar; library; locksmith;
mailing service; photocopying center; photography studio;
photographic development and printing; physical fitness facility;
restaurant (not including a drive-in restaurant or a restaurant with
a drive-through facility), whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served or sold, with or without outdoor seating, with or without a
§ 420-122.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-122.1
344:1093
dedicated brewing facility and with or without a dedicated bar;
retreat center, with or without overnight stays; shoe shine or repair
service; skilled trade office, shop and/or retail facility; tailor;
tanning salon; ticket sales; travel agency; upholstery shop; and
video recording rental.
(3) Corporate, business and professional office uses.
(4) Research, development and testing of products (which may include
prototype fabrication of products) or applied research as it relates
to education, training and tourism.
(5) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89).
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the B-6 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
B-6 District and is free of potential problems requiring special
regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings
supporting any such decision. Any use so approved shall be subject to
all requirements of Subsection B above. Notwithstanding the foregoing
authorization, the following uses shall not be construed to be permitted
uses in the B-6 District:
(1) Any listed permitted use in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or B-5 District that
is not listed in Subsection B above.
(2) Any listed conditional use in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5 or B-6
District that is not listed in Subsection B above.
(3) Motel.
(4) Indoor/outdoor flea market.
(5) Pawnshop.
(6) Psychic/tarot card/astrology reading.
(7) Truck stop and/or truck service facility.
(8) Sale or storage of fireworks.
(9) Nursery.
(10) Greenhouse.
(11) Bakery selling wholesale.
(12) Any use involving the serving or selling of alcoholic beverages that
is not specifically listed in Subsection B above.
(13)Wrecking, junk, demolition and scrap yards.
§ 420-122.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-122.1
344:1094
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses in the B-6 District (as principal uses or accessory uses, as
appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX of this chapter and all
other applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village
ordinances and codes:
(1) Service uses. The following service uses may be permitted as
conditional uses in the B-6 District:
(a) Cabaret.
(b) Concert facility, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served
or sold.
(c) Dinner theater, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served
or sold.
(d) Drive-through facility associated with any allowed service use,
except as otherwise specifically provided.
(e) Dry cabaret.
(f) Fire station.
(g) Gasoline station with or without a car wash.
(h) Indoor commercial recreational facility.
(i) Movie theater.
(j) Museum.
(k) Recording studio.
(l) Restaurant (not including a drive-in restaurant), with a drivethrough
facility, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served
or sold, with or without outdoor seating, with or without a
dedicated brewing facility and with or without a dedicated bar;
provided, however, that no alcoholic beverages shall be served
or sold in or through a drive-through facility.
(m) Taxi service.
(n) Theater.
(o) Therapeutic massage.
(2) Miscellaneous uses. The following miscellaneous uses may be
permitted as conditional uses in the B-6 District:
(a) Electric power or gas metering substation (only as a principal
use on its own lot).
(b) Heliport pad.
§ 420-122.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-122.1
344:1095
(c) Outdoor display or storage of merchandise related to a
principal indoor retail use, except as noted in Subsection K(4)
below.
(d) Restaurants or gasoline stations open to the public during
hours not routinely allowed pursuant to Subsection K(1) below
for which the conditional use permit shall be renewable on an
annual basis or other such time period as prescribed by the
Village Plan Commission.
(e) Transmission line (electric power or natural gas).
(f) Utility substation building (only as a principal use on its own
lot).
E. Special licensed uses. Some uses require a special license approved by
the Village Board and may only be operated pursuant to and in
accordance with such license. The granting of a Village license by the
Village Board is not assured either by permitted use status or by the
granting of a conditional use permit or of any other permit or approval
under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in
this section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the B-6
District, subject to Article IX of this chapter and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in
accordance with each of the following restrictions to the extent such
restrictions are applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the B-6 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the B-6 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the B-6 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the B-6 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time when
the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the B-6 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the B-6 District and
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
§ 420-122.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-122.1
344:1096
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
building in the B-6 District; provided, however, that the area of a
building occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory
uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which any
proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as
of the time when the conditional use permit for such conditional
use or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed
only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the B-6 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 17-14 (April 17, 2017) and any related
accessory uses existing as of such date may be continued in the
same principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the B-6 District are allowed,
subject to Article IX of this chapter and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances and
codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the B-6 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the B-6
District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in accordance
with a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this
chapter.
(2) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
(3) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
§ 420-122.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-122.1
344:1097
H. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the B-6
District by this chapter are prohibited in the B-6 District.
I. Dimensional standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and
structures in the B-6 District shall comply with the following
dimensional standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: 2.5 acres minimum, except that the minimum lot size for a
freestanding commercial communication structure or a utility
substation building shall be as prescribed by § 420-148 of this
chapter, and further provided that no minimum lot size shall be
applicable to a transmission line.
(2) Lot frontage on a public street: 150 feet minimum; provided,
however, that on a substantial curve the public street frontage may
be reduced as necessary to an absolute minimum of 100 feet if all
other requirements are satisfied, except that the minimum lot
frontage on a public street for a freestanding commercial
communication structure or a utility substation building shall be as
prescribed by § 420-148 of this chapter, and further provided that
no minimum lot frontage on a public street shall be applicable to a
transmission line.
(3) Open space: 25% minimum.
(4) Principal building standards:
(a) Gross floor area: 4,000 square feet minimum and 50,000
square feet maximum, except:
[1] The minimum gross floor area for a utility substation
building shall be as prescribed by § 420-148 of this
chapter;
[2] There is no maximum gross floor area for a hotel or
conference center;
[3] An office building shall have minimum of two floors above
grade; the gross floor area of a principal office building
shall be a minimum of 24,000 square feet, and each of the
first two floors above grade shall have a gross floor area of
at least 10,000 square feet with no maximum area; and
[4] The maximum size of a grocery store shall not exceed
25,000 square feet.
(b) Height: 40 feet maximum, except a hotel, conference center or
office building shall not exceed 100 feet.
(c) Setbacks:
§ 420-122.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-122.1
344:1098
[1] Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads.
[2] Side setback: 45 feet minimum.
[3] Rear setback: 45 feet minimum.
[4] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[5] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
(5) Detached accessory building/trash enclosure standards: detached
accessory buildings or trash enclosures are prohibited.
J. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the B-6 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Number of principal structures per lot: One maximum; provided,
however, that attached buildings are allowed if the attachment
maintains a fire wall between each two attached buildings, with no
pedestrian openings, and that the horizontal distance of the
attachment is at least 75% of the length or width of one of each two
attached buildings and a minimum of 75 feet, and, without
limitation, that each such attached building individually satisfies
the minimum gross floor area restriction for principal buildings and
that all such buildings attached to one another collectively comply
with any maximum gross floor area restriction for principal
buildings, and further provided that one or more commercial
communication antennas, whips, panels or other similar
transmission or reception devices (but no towers) mounted on a
principal building or structure are allowed.
(2) Number of detached accessory buildings and/or detached trash
enclosures: none (trash enclosure shall be part of the principal
building).
(3) All accessory uses or structures shall be on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(4) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter.
(5) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(6) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(7) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
§ 420-122.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-122.1
344:1099
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
K. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the B-6 District shall comply with the following operational standards
to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation (when the public is allowed to enter or remain
on site for business purposes), except for hotels, retreat centers
with overnight stays and uses requiring a Village liquor license:
5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight maximum; for hotels and retreat
centers with overnight stays: no limit; for uses requiring a Village
liquor license: as provided in § 125.68(4), Wis. Stats.
(2) Hours for deliveries, or any other activities outside the principal
building that might cause a disturbance to neighboring residential
areas (e.g., outside loading or unloading, the arrival of deliveries,
idling of delivery trucks, beeping of backing vehicles, and garbage
pickup), except for snow removal: 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight
maximum.
(3) Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter, all
business activities shall be conducted within a building.
(4) No outside storage or display of merchandise is allowed, except for
gasoline station and convenience store uses only and pursuant to
the following:
(a) A maximum of one eight-foot-by-six-foot-by-three-foot [(L x H x
D) maximum size] outdoor ice storage bin is allowed per
parcel.
(b) A maximum of one eight-foot-by-six-foot-by-four-foot [(L x H x
D) maximum size] outdoor liquid propane (LP) storage cage
shall be allowed per parcel.
(c) The ice storage bins and LP storage cages:
[1] Shall be located against a solid front or side wall of the
principal structure.
[2] Shall not be located against a rear or back wall of a
building.
[3] Shall not be located in front of windows or doorways and
shall not block or obstruct any windows or doorways.
§ 420-122.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-122.1
344:1100
[4] Shall not block or obstruct any walkways associated with
handicapped accessibility to the main entrance of the
building.
[5] Shall be maintained in a state of good repair; not dented,
crushed or bent.
[6] Shall not contain rust and shall not have peeling/chipped
paint.
[7] Shall not be allowed to have plastic banners, streamers or
other signage affixed, placed or attached to the containers.
[8] Are allowed limited signage on the exterior of the storage
units that is limited to the use therein (i.e., ice and LP gas
advertising signage).
(d) The LP storage cages:
[1] Shall be in compliance with the most current edition of the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 58
(Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code).
[2] Shall be protected by a bollard, raised sidewalk or some
other acceptable means to provide protection against
accidental vehicle impact or damage. The means of
protection shall be reviewed and approved, on a case-bycase
basis, by the Chief of the Fire & Rescue Department,
or his/her designee. The Chief of the Fire & Rescue
Department shall determine the location, spacing and the
quantity of the bollard(s). The means of protection shall
not obstruct or inhibit on-site vehicular or pedestrian
traffic flow.
(e) All LP containers/cylinders shall be stored inside the LP cages.
(5) No on-site residential uses are allowed.
(6) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(7) Each site, building and structure shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
§ 420-122.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-122.1
344:1101
§ 420-123. M-1 Limited Manufacturing District. [Amended
1-15-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01; 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 07-25;
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-59; 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44;
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-11]
L. Municipal services required. Except as otherwise specifically provided
in this chapter, and without limitation, no proposed new, reconstructed
or relocated principal building shall be permitted in the B-6 District
unless it is connected to the Village's public sewer and water systems,
and any existing principal building not already connected to the
Village's public sewer and water systems shall be so connected before
any proposed addition is made to such building, or before any proposed
change in the use of such building is made from one use category to
another (e.g., residential to business), and before any proposed use is
commenced or recommenced in such a building that has been vacant or
unused for 12 consecutive months or longer.
A. Purpose and characteristics.
(1) The M-1 Limited Manufacturing District is intended to provide for
limited manufacturing, wholesaling, warehousing and related uses
within an enclosed structure wherein no high-hazard uses are
allowed and the method of manufacturing is not injurious to the
point of constituting a nuisance to the occupants of adjacent
properties by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration,
smoke, dust or particle matters, toxic or noxious materials, odors,
fire or explosive hazards, glare or heat and located in those areas
where the relationship to surrounding land uses would create few
problems of compatibility. This district also allows for office parks
or individual office buildings and ancillary uses, which may or may
not include space for manufacturing, assemblies, or warehousing,
but provide direct services to the employees or customers or other
uses in the area. It is anticipated that these areas would be
developed in an attractive parklike setting with landscaping,
consistent signage, and similar or compatible building materials
and designed to present an integrated image to customers. No such
district shall be established unless it is in compliance with Village
adopted or amended comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual
plans.
(2) The uses allowed in the M-1 District are based on the Use and
Occupancy Classification specified in Chapter 3 of the 2006
International Building Code (2006 IBC), as may be amended from
time to time. Where a use is proposed for a purpose that is not
specifically provided in Chapter 3 of the 2006 IBC and is not
specifically listed as a prohibited use in the M-1 District, such use
shall be classified in the group that the occupancy most clearly
resembles, according to the firesafety and relative hazard involved.
The Zoning Administrator shall make the final determination if the
use is allowed within the M-1 District.
§ 420-122.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-123
344:1102
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C, below,
are allowed as permitted uses in the M-1 District, subject to the
requirements of Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Uses classified as Factory Group F in Section 306 of the 2006 IBC,
including assembling, disassembling, fabricating, finishing,
manufacturing, packaging, distributing, repair or processing
operations that are not classified as a Group H Hazard or Group S
Storage pursuant to Sections 307 and 311 of the 2006 IBC;
provided, however, that the use is not listed as a prohibited use in
Subsection C below.
(a) Factory Industrial F-2 Low-hazard uses that involve the
fabrication or manufacturing of noncombustible materials
which during finishing, packing or processing do not involve a
significant fire hazard, as determined by the Village Fire Chief,
including but not limited to beverages (up to and including
twelve-percent alcohol content); brick and masonry; ceramic
products; foundries; glass products; gypsum; ice; and metal
products (fabrication and assembly).
(b) Factory Industrial F-1 Moderate-hazard uses which are not
classified as Factory Industrial F-2 Low-hazard uses, including
but not limited to aircraft; appliances; athletic equipment;
automobiles and other motor vehicles, bakeries, beverages
(over twelve-percent alcohol content); bicycles; boats,
building; brooms or brushes; business machines; cameras and
photo equipment; canvas or similar fabric; carpet and rug
(including cleaning); clothing; construction and agricultural
machinery; disinfectants, dry cleaning and dyeing; electronics;
engines (including rebuilding); food processing; furniture;
hemp products; jute products; laundries; leather products;
machinery; metals; millwork (sash and door); motion pictures
and television filming (without spectators); musical
instruments, optical goods; paper mills or products;
photographic film; plastic products; printing or publishing;
recreational vehicles; shoes; soaps and detergents; textiles;
tobacco; trailers; upholstering; wood, distillation;
woodworking (cabinet).
(2) Uses classified as Storage Group S in Section 311 of the 2006 IBC
that are not classified as a Group H Hazard pursuant to Section 307
of the 2006 IBC are allowed to be stored and distributed; provided,
however, that the use is not listed as a prohibited use in subsection
C below.
(a) Low-hazard storage Group S-2 includes uses for the storage of
noncombustible materials such as products on wood pallets or
in paper cartons with or without single-thickness divisions; or
§ 420-123 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-123
344:1103
in paper wrappings. Such products may have a negligible
amount of plastic trim such as knobs, handles or film wrapping.
Storage uses include, but not limited to, beverages (up to and
including twelve-percent alcohol in metal, glass or ceramic
containers); cement in bags; chalk and crayons; dairy products
in nonwaxed coated paper containers; dry cell batteries;
electrical coils; electrical motors; empty cans; food products;
foods in noncombustible containers; fresh fruits and
vegetables in nonplastic trays or containers; frozen foods;
glass; glass bottles, empty or filled with noncombustible
liquids; gypsum board; inert pigments, ivory; meats; metal
cabinets; metal desks with plastic tops and trim; metal parts;
metals; mirrors; oil-filled and other types of distribution
transformers; parking garages, open or enclosed; porcelain
and pottery; stoves; talc and soapstones; and washer and
dryers.
(b) Moderate-hazard Group S-1 includes uses for the storage of
uses which are not classified as low-hazard storage Group S-1,
including but not limited to aerosols, Level 2 and Level 3;
aircraft hangars; bags: cloth, burlap or paper; bamboos and
rattan; baskets; belting: canvas and leather; books and paper
in rolls or packs; boots and shoes; buttons, including cloth
covered, pearl or bone; cardboard and cardboard boxes;
clothing, woolen wearing apparel; cordage; furniture; furs;
glues, mucilage, pastes and size; grains; horns and combs,
other than celluloid; leather, linoleum; lumber; motor vehicle
repair garages complying with the maximum allowable
quantities of hazardous materials listed in Table 307.1(1) of the
2006 IBC; photo engraving; resilient flooring; silks; soaps;
sugar; tobacco, cigars, cigarettes and snuff; upholstery and
mattresses; and wax candles.
(3) Uses classified as Business Group B in Section 304 of the 2006 IBC
that are not classified as a Group H hazard pursuant to Section 307
of the 2006 IBC provided, however, that the use is not listed as a
prohibited use in Subsection C, below. Business Group B uses
include, among others, the use of a building, or a portion thereof,
for office, professional or service-type transactions, which serve as
an ancillary uses or support use in the M-1 District: banks; barberand
beauty shops; clinic-outpatient; dry cleaning and laundries,
pickup and delivery stations and self-service; electronic data
processing; laboratories, testing and research; motor vehicle
showrooms, post offices, print shops, professions services
(architects, attorneys, dentist, physicians, engineering, etc.); and
radio and television stations.
(4) Day-care facilities, either for children or adults.
(5) Public administrative offices and public service buildings, including
fire and police stations, community centers, and welcome centers.
§ 420-123 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-123
344:1104
(6) Public or private schools, colleges, universities, technology
academies and any associated administrative offices.
(7) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the M-1 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
M-1 District and is free of potential problems requiring special
regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings
supporting any such decision. Any use so approved shall be subject to
all requirements of Subsection B above. Notwithstanding the foregoing
authorization, the following uses shall not be construed to be permitted
uses in the M-1 District:
(1) Any listed permitted use or conditional use specified in the I-1, B-1,
B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5, M-2, M-3 and M-4 Districts that is not specifically
listed in Subsection B above.
(2) Any use involving the serving or selling of alcoholic beverages that
is not specifically listed in Subsection B above.
(3) Any adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility.
(4) Any use classified as a High-Hazard Group H use pursuant to
Section 307 of the 2006 IBC that involves the manufacturing,
processing, generation or storage of materials that constitute a
physical or health hazard in quantities in excess of those allowed in
control areas constructed and located as required in Section 414 of
the 2006 IBC.
(5) Anhydrous ammonia (bulk storage facility or retail sale).
(6) Asbestos (storage of).
(7) Animal hospitals, kennels and pounds.
(8) Car wash (commercial).
(9) Concrete and asphalt batch plants.
(10) Dry cabaret.
(11) Feed mills.
(12) Fertilizer (production, sales, storage, mixing or blending).
(13) Fireworks (manufacturing, storage or sale).
§ 420-123 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-123
344:1105
(14) Flea markets.
(15) Gas stations with or without a car wash (commercial).
(16) Greenhouse.
(17) Hotel.
(18) Liquor store.
(19) Livestock sale facilities.
(20) Motel.
(21) Nursery.
(22) Pawnshop.
(23) Petroleum bulk stations and terminals.
(24) Psychic/tarot card/astrology reading.
(25) Recycling facilities.
(26) Refuse incineration.
(27) Slaughterhouse.
(28) Tires (bulk storage).
(29) Tavern.
(30) Truck stop and/or truck service facility.
(31)Wrecking, junk, demolition and scrap yards.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses in the M-1 District (as principal uses or accessory uses, as
appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances
and codes:
(1) Retail or wholesale of merchandise manufactured or stored within
the building, provided that the retail or wholesale use is not
classified as a High-Hazard Group H pursuant to Section 307 of the
2006 IBC.
(2) Miscellaneous uses. The following miscellaneous uses may be
permitted as conditional uses in the M-1 District:
(a) (Reserved)156
156. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(2)(a), concerning commercial communication
antennas and like devices, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-123 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-123
344:1106
(b) Electric power or gas-metering substation (only as a principal
use on its own lot).
(c) (Reserved)157
(d) Outside storage.
(e) Transmission line (electric power or natural gas).
(f) Utility substation building (only as a principal use on its own
lot).
(g) Wind energy conversion systems.
E. Special licensed uses. Some uses require a special license approved by
the Village Board and may only be operated pursuant to and in
accordance with such license. The granting of a Village license by the
Village Board is not assured either by permitted use status or by the
granting of a conditional use permit or of any other permit or approval
under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in
this section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the M-1
District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance with
each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions are
applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the M-1 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the M-1 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the M-1 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the M-1 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time when
the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the M-1 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the M-1 District and
157. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(2)(c), concerning freestanding commercial
communication structures, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-123 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-123
344:1107
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
building in the M-1 District; provided, however, that the area of a
building occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory
uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which any
proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as
of the time when the conditional use permit for such conditional
use or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed
only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the M-1 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 10-11 (March 15, 2010) and any related
accessory uses existing as of such date may be continued in the
same principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the M-1 District are allowed,
subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the M-1 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the M-1
District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in accordance
with a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this
chapter.
(2) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
(3) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
§ 420-123 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-123
344:1108
H. Temporary uses. Temporary uses may be allowed in the M-1 District
pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter.
I. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the M-1
District by this chapter as specified in the foregoing sections are
prohibited in the M-1 District. However, where a use is proposed for a
purpose that is not specifically provided in Chapter 3 of the 2006 IBC
and is not specifically listed as a prohibited use in the M-1 District
regulations, such use shall be classified in the group that the occupancy
most clearly resembles, according to the firesafety and relative hazard
involved. The Zoning Administrator shall make the final determination
if the use is allowed within the M-1 District.
J. Dimensional standards. Except as specifically provided in this chapter,
and without limitations, all uses, site, building and structures in the M-1
District shall comply with the following dimensional standards to the
extent applicable.
(1) Lot size: two acres minimum, except that the minimum lot size for a
freestanding commercial communication structure or a utility
substation building shall be as prescribed by § 420-148 of this
chapter; and further provided that no minimum lot size shall be
applicable to transmission lines.
(2) Lot frontage. Lot frontage on a public street: 150 feet minimum;
however, that on a substantial curve the public street frontage may
be reduced as necessary to an absolute minimum of 100 feet if all
other requirements are satisfied, except that the minimum lot
frontage on a public street for a freestanding communication
structure or a utility substation building shall be as prescribed by
§ 420-148 of this chapter, and further provided that no minimum lot
frontage on a public street shall be applicable to transmission lines.
(3) Open space: 25% minimum.
(4) Building standards:
(a) Gross floor area: No maximum or minimum building area shall
be required in the M-1 District due to the variety of uses within
this district and the diverse building demands of each use.
(b) Principal building height: 45 feet maximum; however, the
height of a principal building or part thereof may be increased
not to exceed 60 feet in height, provided that for every one foot
above 45 feet, said principal structure shall be set back an
additional two feet from the side and rear property lines.
(c) Accessory building height: 30 feet maximum.
(d) Setbacks. The following setbacks shall be considered to be
minimum setbacks; greater setback may be required by state
building codes.
§ 420-123 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-123
344:1109
[1] Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads for buildings constructed after
April 1, 2010, or a minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets
or highways and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads for buildings constructed before
April 1, 2010.
[2] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[3] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
[4] Side setback: 45 feet minimum for all buildings
constructed after April 1, 2010, or 25 feet minimum for all
buildings constructed before April 1, 2010.
[5] Rear setback: 45 feet minimum for all buildings
constructed after April 1, 2010, or 25 feet minimum for all
buildings constructed before April 1, 2010.
[6] Separation distance between all buildings: 45 feet
minimum.
K. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the M-1 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Number of principal structures per lot: no limit.
(2) Number of detached accessory buildings: no limit.
(3) All accessory uses or structures shall be on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(4) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter.
(5) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(6) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(7) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
§ 420-123 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-123
344:1110
L. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the M-1 District shall comply with the following operational
standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation (when the public is allowed to enter or remain
on site for business purposes):
(a) 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight maximum for retail uses allowed
with a conditional use permit.
(b) 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight maximum for day-care facilities,
either for children or adults, and public or private schools,
colleges, universities, technology academies and any
associated administrative offices.
(c) 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight maximum for the following
allowed uses classified as Business Group B in Section 304 of
the 2006 IBC: banks; barbershops and beauty shops; clinicoutpatient;
dry cleaning and laundries, pickup and delivery
stations and self-service; motor vehicle showrooms, post
offices, print shops, and professional services (architects,
attorneys, dentists, physicians, engineering, etc.).
(d) All other uses: no limit.
(2) Hours for deliveries, or any other activities outside the principal
building (e.g., outside loading or unloading, the arrival of
deliveries, idling of delivery trucks, beeping of backing vehicles,
and garbage pickup), except for snow removal:
(a) 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. maximum for retail uses allowed with a
conditional use permit.
(b) 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. maximum for day-care facilities, either
for children or adults, and public or private schools, colleges,
universities, technology academies and any associated
administrative offices.
(c) 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. maximum for the following allowed
uses classified as Business Group B in Section 304 of the 2006
IBC: banks; barbershops and beauty shops; clinic-outpatient;
dry cleaning and laundries, pickup and delivery stations and
self-service; motor vehicle showrooms, post offices, print
shops, and professional services (architects, attorneys,
dentists, physicians, engineering, etc.).
(d) All other uses: no limit.
(3) Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter under a
conditional use granted by the Village, all activities shall be
conducted within a building.
§ 420-123 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-123
344:1111
§ 420-124. M-2 General Manufacturing District. [Amended
1-16-2006 by Ord. No. 06-02; 1-15-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01;
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-59; 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44;
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-12]
(4) No on-site residential uses are allowed.
(5) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(6) Each site, building and structure shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(7) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
M. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
N. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Purpose and characteristics.
(1) The M-2 General Manufacturing District is intended to provide for
manufacturing, wholesaling, warehousing and related uses within
an enclosed structure in which high-hazard uses are located within
limited areas and the method of manufacturing is not injurious to
the point of constituting a nuisance to the occupants of adjacent
properties by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration,
smoke, dust or particle matters, toxic or noxious materials, odors,
fire or explosive hazards, glare or heat and located in those areas
where the relationship to surrounding land uses would create few
problems of compatibility. This district also allows for office parks
or individual office buildings and ancillary uses, which may or may
not include space for manufacturing, assemblies, or warehousing,
but provide direct services to the employees or customers or other
uses in the area. It is anticipated that these areas would be
developed in an attractive parklike setting with landscaping,
consistent signage, and similar or compatible building materials
and designed to present an integrated image to customers. No such
district shall be established unless it is in compliance with Village
adopted or amended comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual
plans.
(2) The uses allowed in the M-2 District are based on the Use and
Occupancy Classification specified in Chapter 3 of the 2006
International Building Code (2006 IBC), as may be amended from
§ 420-123 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-124
344:1112
time to time. Where a use is proposed for a purpose that is not
specifically provided in Chapter 3 of the 2006 IBC and is not
specifically listed as a prohibited use in the M-2 District, such use
shall be classified in the group that the occupancy most clearly
resembles, according to the firesafety and relative hazard involved.
The Zoning Administrator shall make the final determination if the
use is allowed within the M-2 District.
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below
are allowed as permitted uses in the M-2 District, subject to the
requirements of Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes.
(1) All permitted uses allowed in the M-1 Limited Manufacturing
District.
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the M-2 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
M-2 District and is free of potential problems requiring special
regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings
supporting any such decision. Any use so approved shall be subject to
all requirements of Subsection B above. Notwithstanding the foregoing
authorization, the following uses shall not be construed to be permitted
uses in the M-2 District:
(1) Any listed permitted use or conditional use specified in the I-1, B-1,
B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5, M-1, M-3 and M-4 Districts that is not specifically
listed in Subsection B above.
(2) Any use involving the serving or selling of alcoholic beverages that
is not specifically listed in Subsection B above.
(3) Any adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility.
(4) Anhydrous ammonia (bulk storage facility or retail sale).
(5) Asbestos (storage of).
(6) Animal hospitals, kennels and pounds.
(7) Car wash (commercial).
(8) Concrete and asphalt batch plants.
(9) Dry cabaret.
(10) Fertilizer (production, sales, storage, mixing or blending).
§ 420-124 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-124
344:1113
(11) Feed mills.
(12) Fireworks (manufacturing, storage or sale).
(13) Flea markets.
(14) Gas stations with or without a car wash (commercial).
(15) Greenhouse.
(16) Hotel.
(17) Liquor store.
(18) Livestock sale facilities.
(19) Motel.
(20) Nursery.
(21) Pawnshop.
(22) Petroleum bulk stations and terminals.
(23) Psychic/tarot card/astrology reading.
(24) Refuse incineration.
(25) Slaughterhouse.
(26) Tavern.
(27) Tires (bulk storage).
(28) Truck stop and/or truck service facility.
(29)Wrecking, junk, demolition and scrap yards.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses in the M-2 District (as principal uses or accessory uses, as
appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances
and codes:
(1) A principal or accessory use classified as a High-Hazard Group H
use pursuant to Section 307 of the 2006 IBC that involves the
manufacturing, processing, generation or storage of materials that
constitute a physical or health hazard in quantities in excess of
those allowed in control areas constructed and located as required
in Section 414 of the 2006 IBC; provided, however, that the use is
not listed as a prohibited use in Subsection C above shall not be
commenced or expanded on any parcel zoned M-2 as shown on
Illustration 8 in Appendix A.158
158. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 420-124 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-124
344:1114
(2) Recycling facilities (indoors).
(3) Retail or wholesale of merchandise manufactured or stored within
the building, provided that the retail or wholesale use is not
classified as a High-Hazard Group H pursuant to Section 307 of the
2006 IBC.
(4) Miscellaneous uses. The following miscellaneous uses may be
permitted as conditional uses in the M-2 District:
(a) (Reserved)159
(b) Electric power or gas-metering substation (only as a principal
use on its own lot).
(c) (Reserved)160
(d) Outside storage.
(e) Transmission line (electric power or natural gas).
(f) Utility substation building (only as a principal use on its own
lot).
(g) Wind energy conversion systems.
E. Special licensed uses. Some uses require a special license approved by
the Village Board and may only be operated pursuant to and in
accordance with such license. The granting of a Village license by the
Village Board is not assured either by permitted use status or by the
granting of a conditional use permit or of any other permit or approval
under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in
this section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the M-2
District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance with
each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions are
applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the M-2 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the M-2 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the M-2 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
159. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(4)(a), concerning commercial communication
antennas and like devices, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
160. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(4)(c), concerning freestanding commercial
communication structures, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-124 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-124
344:1115
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the M-2 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time
when the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the M-2 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the M-2 District and
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
building in the M-2 District; provided, however, that the area of a
building occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory
uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which any
proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of
the time when the conditional use permit for such conditional use
or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed
only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the M-2 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 10-12 (March 15, 2010) and any related
accessory uses existing as of such date may be continued in the
same principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the M-2 District are allowed,
subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the M-2 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the M-2
District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in accordance
§ 420-124 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-124
344:1116
with a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this
chapter.
(2) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
(3) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
H. Temporary uses. Temporary uses may be allowed in the M-2 District
pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter.
I. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the M-2
District by this chapter as specified in the foregoing sections are
prohibited in the M-2 District. However, where a use is proposed for a
purpose that is not specifically provided in Chapter 3 of the 2006 IBC
and is not specifically listed as a prohibited use in the M-2 District
regulations, such use shall be classified in the group that the occupancy
most clearly resembles, according to the firesafety and relative hazard
involved. The Zoning Administrator shall make the final determination
if the use is allowed within the M-2 District.
J. Dimensional standards. Except as specifically provided in this chapter,
and without limitations, all uses, site, building and structures in the M-2
District shall comply with the following dimensional standards to the
extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: two acres minimum, except that the minimum lot size for a
freestanding commercial communication structure or a utility
substation building shall be as prescribed by § 420-148 of this
chapter; and further provided that no minimum lot size shall be
applicable to transmission lines.
(2) Lot frontage. Lot frontage on a public street: 150 feet minimum;
however, that on a substantial curve, the public street frontage may
be reduced as necessary to an absolute minimum of 100 feet if all
other requirements are satisfied, except that the minimum lot
frontage on a public street for a freestanding communication
structure or a utility substation building shall be as prescribed by
§ 420-148 of this chapter, and further provided that no minimum lot
frontage on a public street shall be applicable to transmission lines.
(3) Open space: 25% minimum.
(4) Building standards:
§ 420-124 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-124
344:1117
(a) Gross floor area: No maximum or minimum building area shall
be required in the M-2 District due to the variety of uses within
this district and the diverse building demands of each use.
(b) Principal building height: 60 feet maximum; however, the
height of a principal building or part thereof may be increased
to a maximum of 90 feet in height, provided that for every one
foot above 60 feet, said principal structure shall be set back an
additional 1.5 feet from all property lines. [Amended
10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 12-38]
(c) Accessory building height: 30 feet maximum.
(d) Setbacks. The following setbacks shall be considered to be
minimum setbacks; greater setback may be required by state
building codes.
[1] Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads for buildings constructed after
April 1, 2010, or a minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets
or highways and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads for buildings constructed before
April 1, 2010.
[2] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[3] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
[4] Side setback: 45 feet minimum for all buildings
constructed after April 1, 2010, or 25 feet minimum for all
buildings constructed before April 1, 2010.
[5] Rear setback: 45 feet minimum for all buildings
constructed after April 1, 2010, or 25 feet minimum for all
buildings constructed before April 1, 2010.
[6] Separation distance between all buildings: 45 feet
minimum.
K. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the M-2 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Number of principal structures per lot: no limit.
(2) Number of detached accessory buildings: no limit.
(3) All accessory uses or structures shall be on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
§ 420-124 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-124
344:1118
(4) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter.
(5) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(6) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(7) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
L. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the M-2 District shall comply with the following operational
standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation (when the public is allowed to enter or remain
on site for business purposes):
(a) 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight maximum for retail uses allowed
with a conditional use permit.
(b) 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight maximum for day-care facilities,
either for children or adults, and public or private schools,
colleges, universities, technology academies and any
associated administrative offices.
(c) 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight maximum for the following
allowed uses classified as Business Group B in Section 304 of
the 2006 IBC: banks; barbershops and beauty shops; clinicoutpatient;
dry cleaning and laundries, pickup and delivery
stations and self-service; motor vehicle showrooms, post
offices, print shops, and professional services (architects,
attorneys, dentists, physicians, engineering, etc.).
(d) All other uses: no limit.
(2) Hours for deliveries, or any other activities outside the principal
building (e.g., outside loading or unloading, the arrival of
deliveries, idling of delivery trucks, beeping of backing vehicles,
and garbage pickup), except for snow removal:
(a) 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. maximum for retail uses allowed with a
conditional use permit.
(b) 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. maximum for day-care facilities, either
for children or adults, and public or private schools, colleges,
§ 420-124 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-124
344:1119
§ 420-125. M-3 Mineral Extraction and Landfill District.
universities, technology academies and any associated
administrative offices.
(c) 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. maximum for the following allowed
uses classified as Business Group B in Section 304 of the 2006
IBC: banks; barbershops and beauty shops; clinic-outpatient;
dry cleaning and laundries, pickup and delivery stations and
self-service; motor vehicle showrooms, post offices, print
shops, and professions services (architects, attorneys, dentist,
physicians, engineering, etc.).
(d) All other uses: no limit.
(3) Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter under a
conditional use granted by the Village, all activities shall be
conducted within a building.
(4) No on-site residential uses are allowed.
(5) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(6) Each site, building and structure shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(7) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
M. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
N. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The M-3 Mineral Extraction and
Landfill District is intended to provide for the orderly continuation of
existing quarries and related operations and to provide for new
operations that provide maximum protection to the natural
environment.161 This district further provides for the restoration of
quarries in a manner that will not deteriorate the natural environment
of the Village. In addition to quarrying uses, the district provides for the
location of municipal liquid and solid waste disposal sites.
B. Principal uses. [Amended 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
161. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 270, Quarries and Nonmetallic Mining Operations.
§ 420-124 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-125
344:1120
(1) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89).
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Parking areas and storage garages.
(2) Related office facilities and power supplies.
D. Conditional uses (see also Article XVIII).
(1) Caretaker's quarters.
(2) Concrete and asphalt batch plants.
(3) Garbage incinerators.
(4) Manufacturing of cement or concrete products.
(5) Manufacturing of lime, gypsum or plaster of paris.
(6) Mining or extraction of rock, slate, gravel, sand, topsoil and other
minerals.
(7) Sanitary landfill operations.
(8) Storage of mineral products or machinery.
(9) Utilities and substations.
(10)Washing, refining or processing of rock, slate, gravel, sand or
minerals processed from the topsoil.
(11)Wind energy conversion systems.
E. Lot area and width. Lots in the M-3 Mineral Extraction and Landfill
District shall provide sufficient area for all structures, the extractive
industrial operation, off-street parking and loading as required in
Article VIII of this chapter and all required setbacks.
F. Building height and area.
(1) No building or parts of a building shall exceed 60 feet in height.
(2) No maximum or minimum building area shall be required in the
M-3 Mineral Extraction or Landfill District due to the variety of
uses within the district and the diverse building demands of each
use.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Extractive industrial operations and landfills shall be set back a
minimum of 200 feet from the right-of-way of all highways or roads
and all property lines.
§ 420-125 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-125
344:1121
§ 420-125.1. M-4 Power Generating District. [Added 3-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-13]
(2) Incinerators, sewage treatment facilities, utilities, and accessory
uses, such as offices, parking areas and stockpiles, shall be set back
a minimum of 100 feet from the right-of-way of all highways or
roads and all property lines.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The M-4 Power Generating District is
intended to provide for electrical, steam, power and/or heat generating
plants, electrical light plants and power houses and related accessory
uses that are not injurious to the point of constituting a nuisance to the
occupants of adjacent properties by reason of the emission or creation
of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or particle matters, toxic or noxious
materials, odors, fire or explosive hazards, glare or heat and located in
those areas where the relationship to surrounding land use would
create few problems of compatibility. No such district shall be
established unless it is in compliance with Village adopted or amended
comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual plans.
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal and accessory uses
related to power generating facilities and certain unspecified principal
uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below are allowed as
permitted uses in the M-4 District, subject to the requirements of
Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this chapter and of other
Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Office uses classified as a Business Group B in Section 304 of the
Chapter 3 of the 2006 International Building Code (2006 IBC), as
amended from time to time, that are not classified as a Group H
hazard pursuant to Section 307 of the 2006 IBC.
(2) Entry and security offices or buildings, provided that the use is not
classified as a Group H hazard pursuant to Section 307 of the 2006
IBC.
(3) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the M-4 District a proposed
principal use or accessory use not listed in Subsection B above if the
proposed use is similar in character to the listed permitted use and is
not expressly prohibited. Any use so approved shall be subject to all
requirements of Subsection B above. Notwithstanding the foregoing
authorization, the following uses shall not be construed to be permitted
uses in the M-4 District:
§ 420-125 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-125.1
344:1122
(1) Any listed permitted or conditional use in the I-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4,
B-5, M-1, M-2, and M-3 Districts that is not specifically listed in
Subsection B above.
(2) Any listed unspecified permitted use in any zoning district that is
not specifically listed in Subsection B above.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses in the M-4 District (as principal uses or accessory uses, as
appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances
and codes:
(1) (Reserved)162
(2) Electric, gas and steam generating plants.
(3) Electric light plants and power houses.
(4) Power, gas and heat generating plants.
(5) Transmission lines (electric power or natural gas).
(6) Utility substations.
(7) Utility substation buildings.
E. Accessory uses. Accessory uses to a permitted principal use or a
conditional use that are not specified in Subsection B above may be
allowed in the M-4 District, but only pursuant to and in accordance with
a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this chapter. In
the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly an
accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to decide.
The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to support any
such decision.
F. Special licensed uses. Some uses require a special license approved by
the Village Board and may only be operated pursuant to and in
accordance with such license. The granting of a Village license by the
Village Board is not assured either by permitted use status or by the
granting of a conditional use permit or of any other permit or approval
under this chapter.
G. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in
this section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the M-4
District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance with
162. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(1), concerning commercial communication antennas
and like devices, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-125.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-125.1
344:1123
each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions are
applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the M-4 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building or
on the same site in the M-4 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the M-4 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building or
on the same site in the M-4 District; provided, however, that the
area of a building occupied by a conditional use and any related
accessory uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which
any proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing
as of the time when the conditional use permit for such conditional
use or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed
only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the M-4 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the M-4 District and
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
building or on the same site in the M-4 District; provided, however,
that the area of a building occupied by a conditional use and any
related accessory uses shall be a physically separate defined area
in which any proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind
existing as of the time when the conditional use permit for such
conditional use or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall
be allowed only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional
use permit issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of
this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the M-4 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 10-13 (March 15, 2010) and any related
accessory uses existing as of such date may be continued in the
same principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
§ 420-125.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-125.1
344:1124
H. Temporary uses. Temporary uses may be allowed in the M-4 District
pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter.
I. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the M-4
District by this chapter as specified in the foregoing sections are
prohibited in the M-4 District.
J. Dimensional standards. Except as specifically provided in this chapter,
and without limitations, all uses, sites, buildings and structures in the
M-4 District shall comply with the following dimensional standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: 50 acres minimum.
(2) Lot frontage. Lot frontage on a public street: 300 feet minimum.
(3) Open space: 40% minimum.
(4) Building standards:
(a) Gross floor area: No maximum or minimum building area shall
be required in the M-4 District due to the variety of uses within
this district and the diverse building demands of each use.
(b) Height: 250 feet maximum; however, the height of a building or
part thereof may be increased not to exceed 300 feet in height,
provided that for every one foot above 250 feet, said principal
structure shall be set back an additional 10 feet from the
street, side and rear property lines.
(c) Setbacks. The following setbacks shall be considered to be
minimum setbacks; greater setback may be required by state
building codes:
[1] Street setback: minimum of 200 feet from all streets or
highways, except for entry security buildings, which shall
be set back a minimum of 65 feet from all streets.
[2] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
[3] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
[4] Side setback: 200 feet minimum.
[5] Rear setback: 200 feet minimum.
[6] Separation distance between buildings: 10 feet minimum.
K. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the M-4 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
§ 420-125.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-125.1
344:1125
(1) Number of principal structures per lot: no maximum.
(2) Number of detached accessory buildings: no maximum.
(3) All accessory uses or structures shall be on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(4) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter.
(5) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(6) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(7) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(8) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
L. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the M-4 District shall comply with the following operational
standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation, including deliveries: no limit.
(2) Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter under a
conditional use granted by the Village, all activities shall be
conducted within a building.
(3) No on-site residential uses are allowed.
(4) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(5) Each site, building and structure shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(6) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
M. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
N. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
§ 420-125.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-125.2
344:1126
§ 420-125.2. M-5 Production Manufacturing District. [Amended
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08; 4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-12; 7-17-2017
by Ord. No. 17-32; 2-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-07;5-14-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-19]
A. Purpose and characteristics.
(1) The M-5 Production Manufacturing District is intended to provide
for manufacturing, assembly, office, and research and development
uses with limited warehouse and distribution uses within an
enclosed structure wherein no high hazard uses are allowed and
the method of manufacturing is not injurious to the point of
constituting a nuisance to the occupants of adjacent properties by
reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust
or particle matters, toxic or noxious materials, odors, fire or
explosive hazards, glare or heat and located in those areas where
the relationship to surrounding land uses would create few
problems of compatibility. This district also allows for office parks
or individual office buildings and ancillary uses, which may or may
not include space for manufacturing, assemblies, or research and
development but provides direct services to the employees or
customers or other uses in the area. It is anticipated that these
areas would be developed in an attractive corporate parklike
setting with landscaping, consistent signage, and similar or
compatible building materials and designed to present an
integrated image to customers. No such district shall be
established unless it is in compliance with Village adopted or
amended comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual plans.
(2) Some of the uses allowed in the M-5 District are based on the Use
and Occupancy Classification specified in Chapter 3 of the 2006
International Building Code (2006 IBC), as may be amended from
time to time. Where a use is proposed for a purpose that is not
specifically provided in Chapter 3 of the 2006 IBC and is not
specifically listed as a prohibited use in the M-5 District, such use
shall be classified in the group that the occupancy most clearly
resembles, according to the firesafety and relative hazard involved.
The Zoning Administrator shall make the final determination if the
use is allowed within the M-5 District.
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below
are allowed as permitted uses in the M-5 District, subject to the
requirements of Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes.
(1) Uses classified as Factory Group F in Section 306 of the 2006 IBC,
including assembling, disassembling, fabricating, finishing,
manufacturing, packaging, distributing [pursuant to Subsection
C(3) below], repair or processing operations that are not classified
as a Group H Hazard or Group S Storage pursuant to Sections 307
§ 420-125.2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-125.2
344:1127
and 311 of the 2006 IBC; provided, however, the use is not listed as
a prohibited use in Subsection C below.
(a) Factory Industrial F-2 Low-hazard uses that involve the
fabrication or manufacturing of noncombustible materials
which during finishing, packing or processing do not involve a
significant fire hazard, as determined by the Village Fire and
Rescue Chief, including but not limited to beverages (up to and
included twelve-percent alcohol content); brick and masonry;
ceramic products; foundries; glass products; gypsum; ice; and
metal products (fabrication and assembly).
(b) Factory Industrial F-1 Moderate-hazard uses which are not
classified as Factory Industrial F-2 Low-hazard uses, including
but not limited to aircraft; appliances; athletic equipment;
automobiles and other motor vehicles; bakeries; beverages
(over twelve-percent alcohol content); bicycles; boats,
building; brooms or brushes; business machines; cameras and
photo equipment; canvas or similar fabric; carpet and rug
(including cleaning); clothing; construction and agricultural
machinery; disinfectants, dry cleaning and dyeing; electronics;
engines (including rebuilding); food processing; furniture;
hemp products; jute products; laundries; leather products;
lighting products; machinery; metals; millwork (sash and
door); motion pictures and television filming (without
spectators); musical instruments; optical goods; paper mills or
products; photographic film; plastic products; printing or
publishing; recreational vehicles; shoes; soaps and detergents;
textiles; tobacco; trailers; upholstering; wood, distillation;
woodworking (cabinets).
(2) Corporate, business and professional office uses.
(3) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89).
(4) Stormwater detention or retention facilities.
(5) Water storage tanks, towers and reservoirs and related
appurtenances.
(6) Medical office facility (operation of a health center for the provision
of medical, surgical, dental, psychiatric and behavioral care,
whether inpatient or outpatient, and related uses, including,
without limitation, a hospital, outpatient surgery center, urgent
care, medical offices, health club, pharmacy, laboratory, auxiliary
uses such as temporary overnight lodging for employees for use
while on duty only, and complimentary retail uses, such as gift
shop, food and beverage and similar uses reasonably auxiliary to
the operation of a health center) with approval of a payment in lieu
of taxes (PILOT) agreement acceptable to the Village, if any portion
§ 420-125.2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-125.2
344:1128
of the property is exempt from paying Village of Pleasant Prairie
real estate taxes.
C. Auxiliary permitted uses. The following listed auxiliary principal uses,
and certain unspecified auxiliary principal uses as approved pursuant
to Subsection C(5) below, are allowed as permitted uses in the M-5
District:
(1) Retail auxiliary permitted uses. The retail sale of any of the
following goods or products shall be an auxiliary permitted use in a
principal office building or medical office facility in the M-5
District: bakery goods; books; candy; cards; clothing; electronics;
handbags; ice cream; jewelry; leather goods; newspapers and
magazines; office supplies; pharmaceuticals; sundries; shoes; and
tobacco, provided that the following limitations are satisfied: such
uses are auxiliary to the permitted office use(s), in that they are
located in the principal office building, and are designed to serve
the needs of the occupants of the principal office building, and have
no dedicated outside entrance to such building, and have no
signage visible from the exterior of such building, and further
provided that all retail and service auxiliary permitted uses in a
principal office building together shall not occupy more than 10%
of the gross floor area of such building, all subject to the
requirements of Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes.
(2) Service auxiliary permitted uses. The following service uses shall
be auxiliary permitted uses in a principal office building or medical
office facility in the M-5 District: barbershop; coffeehouse; day care
(for children or adults) not open to the general public; dry-cleaning
service; financial institution; fitness center not open to the general
public; museum; photocopying center; photograph developing and
printing; restaurant (not including a drive-in restaurant or a
restaurant with drive-through facility); and shoe shine or repair
service, provided that the following limitations are satisfied: such
uses are auxiliary to the permitted office use(s), in that they are
located in the principal office building, and are designed to serve
the needs of the occupants of the principal office building, and have
no dedicated outside entrance to such building, and have no
signage visible from the exterior of such building, and further
provided that all service and retail auxiliary permitted uses in a
principal office building together shall not occupy more than 10%
of the gross floor area of such building, all subject to the
requirements of Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes.
(3) Warehouse and distribution auxiliary permitted uses. The
warehouse and distribution auxiliary uses which are permitted in
the M-5 District are uses classified as Storage Group S in Section
311 of the 2006 IBC that are not classified as a Group H Hazard
pursuant to Section 307 of the 2006 IBC shall be auxiliary
§ 420-125.2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-125.2
344:1129
permitted uses in a building in the M-5 District, provided that all of
the following limitations shall be satisfied:
(a) Such uses are auxiliary to the permitted manufacturing or
research and development use(s), in that they are located in
the principal building;
(b) All warehouse and distribution auxiliary permitted uses in a
principal building together shall not occupy more than 30% of
the gross floor area of such building, except that the building
occupant's storage of raw materials and finished products
assembled or produced on site shall be exempt from this thirtypercent
requirement;
(c) The building facade area of dock doors is limited to a total of
25% of the building exterior walls; and
(d) Such uses are subject to the requirements of Article IX and all
other applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village
ordinances and codes.
(4) Corporate campus auxiliary permitted uses. The following auxiliary
uses are permitted within a corporate campus development either
within any building or a separate standalone building within the
corporate campus. A "corporate campus" for this section is defined
as a development with multiple buildings on a single lot, provided
that a minimum of 60% of the gross floor area of all of the buildings
within the campus development is being developed as permitted
uses listed in Subsection B(1) and (2) on a single lot with Village
approval of a Master Conceptual Plan. As a part of the Master
Conceptual Plan, the Village Board may, on a case-by-case basis,
allow for buildings to be constructed and occupied in phases
pursuant to an approved development agreement, wherein
reasonable conditions for the development construction are made
and reasonable time frames for the required permitted uses to be
constructed and occupied within the corporate campus
development are required.
(a) Retail auxiliary permitted uses. The retail sale of any of the
following goods or products: bakery goods; books; candy;
cards; clothing; electronics; handbags; ice cream; jewelry;
leather goods; newspapers and magazines; office supplies;
pharmaceuticals; sundries; shoes; and tobacco, provided that
the following limitations are satisfied: such uses are auxiliary
to the permitted use(s), in that they are designed to serve the
needs of the occupants of the corporate campus occupants and
the needs of the general public, provided that they are subject
to the requirements of Article IX and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances and
codes.
§ 420-125.2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-125.2
344:1130
(b) Retreat center or corporate retreat center, with or without
overnight stays in a separate building on the property of the
permitted use or within the same building as the permitted use
on the property.
(c) Service auxiliary permitted uses. The following service uses:
barbershop; coffeehouse; day care (for children or adults) not
open to the general public; dry-cleaning service; financial
institution; fitness center not open to the general public;
museum; photocopying center; photograph developing and
printing; restaurant (not including a drive-in restaurant or a
restaurant with drive-through facility); and shoe shine or
repair service, provided that the following limitations are
satisfied: such uses are auxiliary to the permitted use(s), in
that they are designed to serve the needs of the corporate
campus occupants and the general public, provided that they
are subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village
ordinances and codes.
(d) Warehouse and distribution uses within a corporate campus
are permitted auxiliary to permitted manufacturing use(s) on
the lot to the extent all warehouse and distribution auxiliary
uses within the corporate campus shall not occupy more than
30% of the gross floor area of all of the buildings on the lot,
except that the buildings' occupants' storage of raw materials
and finished products assembled or produced on the site shall
be exempt from this 30% requirement, the building facade
area of dock doors is limited to a total of 25% of any building's
exterior walls, and such uses are subject to the requirements of
Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of other Village ordinances and codes.
(5) Unspecified permitted auxiliary uses. The Zoning Administrator
shall have authority to approve, as an auxiliary permitted use, a
proposed principal use not listed in Subsection C(1), (2), (3) or (4)
above, if the proposed use is similar in character to one or more of
the listed auxiliary permitted uses in the M-5 District, the use
satisfies all of the limitations of this Subsection C above and is free
of potential problems requiring special regulation. The Zoning
Administrator shall make written findings supporting any such
decision. Notwithstanding the foregoing authorization, the
following uses shall not be construed to be auxiliary permitted uses
in the M-5 District:
(a) Any adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult
movie theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or
adult viewing facility.
(b) Anhydrous ammonia (bulk storage facility or retail sale).
§ 420-125.2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-125.2
344:1131
(c) Asbestos (storage of).
(d) Animal hospitals, kennels and pounds.
(e) Any cabaret.
(f) Car wash (commercial).
(g) Concrete and asphalt batch plants.
(h) Dry cabaret.
(i) Fertilizer (production, sales, storage, mixing or blending).
(j) Feed mills.
(k) Fireworks (manufacturing, storage or sale).
(l) Flea markets.
(m) Gas stations with or without a car wash (commercial).
(n) Greenhouse.
(o) Hotel.
(p) Liquor store.
(q) Livestock sale facilities.
(r) Motel.
(s) Nursery.
(t) Pawnshop.
(u) Petroleum bulk stations and terminals.
(v) Psychic/tarot card/astrology reading.
(w) Refuse incineration.
(x) Slaughterhouse.
(y) Tavern.
(z) Tires (production or bulk storage).
(aa) Truck stop and/or truck service facility.
(bb)Wrecking, junk, demolition and scrap yards.
D. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the M-5 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B or C above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
M-5 District and is free of potential problems requiring special
§ 420-125.2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-125.2
344:1132
regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings
supporting any such decision. Any use so approved shall be subject
to all requirements of Subsection B or C above. Notwithstanding the
foregoing authorization, the following uses shall not be construed to be
permitted uses in the M-5 District:
(1) Any listed permitted use or conditional use or unspecified
permitted use specified in any other district that is not expressly
listed in Subsection B above.
(2) Any use involving the serving or selling of alcoholic beverages that
is not specifically listed in Subsection B or C above.
(3) Any adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility.
(4) Any use classified as a High-Hazard Group H use pursuant to
Section 307 of the 2006 IBC that involves the manufacturing,
processing, generation or storage of materials that constitute a
physical or health hazard in quantities in excess of those allowed in
control areas constructed and located as required in Section 414 of
the 2006 IBC.
E. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses in the M-5 District (as principal uses or accessory uses, as
appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village ordinances
and codes:
(1) Retail or wholesale of merchandise manufactured or stored within
the building, provided that the retail or wholesale use is not
classified as a High-Hazard Group H pursuant to Section 307 of the
2006 IBC.
(2) Day-care facilities, either for children or adults, that are open to the
general public.
(3) Miscellaneous uses. The following miscellaneous uses may be
permitted as conditional uses in the M-5 District:
(a) (Reserved)
(b) Electric power or gas metering substation (only as a principal
use on its own lot).
(c) Heliport pad.
(d) Outside storage.
(e) Transmission line (electric power or natural gas).
§ 420-125.2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-125.2
344:1133
(f) Utility substation building (only as a principal use on its own
lot).
(g) Wind energy conversion systems.
F. Special licensed uses. Some uses require a special license approved by
the Village Board and may only be operated pursuant to and in
accordance with such license. The granting of a Village license by the
Village Board is not assured either by permitted use status or by the
granting of a conditional use permit or of any other permit or approval
under this chapter.
G. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in
this section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the M-5
District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance with
each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions are
applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the M-5 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the M-5 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the M-5 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the M-5 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time when
the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the M-5 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the M-5 District and
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
building in the M-5 District; provided, however, that the area of a
building occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory
uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which any
proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of
the time when the conditional use permit for such conditional use
or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed
only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 420-125.2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-125.2
344:1134
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the M-5 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 13-22 (June 17, 2013) and any related
accessory uses existing as of such date may be continued in the
same principal building along with other existing agricultural
related uses; provided, however, that no nonconforming use and no
accessory use to a nonconforming use may be extended or
expanded into new areas, and no new accessory use related to such
nonconforming use (and no prior accessory use to such
nonconforming use that has been discontinued as an actively
conducted use for a period of 12 or more consecutive months) may
be commenced or recommenced, and further provided that the
area of a building occupied by a nonconforming use and any related
accessory uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which
any proposed new use of any kind shall be prohibited.
H. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the M-5 District are allowed,
subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the M-5 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the M-5
District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in accordance
with a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this
chapter.
(2) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
(3) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
I. Temporary uses. Temporary uses may be allowed in the M-5 District
pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter.
J. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the M-5
District by this chapter as specified in the foregoing sections are
prohibited in the M-5 District. However, where a use is proposed for a
purpose that is not specifically provided in Chapter 3 of the 2006 IBC
and is not specifically listed as a prohibited use in the M-5 District
regulations, such uses shall be classified in the group that the
occupancy most clearly resembles, according to the firesafety and
relative hazard involved. The Zoning Administrator shall make the final
determination if the use is allowed within the M-5 District.
§ 420-125.2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-125.2
344:1135
K. Dimensional standards. Except as specifically provided in this chapter,
and without limitations, all uses, sites, buildings and structures in the
M-5 District shall comply with the following dimensional standards to
the extent applicable.
(1) Lot size: two acres minimum, except that the minimum lot size for a
freestanding commercial communication structure or a utility
substation building shall be as prescribed by § 420-148 of this
chapter, and further provided that no minimum lot size shall be
applicable to transmission lines.
(2) Lot frontage. Lot frontage on a public street: 150 feet minimum;
however, for that on a substantial curve or cul-de-sac, the public
street frontage may be reduced as necessary to an absolute
minimum of 100 feet if all other requirements are satisfied, except
that the minimum lot frontage on a public street for a freestanding
communication structure or a utility substation building shall be as
prescribed by § 420-148 of this chapter, and further provided that
no minimum lot frontage on a public street shall be applicable to
transmission lines.
(3) Open space: 25% minimum.
(4) Building standards:
(a) Gross floor area. No maximum or minimum building area shall
be required in the M-5 District due to the variety of uses within
this district and the diverse building demands of each use.
(b) Principal building height: 60 feet maximum; however, the
height of a principal building or part thereof may be increased
to a maximum of 100 feet in height, provided that for every one
foot above 60 feet, said principal structure shall be set back an
additional 1.5 feet from all property lines.
(c) Accessory building height: 30 feet maximum.
(d) Setbacks. The following setbacks shall be considered to be
minimum setbacks; greater setback may be required by state
building codes.
[1] Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads for buildings.
[2] Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake
Michigan, 35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable
waterways.
[3] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
[4] Side setback: 45 feet minimum for all buildings.
§ 420-125.2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-125.2
344:1136
[5] Rear setback: 45 feet minimum for all buildings.
[6] Separation distance between all buildings: 45 feet
minimum.
L. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the M-5 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Number of principal structures per lot: no limit.
(2) Number of detached accessory buildings: no limit.
(3) Fences may be allowed pursuant to § 420-81; however, chain-link
fences shall be vinyl-coated and the color shall be black, earth
tones or complementary to the color of the building.
(4) Dock doors may face a public street; only under special
circumstances with an approved screening and maintenance plan
as approved by the Plan Commission. [Amended 3-18-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-07]
(5) All accessory uses or structures shall be on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(6) Principal building standards. All facades that are visible to and
facing the public street and any portions of the building with office
uses shall provide architectural details and elements such as but
not limited to varying roof heights, varying fenestration and other
appropriate architectural elements. In addition, the office area of
the building shall have an appearance of a two-story building.
(7) Principal office building standards (for stand-alone corporate,
business, professional office buildings where no manufacturing,
distribution and/or warehouse activities are conducted in the office
building):
(a) Each principal office building shall have a minimum of two
floors above grade.
(b) The gross floor area of a principal office building shall be a
minimum of 24,000 square feet, and each of the first two floors
above grade shall have a gross floor area of at least 10,000
square feet.
(c) The gross floor area for all auxiliary permitted uses within a
principal office building shall not exceed 10% of the gross floor
area of such building.
(d) Height: 30 feet minimum.
(8) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter, except as provided below:
§ 420-125.2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-125.2
344:1137
(a) Buildings shall comply with the facade design requirements in
this subsection. The Village Zoning Administrator shall have
the discretion to adjust the minimum glazed area percentages
set forth below among various facades of a building so long as
all facades, taken together, satisfy the minimum glazed area
percentages (for example, any individual facade may be less
than the minimum so long as one or more of the other facades
exceeds the minimum such that the total glazed area for all
facades equals or exceeds the minimum glazed area
percentages); provided, however, that the glazing on the sides
visible from the public streets or highways outside the district
shall not be less than stated minimum percentages.
[1] Manufacturing. Portions of the building used for
manufacturing or directly related warehousing and/or
distribution uses, as defined in Subsection C(3)(b) above,
shall have a minimum glazed area (calculated on the basis
of all manufacturing or directly related warehousing and/
or distribution building facade areas) of 5%.
[2] Office building(s). Portions of the building used for
business office or research and development uses shall
have a minimum glazed area (calculated on the basis of all
office or research and development building facade areas)
of 25%.
[3] Parking garages. Parking garages shall have entry and exit
stairwells and lobbies that are visible from the exterior,
and any such areas visible from the exterior shall have a
minimum glazed area of 25%.
[4] Utility substations; utility substation building. Utility
substations and utility substation buildings shall have no
minimum glazing requirement.
(b) Construction materials. Principal buildings, accessory
buildings, parking garages and any penthouse areas associated
with such building or structure shall comply with the following
requirements for construction materials:
[1] Glazed area. The following requirements apply to all
glazed areas:
[a] Glazed areas may be tinted or clear glass. Mirrored
glass is prohibited.
[b] Anodized or powder-coated aluminum curtain wall
systems, storefront systems and accents are allowed.
[c] Stainless steel, bronze or brass curtain wall systems.
Storefront systems and accents are allowed.
§ 420-125.2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-125.2
344:1138
[d] Anodized or powder-coated aluminum metal panels or
other metal panels are allowed if integral to window
wall or curtain wall systems or if used for trim, soffits,
canopy, sun protection systems or mechanical
penthouses.
[e] Door frames. Door frames shall complement window
frames in material, finish and color.
[2] Nonglazed area. The nonglazed areas of any building in
this district shall comply with the standard in
§ 420-57H(2)(g). Additionally, architectural precast
concrete panels, through the application/addition of
certain finishing elements (e.g., reveals, relief, and
dimension), finish, shape, color or texture shall contribute
to the architectural form, style and aesthetics or the
structure. Architectural precast concrete may be
structural (e.g., load-bearing element) and/or decorative
(e.g., building cladding) and may be conventionally
reinforced or prestressed. Architectural precast concrete
panels shall not result in plain, blank walls.
[3] Roofs (architectural features). Section 420-57H(2)(i) shall
not apply. Architectural roof features or forms shall be
copper or zinc-coated aluminum metal panels or slate or
architecturally painted metal panels.
[4] Mechanical screening. All mechanical units, ground or
roof-mounted, shall be screened from public view by either
landscaping or other approved high-quality architecturalgrade
metal screening or panels as specifically approved
by the Plan Commission.
(9) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(10) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(11) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(12) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
M. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the M-5 District shall comply with the following operational
standards to the extent applicable:
§ 420-125.2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-125.2
344:1139
§ 420-126. I-1 Institutional District. [Amended 3-3-2008 by Ord. No.
08-11]
(1) Hours of operation (when the public is allowed to enter or remain
on site for business purposes):
(a) From 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight maximum for corporate,
business and professional office uses, and service or retail uses
allowed as auxiliary permitted uses; for any day-care facilities,
either for children or adults that are open to the general
public, as may be allowed by a conditional use permit.
(b) All other uses: no limit.
(2) Hours for deliveries, or any other activities outside the principal
building (e.g., outside loading or unloading, the arrival of
deliveries, idling of delivery trucks, beeping of backing vehicles,
and garbage pickup), except for snow removal:
(a) 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. maximum for corporate, business and
professional office uses, and service or retail uses allowed as
auxiliary permitted uses; for any day-care facilities, either for
children or adults, as may be allowed by a conditional use
permit.
(b) All other uses: no limit.
(3) Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter under a
conditional use granted by the Village, all activities shall be
conducted within a building.
(4) No on-site residential uses are allowed.
(5) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(6) Each site, building and structure shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(7) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
N. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
O. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
§ 420-125.2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-126
344:1140
A. Purpose and characteristics. The I-1 Institutional District is intended to
provide for areas which are under private or public ownership and
where the uses in those areas for public purposes or institutional
purposes, whether public or private, are anticipated to serve the needs
of the community. No such district shall be established unless it is in
compliance with duly adopted or amended comprehensive,
neighborhood and conceptual plans.
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses, and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below,
are allowed as permitted uses in the I-1 District, subject to the
requirements of Article IX of this chapter and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter and other Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Administrative offices for public or private schools, colleges,
universities, or technology academies.
(2) Health services, including offices of state-licensed health
practitioners such as doctors, dentists or chiropractors, medical
and dental laboratories, outpatient care facilities and other health
and allied services operated by state-licensed health practitioners.
(3) Hospice facilities.
(4) Hospitals.
(5) Financial institutions with or without a drive-through facility.
(6) Libraries, museums and art galleries.
(7) Nursing homes.
(8) Office or clinic uses such as accounting; architectural; dental;
engineering; financial services; information services; insurance;
legal; medical (but no ambulance service); or real estate.
(9) Post offices and postal stores.
(10) Public administrative offices and public service buildings, including
fire and police stations, community centers, public emergency
shelters, weigh stations and welcome centers.
(11) Public or private community development organizations.
(12) Public or private schools, colleges, universities, technology
academies.
(13) Public utility offices.
(14) Retail sale of religious affiliated merchandise.
(15) Stormwater retention and detention facilities.
(16)Water storage tanks, towers and reservoirs and related
appurtenances.
§ 420-126 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-126
344:1141
(17) The retail sale of any of the following goods or products is a
permitted use in the I-1 District, provided that the retail area is less
than 2,000 square feet and that the retail use was in operation as of
April 21, 2008, and further provided that the retail use does not
cease its operations for more than 12 consecutive months:
antiques; apparel; art; art supplies; audio recordings; bakery
goods; books; candy; cameras and photographic supplies; cards;
cosmetics; eyeglasses and related products; fabric; flowers;
frames; gifts; glassware; groceries (without alcoholic beverages as
package goods in a grocery store or convenience store); hardware;
hobby and craft supplies; ice cream; jewelry; novelties; musical
instruments and accessories; newspapers and magazines; office
supplies; prepared food not for consumption on the premises; shoes
and accessories; souvenirs; sundries; telephones; toys; and video
recordings. [Added 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-21]
(18) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the I-1 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the I-1
District and is free of potential problems requiring special regulation.
The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings supporting any
such decision. Any use so approved shall be subject to all requirements
of Subsection B above. Notwithstanding the foregoing authorization,
and without limitation, the following uses shall not be construed to be
permitted uses in the I-1 District:
(1) Any listed permitted use in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or B-5 District that
is not listed in Subsection B above.
(2) Any listed conditional use in the I-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or B-5
District.
(3) Any listed unspecified permitted use listed in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4,
or B-5 District that is not listed in Subsection B above.
(4) Adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility.
D. Conditional uses. The following listed uses may be permitted as
conditional uses in the I-1 District (as principal uses or accessory uses,
as appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and other Village ordinances and
codes:
§ 420-126 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-126
344:1142
(1) Airport, heliport pads, aircraft hangars for storage and equipment
maintenance, and aircraft sales and service. [See also
§ 420-148B(2).]
(2) Auditoriums, gymnasiums, arenas and stadiums (as a principal
use).
(3) Bus terminals. [See also § 420-148B(12).]
(4) Cemeteries. [See also § 420-148B(14).]
(5) Day-care facilities, either for children or adults.
(6) Dormitories related to churches, schools, universities or colleges.
(7) Funeral home, with or without a crematorium.
(8) Mausoleums.
(9) Municipal composting and recycling facilities.
(10) Municipal landfills.
(11) Penal, reform, disciplinary and mental health institutions. [See also
§ 420-148B(77).]
(12)Railroad depots. [See also § 420-148B(86).]
(13) Religious institutions, including churches, convents, seminaries,
rectories, parsonages, parish houses and residential quarters for
clergy.
(14) Sanitariums.
(15) Shelters and food pantry facilities.
(16) Televisions and radio stations.
(17) Temporary classroom structures. [See also § 420-148B(115).]
(18) Veterinarian emergency service offices. [See also
§ 420-148B(120.1)].
(19) Veterinarian offices.
(20)Wind energy conversion systems. [See also § 420-148B(123).]
(21) Miscellaneous uses. The following miscellaneous uses may be
permitted as conditional uses in the I-1 District:
(a) (Reserved)163
(b) Electric power substation or gas-metering substation.
163. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(21)(a), concerning commercial communication
antennas and like devices, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-126 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-126
344:1143
(c) Outside storage or display of merchandise.164 [Added
3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 16-02]
(d) Transmission lines (electric power or natural gas).
(e) Utility substations and utility substation buildings. [Amended
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-22]
E. Special licensed uses. Uses requiring a license by the Village Board
(including nonconforming uses) may only be conducted pursuant to and
in accordance with such a license. The granting of a Village license by
the Village Board is not assured either by permitted use status or by the
granting of a conditional use permit or of any other permit or approval
under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the I-1
District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance with
each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions are
applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the I-1 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the I-1 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the I-1 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the I-1 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time when
the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the I-1 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the I-1 District and
their related accessory uses may be located separately or together,
and may be conducted separately or together, in the same principal
building in the I-1 District; provided, however, that the area of a
building occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory
uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which any other
164. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(21)(c), concerning freestanding commercial
communication structures, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-126 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-126
344:1144
use or any proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind
existing as of the time when the conditional use permit for such
conditional use or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall
be allowed only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional
use permit issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of
this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the I-1 District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 08-11 (March 3, 2008), and any related
accessory uses as of such date, may be continued in the same
principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the I-1 District are allowed,
subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the I-1 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the I-1
District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in accordance
with a conditional use permit issued under Article XVIII of this
chapter.
(2) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
(3) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
H. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the I-1 District
by this chapter are prohibited in the I-1 District.
I. Dimensional standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and
§ 420-126 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-126
344:1145
structures in the I-1 District shall comply with the following
dimensional standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: one acre minimum, except as provided below:
(a) The lot size for a water storage tank, tower and reservoirs;
freestanding commercial communications structure; utility
substation; or a utility substation building shall be large
enough to accommodate the required setback and open space
requirements. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-22]
(b) There is no minimum lot size for transmission lines.
(2) Lot frontage on a public street: 150 feet minimum; provided,
however, that on a substantial curve, the public street frontage may
be reduced as necessary to an absolute minimum of 100 feet if all
other requirements are satisfied, except as provided below:
(a) The minimum lot frontage on a public street for a water
storage tank, freestanding commercial communications
structure or a utility substation shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
(b) No lot frontage on a public street is required for transmission
lines.
(3) Open space: 30% minimum.
(4) Building standards:
(a) No maximum or minimum building area shall be required in
the I-1 Institutional District due to the variety of uses within
this district and the diverse building demands of each use.
(b) Height. Except as expressly allowed in this chapter, the
maximum height shall be 35 feet. However, the Village Plan
Commission may allow, on a case-by-case basis, the height of a
building to increase up to 60 feet, and further provided that the
Plan Commission shall have the authority to require greater
setbacks for buildings that exceed 35 feet.
(5) Setbacks:
(a) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways, and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(b) Side setback: 25 feet minimum.
(c) Rear setback: 25 feet minimum.
(d) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35
feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways.
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
§ 420-126 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-126
344:1146
(e) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum.
(f) Separation distances between structures: as required by the
current commercial building code effective in the Village.
[Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-66]
(6) School, church or day-care centers for children are allowed in the
I-1 District, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village
ordinances and codes, provided that the physically separate
defined area of the building in which a school, church or day-care
center for children use is proposed to be commenced or expanded
shall be not less than 300 feet in a direct line from the nearest lot
line of any lot on which any adult-oriented use is located or has a
vested right to locate.
J. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the I-1 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) All accessory uses shall be on the same lot or approved site as the
principal use, except for shared off-street parking or access
pursuant to Article VIII of this chapter.
(2) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter.
(3) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(4) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(5) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(6) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
K. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the I-1 District shall comply with the following operational standards
to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation (when the public is allowed to enter or remain
on site for business purposes): 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight
maximum, except for uses requiring a Village liquor license as
provided in § 125.68(4), Wis. Stats., and the following uses have no
limits: any residential use listed as a permitted use or a conditional
use in the I-1 District, hospitals, hospice facilities, nursing homes,
fire and police stations, public emergency shelters, veterinarian
§ 420-126 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-126
344:1147
§ 420-127. PR-1 Neighborhood Park-Recreational District.
[Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09; 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-20]
emergency services office, weigh stations and welcome centers. In
addition, the Village Plan Commission may allow, on a case-by-case
basis, other I-1 uses to increase their hours of operation from 12:00
midnight to 5:00 a.m.
(2) Hours for deliveries, or any other activities outside the principal
building that might cause a disturbance to neighboring residential
areas (e.g., outside loading or unloading, the arrival of deliveries,
the idling of delivery trucks, the beeping of backing vehicles, and
garbage pickup), except for snow removal: 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
maximum.
(3) Except as otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter, under a
conditional use permit granted by the Village, all business activities
shall be conducted within a building. [Amended 3-7-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-02]
(4) (Reserved)165
(5) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(6) Each building, structure and site shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(7) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
L. Municipal services required. Except as otherwise specifically provided
in this chapter, and without limitation, no proposed new, reconstructed
or relocated principal building shall be permitted in the I-1 District
unless it is connected to the Village's public sewer and water systems,
and any existing principal building not already connected to the
Village's public sewer and water shall be so connected before any
addition is made to such building, or before any proposed change in the
use of such building is made from one use category to another (e.g.,
residential to institutional), and before any proposed use is commenced
or recommenced in such a building that has been vacant or unused for
12 consecutive months or longer.
165. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection K(4), concerning outside storage or display of
merchandise, was repealed 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 16-02.
§ 420-126 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-127
344:1148
A. Purpose and characteristics. The PR-1 Neighborhood Park-Recreational
District is intended to provide for areas for stormwater facilities and
other limited recreational and open space uses. No such district shall
be established unless it is in compliance with duly adopted or amended
comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual plans.
B. Principal uses. The following listed principal uses, and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below,
are allowed as permitted uses in the PR-1 District, subject to the
requirements of Article IX of this chapter and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter and other Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Stormwater detention or retention facilities; provided, however,
that the detention or retention facility is not used for recreational
purposes, such as, but not limited to, boating, fishing, ice skating or
swimming.
(2) Limited recreational and open space uses, including beaches;
bicycling, hiking and nature trails and walks; boat access sites;
boating; cross country ski trails; fishing; historic monuments or
sites; picnic areas; playgrounds and tot lots; play fields/courts or
athletic fields/courts; rollerblading; skating areas; sledding or
tobogganing areas; outdoor swimming areas.
(3) Pavilions, gazebos, other shelters or maintenance buildings and
temporary restroom facilities.
(4) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the PR-1 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
PR-1 District and is free of potential problems requiring special
regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings
supporting any such decision. Any use so approved shall be subject to
all requirements of Subsection B above. Notwithstanding the foregoing
authorization, and without limitation, the following uses shall not be
construed to be permitted uses in the PR-1 District:
(1) Any listed permitted use in any other zoning district that is not
listed in Subsection B above.
(2) Any listed conditional use in any other zoning district that is not
listed in Subsection B above.
(3) Any listed unspecified permitted use listed in any other zoning
district that is not listed in Subsection B above.
(4) Any adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
§ 420-127 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-127
344:1149
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility.
D. Conditional uses. The following listed uses may be permitted as
conditional uses in the PR-1 District (as principal uses or accessory
uses, as appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII
of this chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and other Village ordinances and
codes:
(1) Indoor swimming pools.
(2) Restroom facilities (permanent).
(3) Transmission lines (electric power or natural gas).
E. Special licensed uses. Some uses require a special license approved by
the Village Board and may only be operated pursuant to and in
accordance with such license. The granting of a Village license by the
Village Board is not assured either by permitted use status or by the
granting of a conditional use permit or of any other permit or approval
under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the
PR-1 District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of
this chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance
with each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions
are applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the PR-1 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the PR-1 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the PR-1 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the PR-1 District; provided,
however, that the area of a building occupied by a conditional use
and any related accessory uses shall be a physically separate
defined area in which any proposed new use of any kind (or any use
of any kind existing as of the time when the conditional use permit
for such conditional use or any amendment of such permit is
approved) shall be allowed only pursuant to and in accordance with
the conditional use permit issued for such conditional use under
Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the PR-1 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the PR-1 District
and their related accessory uses may be located separately or
§ 420-127 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-127
344:1150
together, and may be conducted separately or together, in the same
principal building in the PR-1 District; provided, however, that the
area occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses
shall be a physically separate defined area in which any other
use or any proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind
existing as of the time when the conditional use permit for such
conditional use or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall
be allowed only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional
use permit issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of
this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the PR-1 District may be continued
in the same principal building with other uses; provided, however,
that no nonconforming use and no accessory use to a
nonconforming use may be extended or expanded into new areas,
and no new accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and
no prior accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the PR-1 District are allowed,
subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the PR-1 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the
PR-1 District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in
accordance with a conditional use permit issued under Article
XVIII of this chapter.
(2) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
(3) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
H. Temporary uses. Temporary uses may be allowed in the PR-1 District
pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter.
§ 420-127 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-127
344:1151
I. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the PR-1
District by this chapter as specified in the forgoing sections are
prohibited in the PR-1 District.
J. Dimensional standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and
structures in the PR-1 District shall comply with the following
dimensional standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: shall provide for sufficient area for the proposed uses and
associated structures, parking, open space and setback
requirements.
(2) Lot frontage on a public or private street: 45 feet minimum.
(3) Open space: 75% minimum.
(4) No building or part of a building shall exceed 20 feet in height.
(5) Maximum building area: 1,000 square feet per building.
(6) Setbacks, unless otherwise specified:
(a) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(b) Side setback: 40 feet minimum, except of tennis courts or
sports courts 20 feet minimum.
(c) Rear setback: 40 feet minimum, except of tennis courts or
sports courts 20 feet minimum.
(d) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan,
provided that the shore remains stabilized and protected, and
35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways.
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(e) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum, unless a greater setback is
required by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(f) Setback between structures: 20 feet minimum.
(g) Setback for retention or detention facilities: minimum of 10
feet from the normal water elevation of the facility unless
greater setbacks are required by the Village to provide
adequate access to the facility and to ensure that all required
landscape, utility or other required easements are provided
above the normal water elevation of the facility.
K. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the PR-1 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
§ 420-127 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-127
344:1152
§ 420-127.1. PR-2 Community Park-Recreational District. [Added
3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-10; amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21]
(1) All accessory uses or structures shall be on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(2) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter, except that the Zoning Administrator may allow other
building materials as may be appropriate for the building type and
particular use.
(3) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(4) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(5) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(6) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
L. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the PR-1 District shall comply with the following operational
standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation (when the public is allowed to enter or remain
on site for recreational and maintenance purposes): 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m. maximum, or as approved by the Village.
(2) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(3) Each site, building and structure shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(4) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
M. Municipal services required.
(1) Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
(2) Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
§ 420-127 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-127.1
344:1153
A. Purpose and characteristics. The PR-2 Community Park-Recreational
District is intended to provide for public or private park, open space and
recreational uses to serve the adjacent neighborhoods or the entire
community. The PR-2 District shall be at least five acres and may
incorporate other natural features such as wetlands, woodlands,
shorelands, floodplains and other resources that may be zoned C-1
Lowland Resource Conservancy District; C-2 Upland Resource
Conservancy District; or FPO Floodplain Overlay District. No such
district shall be established unless it is in compliance with duly adopted
or amended comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual plans.
B. Principal uses. The following listed principal uses and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below
are allowed as permitted uses in the PR-2 District, subject to the
requirements of Article IX of this chapter and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter and other Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Outdoor recreational facilities and activities, including beaches;
bicycling, hiking and nature trails and walks; cross-country ski
trails; historic monuments or sites; picnic areas; playgrounds and
tot lots; play fields/courts and athletic fields/courts; rollerblading;
and swimming or other water-related activities; skating rinks; and
sledding and tobogganing areas.
(2) (Reserved)166
(3) Indoor swimming pools.
(4) Pavilions, gazebos or other shelters and maintenance buildings.
(5) Nature or education centers.
(6) Restaurants/snack bars (with or without outdoor seating, but not
including a restaurant/snack bars where alcoholic beverages are
served or sold, with a dedicated bar, with a drive-in, with a drivethrough
facility, or with a dedicated brewing facility).
(7) Stormwater detention or retention facilities; provided, however,
that the detention or retention facility is not used for recreational
purposes such as, but not limited to, boating, fishing, ice skating or
swimming.
(8) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the PR-2 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
PR-2 District and if the use is free of potential problems requiring
166. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), Dry cabarets, was repealed 5-17-2010 by Ord. No.
10-30.
§ 420-127.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-127.1
344:1154
special regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make written
findings supporting any such decision. Any use so approved shall be
subject to all requirements of Subsection B. Notwithstanding the
foregoing authorization, the following uses shall not be construed to be
permitted uses in the PR-2 District:
(1) Any listed permitted use in any other zoning district that is not
listed in Subsection B above.
(2) Any listed conditional use in any other zoning district that is not
listed in Subsection B above.
(3) Any listed unspecified permitted use listed in any other zoning
district that is not listed in Subsection B above.
(4) Any use involving the serving or selling of alcoholic beverages that
is not specifically listed in Subsection B above or Subsection D
below.
(5) Any adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility.
D. Conditional uses The following listed uses may be permitted as
conditional uses in the PR-2 District (as principal uses or accessory
uses, as appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII
of this chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and other Village ordinances and
codes:
(1) Archery ranges.
(2) Boat rentals.
(3) Cabaret or a dry cabaret. [Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No.
10-30]
(4) Campgrounds.
(5) (Reserved)167
(6) Equestrian trails.
(7) Golf courses.
(8) Golf driving ranges.
(9) Marinas.
(10) Miniature golf courses.
167. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(5), listing commercial communications structures,
was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-127.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-127.1
344:1155
(11)Off-road vehicular trails.
(12) Residential quarters for owner, proprietor, employee or caretaker
located on the premises.
(13) Restaurants/snack bars (whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served or sold, and with or without outdoor seating, with or without
a dedicated bar but not including a restaurant/snack bar with a
drive-in, with a drive-through facility, or with a dedicated brewing
facility).
(14) Sportsmen's clubs.
(15) Summer theaters, amphitheaters and band shells.
(16) Transmission lines (electric power or natural gas).
(17) Utility substations and utility substation buildings. [Amended
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-22]
(18)Wind energy conservation systems.
(19) Zoological and botanical gardens.
E. Special licensed uses. Some uses require a special license approved by
the Village Board and may only be operated pursuant to and in
accordance with such license. The granting of a Village license by the
Village Board is not assured either by permitted use status or by the
granting of a conditional use permit or of any other permit or approval
under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the
PR-2 District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of
this chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance
with each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions
are applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the PR-2 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the PR-2 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the PR-2 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the PR-2 District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time when
§ 420-127.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-127.1
344:1156
the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the PR-2 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the PR-2 District
and their related accessory uses may be located separately or
together, and may be conducted separately or together, in the same
principal building in the PR-2 District; provided, however, that the
area of a building occupied by a conditional use and any related
accessory uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which
any other use or any proposed new use of any kind (or any use of
any kind existing as of the time when the conditional use permit for
such conditional use or any amendment of such permit is approved)
shall be allowed only pursuant to and in accordance with the
conditional use permit issued for such conditional use under Article
XVIII of this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the PR-2 District may be continued
in the same principal building with other uses; provided, however,
that no nonconforming use and no accessory use to a
nonconforming use may be extended or expanded into new areas,
and no new accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and
no prior accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the PR-2 District are allowed,
subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the PR-2 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the
PR-2 District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in
accordance with a conditional use permit issued under Article
XVIII of this chapter.
(2) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
§ 420-127.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-127.1
344:1157
(3) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
H. Temporary uses. Temporary uses may be allowed in the PR-2 District
pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter.
I. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the PR-2
District by this chapter as specified in the foregoing sections are
prohibited in the PR-2 District.
J. Dimensional standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and
structures in the PR-2 District shall comply with the following
dimensional standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: shall provide for sufficient area for the proposed uses and
associated structures, parking, open space and setback
requirements.
(2) Lot frontage on a public or private street: 45 feet minimum.
(3) Open space: 75% minimum.
(4) No building or part of a building shall exceed 40 feet in height.
(5) No maximum or minimum building area is required due to the
variety of uses within this district and the diverse building demands
of each use.
(6) Setbacks, unless otherwise specified:
(a) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(b) Side setback: 40 feet minimum, except of tennis courts or
sports courts: 20 feet minimum.
(c) Rear setback: 40 feet minimum, except of tennis courts or
sports courts: 20 feet minimum.
(d) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan,
provided that the shore remains stabilized and protected, and
35 feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways.
[Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(e) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum, unless a greater setback is
required by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(f) Setback between structures: 20 feet minimum.
§ 420-127.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-127.1
344:1158
(g) Setback for retention or detention facilities: minimum of 10
feet from the normal water elevation of the facility unless
greater setbacks are required by the Village to provide
adequate access to the facility and to ensure that all required
landscape, utility or other required easements are provided
above the normal water elevation of the facility.
K. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the PR-2 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) All accessory uses or structures shall be on the same lot or
approved site as the principal use.
(2) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter.
(3) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter.
(4) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
(5) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(6) Swimming pool requirements pursuant to Article XII of this
chapter.
(7) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
L. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the PR-2 District shall comply with the following operational
standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation (when the public is allowed to enter or remain
on site for business purposes): 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. maximum or
as approved by the Village; for uses requiring a Village liquor
license: as provided in § 125.68(4), Wis. Stats.
(2) Hours for deliveries, or any other activities outside the principal
building that might cause a disturbance to neighboring residential
areas (e.g., outside loading or unloading, the arrival of deliveries,
idling of delivery trucks, beeping of backing vehicles, and garbage
pickup), except for snow removal: 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
maximum or as approved by the Village.
§ 420-127.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-127.1
344:1159
§ 420-127.2. PR-3 Regional Park-Recreational District. [Added
3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-10; amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-22]
(3) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(4) Each site, building and structure shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(5) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
M. Municipal services required.
(1) Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
(2) Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Purpose and characteristics. The PR-3 Regional Park-Recreational
District is intended to provide for park, open space and recreational
uses to serve the community and the surrounding region. The PR-3
District shall be at least 200 acres and may incorporate other natural
features such as wetlands, woodlands, shorelands, floodplains and
other resources that may be zoned C-1, C-2, or FPO. No such district
shall be established unless it is in compliance with duly adopted or
amended comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual plans.
B. Principal uses. The following listed principal uses, and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below,
are allowed as permitted uses in the PR-3 District, subject to the
requirements of Article IX of this chapter and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter and other Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Educational uses, including classrooms; child- or adult-care
facilities; preschool facilities; day camps; and nature study areas.
(2) Indoor recreational facilities and activities, including auditoriums;
gymnasiums; ice arenas; dance studios; swimming pools; physical
fitness facilities; spa facilities; cabarets; dry cabarets; and play
fields/courts and athletic fields/courts.
(3) Limited retail uses, including the sale of books; camping supplies;
candy; cameras and photographic supplies; cards; gifts; ice cream;
novelties; newspapers and magazines; prepared food not intended
for consumption on the premises; souvenirs; sporting goods and
apparel; and sundries.
§ 420-127.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-127.2
344:1160
(4) Limited service uses, including bakeries (not selling wholesale);
barbershops; beauty salons; coffeehouses; dry cleaning; financial
institutions; mailing services; sporting equipment rentals; and
tanning salons.
(5) Outdoor recreational facilities and activities, including beaches;
bicycling; hiking and nature trails and walks; boat rental and boat
access sites; cross-country ski trails; archery facilities; firework
displays; fishing; historic monuments or sites; picnic areas;
playgrounds and tot lots; play fields/courts and athletic fields/
courts; miniature golf; skating rinks; roller-blading; sledding and
tobogganing areas; and swimming or other water-related activities.
(6) Public administrative offices and public service buildings, including
fire and police stations, community centers, public emergency
shelters, and welcome centers.
(7) Pavilions, gazebos or other shelters and maintenance buildings.
(8) Restaurants or snack bars (whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served or sold, and with or without outdoor seating, and with or
without a drive-in or a drive-through facility, but not including a
dedicated bar or a dedicated brewing facility).
(9) Stormwater detention or retention facilities; provided, however,
that the detention or retention facility is not used for recreational
purposes such as, but not limited to, boating, fishing, ice skating or
swimming.
(10) Summer theaters, amphitheaters and band shells.
(11) Therapeutic recreational and physical therapy facilities.
(12) Commercial communication structures (as a principal or accessory
use per § 420-89). [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the PR-3 District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
PR-3 District and if the use is free of potential problems requiring
special regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make written
findings supporting any such decision. Any use so approved shall be
subject to all requirements of Subsection B. Notwithstanding the
foregoing authorization, the following uses shall not be construed to be
permitted uses in the PR-3 District:
(1) Any listed permitted uses in the M-1, M-2 or M-3 District that are
not listed in Subsection B above.
(2) Any listed conditional uses in the PR-1, PR-2, PR-3, B-1, B-2, B-3,
B-4, B-5, M-1, M-2, M-3 or I-1 District that are not listed in
Subsection B above.
§ 420-127.2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-127.2
344:1161
(3) Hunting.
(4) Motels.
(5) Indoor/outdoor flea markets. [Amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No.
11-32]
(6) Pawnshops.
(7) Psychic/tarot card/astrology readings.
(8) Sale or storage of fireworks.
(9) Nurseries.
(10) Greenhouses.
(11) Adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility.
D. Conditional uses. The following listed uses may be permitted as
conditional uses in the PR-3 District (as principal uses or accessory
uses, as appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII
of this chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and other Village ordinances and
codes:
(1) Campgrounds.
(2) (Reserved)168
(3) Golf courses.
(4) Golf driving ranges.
(5) Hotels.
(6) Restaurants (with a dedicated bar or a dedicated brewing facility).
(7) Transmission lines (electric power or natural gas).
(8) Utility substations and utility substation buildings. [Amended
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-22]
(9) Wind energy conservation systems.
(10) Zoological and botanical gardens.
E. Special licensed uses. Some uses require a special license approved by
the Village Board and may only be operated pursuant to and in
accordance with such license. The granting of a Village license by the
168. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(2), listing commercial communications structures,
was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
§ 420-127.2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-127.2
344:1162
Village Board is not assured either by permitted use status or by the
granting of a conditional use permit or of any other permit or approval
under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the
PR-3 District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of
this chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance
with each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions
are applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the PR-3 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the PR-3 District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses; provided, however, that the area
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a defined area in which any proposed new use of any kind (or
any use of any kind existing as of the time when the conditional use
permit for such conditional use or any amendment of such permit is
approved) shall be allowed only pursuant to and in accordance with
the conditional use permit issued for such conditional use under
Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the PR-3 District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the PR-3 District
and their related accessory uses may be located separately or
together, and may be conducted separately or together; provided,
however, that the area of a building occupied by a conditional use
and any related accessory uses shall be a defined area in which any
other use or any proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any
kind existing as of the time when the conditional use permit for
such conditional use or any amendment of such permit is approved)
shall be allowed only pursuant to and in accordance with the
conditional use permit issued for such conditional use under Article
XVIII of this chapter.
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the PR-3 District may be continued
in the same principal building with other uses; provided, however,
that no nonconforming use and no accessory use to a
nonconforming use may be extended or expanded into new areas,
and no new accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and
no prior accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
§ 420-127.2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-127.2
344:1163
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the PR-3 District are allowed,
subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the PR-3 District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the
PR-3 District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in
accordance with a conditional use permit issued under Article
XVIII of this chapter.
(2) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is properly
an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to
decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings to
support any such decision.
(3) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
H. Temporary uses. Temporary uses may be allowed in the PR-3 District
pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter.
I. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the PR-3
District by this chapter as specified in the foregoing sections are
prohibited in the PR-3 District.
J. Dimensional standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and
structures in the PR-3 District shall comply with the following
dimensional standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Lot size: 25 acres minimum.
(2) Lot frontage on a public street: 300 feet minimum.
(3) Open space: 75% minimum.
(4) No building or part of a building shall exceed 100 feet in height.
(5) Building height: No maximum or minimum building area shall be
required due to the variety of uses within this district and the
diverse building demands of each use.
(6) Setbacks, unless otherwise specified:
§ 420-127.2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-127.2
344:1164
(a) Street setback: minimum of 40 feet from arterial streets or
highways, and a minimum of 10 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(b) Side setback: 40 feet minimum, except for tennis courts or
sports courts: 20 feet minimum.
(c) Rear setback: 40 feet minimum, except for tennis courts or
sports courts: 20 feet minimum.
(d) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan,
provided that the shore remains stabilized and protected; 35
feet minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways except
Lake Andrea, wherein the shore setback may be reduced to not
less than 10 feet, provided that the shore remains stabilized
and protected. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(e) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum, unless a greater setback is
required by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(f) Setback between structures: 20 feet minimum.
(g) Setback for retention or detention facilities: minimum of 10
feet from the normal water elevation of the facility unless
greater setbacks are required by the Village to provide
adequate access to the facility and to ensure that all required
landscape, utility or other required easements are provided
above the normal water elevation of the facility.
K. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the PR-3 District shall comply with the following design standards to
the extent applicable:
(1) Site and operational plan requirements pursuant to Article IX of
this chapter, except that the Zoning Administrator may allow other
building materials as may be appropriate for the building type and
particular use.
(2) Parking, access and traffic requirements pursuant to Article VIII of
this chapter, except as provided below:
(a) Minimum 20 feet from arterial streets or highways and a
minimum of five feet from nonarterial streets or private roads.
(b) Parking spaces shall be provided throughout the site; the
number and location shall be approved by the Plan
Commission.
(c) Park access roadways are not required to have curb and gutter
and may be reduced to 26 feet in width.
(3) Sign requirements pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
§ 420-127.2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-127.2
344:1165
§ 420-128. C-1 Lowland Resource Conservancy District.
(4) Fence requirements pursuant to Article XI of this chapter.
(5) Each use, site, building and structure shall be designed, laid out,
constructed and maintained in full compliance with the approved
site and operational plan, any required conditional use permit, any
required license and all other applicable provisions of this chapter
and of all other Village ordinances and codes.
L. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the PR-3 District shall comply with the following operational
standards to the extent applicable:
(1) Hours of operation: as approved by the Village.
(2) Hours for deliveries: as approved by the Village.
(3) No on-site residential uses are allowed, except for sleeping
quarters for fire and rescue personnel within a fire station.
(4) Each use, site, building and structure shall comply with all
applicable performance standards set forth in § 420-38 of this
chapter.
(5) Each site, building and structure shall be maintained in a neat,
presentable, aesthetically pleasing, structurally sound and
nonhazardous condition. All litter and debris shall be promptly
removed.
(6) Each use, site, building and structure shall be operated in full
compliance with the approved site and operational plan, any
required conditional use permit, any required license and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other Village
ordinances and codes.
M. Municipal services required.
(1) Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
(2) Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The C-1 Lowland Resource
Conservancy District is intended to be used to prevent destruction of
valuable natural or man-made resources and to protect watercourses
and wetlands, including the shorelands of navigable waters, and areas
that are not naturally drained, or which are subject to periodic flooding,
where development would result in hazards to health or safety and or
would deplete or destroy natural resources or be otherwise
incompatible with public welfare. Wetlands are unique and valuable
natural resources that are becoming rare in Wisconsin and have many
benefits. Wetlands filter nutrients and sediments out of water, keeping
§ 420-127.2 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-128
344:1166
our lakes and streams clean; wetlands reduce flood damage by storing
runoff from heavy rains or snow melt; wetlands are spawning and
nursery areas for fish such as northern pike; wetlands are home to
waterfowl, songbirds, pheasants, fur-bearers, and a number of rare or
endangered animal and plant species; wetlands buffer adjacent uplands
against wave and current erosion; and wetlands are scenic.
B. Designation of lowland conservancy areas. Lands mapped as wetlands
have soils formed under wet conditions and have water at or near the
surface often enough to be able to support plants adapted to wet
conditions. For the purpose of determining which areas are to be
located in the C-1 Lowland Resource Conservancy District, the Village
Community Development Department has established wetland map
resources which reflect the best data available to the Village. The
district delineation process shall make use of the 2005 Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources Final Wetland Inventory Maps, as
may be amended from time to time, in delineating wetlands. [Amended
10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 08-51]
C. Mapping disputes. Whenever there is a discrepancy between the
Official Zoning Map and actual field conditions, the discrepancy shall be
resolved by the property owner or his/her agent by completing a
wetland staking by a qualified biologist by any manner specified below:
[Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
(1) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WI DNR) assured
biologist. The WI DNR offers a program for wetland consultants to
have WI DNR assess their accuracy in determining wetland
boundaries. Individuals are assured for purposes of State of
Wisconsin permits and state-mandated local programs. By using an
assured biologist, concurrence from WI DNR is not needed and
wetland delineation issues are unlikely to cause delays in state
permit decisions for sites at which these individuals are the lead
field delineator and report author. Using this method allows for
early planning and the permit application process to proceed more
quickly. This approval, however, may not satisfy wetland
requirements for the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers (ACOE) for any
required permits necessary from the ACOE. A list of WI DNR
assured biologists can be found on the WI DNR website.
(a) The property owner or his/her agent contracts with a WI DNR
assured biologist to complete a site investigation and wetland
report and stake the location of the wetlands on the property,
referred to as a "wetland staking."
(b) Upon completion of the wetland staking, the following shall be
submitted to the Village:
[1] A letter from WI DNR verifying the biologist is a WI DNR
assured biologist.
§ 420-128 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-128
344:1167
[2] A wetland report prepared by the biologist.
[3] A plat of survey prepared by a Wisconsin registered
surveyor that includes, at a minimum, the property
boundaries and location of any structures on the property;
location and legal description of the field-delineated
wetlands; a note indicating the name of the biologist that
completed the wetland staking and the date(s) the
wetlands were staked; clear notations as to which areas
are wetlands and which areas are uplands; and the square
footage or acreage of each.
[4] A complete application and application fee to amend the
Village Comprehensive Land Use Map and the Village
Zoning Map pursuant to Village requirements for said
amendments.
(2) Non-WI DNR assured biologist. The property owner or his/her
agent contracts with a qualified biologist to complete a site
investigation and wetland report and stake the location of the
wetlands on the property, referred to as a "wetland staking." Upon
completion of the wetland staking and written approval from the
WI DNR, the following shall be submitted to the Village:
(a) A letter from WI DNR approving the wetland staking.
(b) A wetland report prepared by the biologist.
(c) A plat of survey prepared by a Wisconsin registered surveyor
that includes, at a minimum, the property boundaries and
location of any structures on the property; location and legal
description of the field-delineated wetlands; a note indicating
the name of the biologist that completed the wetland staking
and the date(s) the wetlands were staked; clear notations as to
which areas are wetlands and which areas are uplands; and the
square footage or acreage of each.
(d) A complete application and application fee to amend the
Village Comprehensive Land Use Map and the Village Zoning
Map pursuant to Village requirements for said amendments.
(3) Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Plan Commission (SEWRPC) staff
biologist. The Village will, upon receipt of a complete application,
coordinate with the staff biologist from the SEWRPC, based on
their availability, a site investigation and wetland report and stake
the location of the wetlands on the property, referred to as a
"wetland staking." The following procedure will be used:
(a) The property owner or his/her agent shall submit a completed
wetland staking application form to the Community
Development Department. In addition, the property owner/
§ 420-128 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-128
344:1168
agent shall submit an application fee pursuant to Article V of
this chapter.
(b) The property owner or his/her agent shall have the property
boundaries clearly delineated and staked on the site by a
Wisconsin registered land surveyor so that the field biologist
can clearly identify the site boundaries.
(c) Upon receipt of the completed application, the Community
Development Department staff shall forward a written request
letter to SEWRPC to schedule the services of its field biologist.
(d) A representative from SEWRPC will contact the Village staff
with the date and time of the field staking appointment. The
staking appointment may be scheduled more than 90 days
after the receipt of a completed application by the Village. The
Community Development Department or SEWRPC will notify
the owner or his/her agent of the appointment date and
approximate time so that the owner/agent can notify the
Wisconsin registered land surveyor.
(e) The SEWRPC field biologist will field-stake the wetlands by
flagging the limits of the wetlands on the subject property.
(f) The property owner/agent shall contact his/her Wisconsin
registered land surveyor to prepare a plat of survey of the
wetlands within five days from the date of the biologist's field
staking. The owner/agent shall submit the plat of survey to the
Community Development Department within 30 days from the
date of the biologist's staking.
(g) The plat of survey, as certified by a Wisconsin registered land
surveyor, shall include, at a minimum, the following
information: the property boundaries and all structures on the
property; the location of the wetlands as staked in the field by
the biologist, including a legal description of the wetland
area(s); a notation of the date when the wetlands were fieldstaked
and which agency, that is, "Wetland boundary as
marked by (agency) SEWRPC on (date) August 5, 1996"; clear
notations as to which areas are wetlands and which areas are
uplands; and the square footage or acreage of each.
(h) If the plat of survey is not completed and received by the
Community Development Department within the required 30
days from the date of the field staking, the Village will, after
providing notice, have the plat of survey completed, and all
associated costs will be invoiced to the property owner
pursuant to application requirements (pre-development
agreement) specified in Article V of this chapter.
§ 420-128 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-128
344:1169
(i) Upon receipt of the plat of survey, the Village will forward a
copy of the plat of survey to the SEWRPC for final review and
approval.
(j) Within 30 days of receipt of the final written approval from
SEWRPC, the Village will initiate an application to amend the
Village Comprehensive Land Use Map and the Village Zoning
Map pursuant to Village requirements for said amendments.
All associated costs will be invoiced to the property owner
pursuant to application requirements (pre-development
agreement) specified in Article V of this chapter.
D. Principal uses.
(1) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, and boating, unless
otherwise prohibited by law, provided that the activity does not
involve filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tilling or
excavation.
(2) The maintenance and repair of existing agricultural drainage
systems, including ditching, tiling, dredging, excavating and filling
necessary to maintain the level of drainage required to continue
the existing agricultural use. This may include minimum filling
necessary for disposal of dredged spoil adjacent to the drainage
system, provided that dredged spoils are placed on existing spoil
banks where possible.
(3) The construction or maintenance of fences for the pasturing of
livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for
such construction or maintenance on property being farmed as of
the date of this chapter and where the remaining property is zoned
agricultural.
(4) Stormwater detention, retention, and/or water quality ponds or
basins and related improvements, including the maintenance and
repair of such facilities so far as the stormwater facilities and
related improvements are located outside of staked/delineated
wetland boundaries or whereby such stormwater facilities and
related improvements are located within staked/delineated wetland
boundaries as permitted by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources. [Added 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-18]
(5) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89) unless
otherwise prohibited by law, provided that the activity does not
involve filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tilling or
excavation. [Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
E. Stipulated conservancy permit:
(1) A stipulated conservancy permit may be issued by the Community
Development Department only after a completed application is
§ 420-128 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-128
344:1170
reviewed and approved by the Village for the following uses within
the C-1 District:
(a) Removing of non-native wetland or prairie plants;
(b) Mowing or cutting of any non-native plants, bushes or trees;
(c) Planting of native plants and plant materials; or
(d) Burning, debrushing or any other form of wetland
maintenance.
(2) The procedures for the review of a stipulated conservancy permit
shall be followed.
(a) An owner/agent shall submit a complete application, related
materials and fee for the stipulated conservancy permit to the
Community Development Department.
(b) The owner/agent is required to obtain any and all necessary
permits from the ACOE and the DNR. These permits, if
required, shall be obtained prior to the Village issuing the
stipulated conservancy permit.
(c) Copies of the application and related materials will be sent to
all abutting property owners within 200 feet, the DNR, the
SEWRPC, and the ACOE for a twenty-day review period of the
application.
(d) After the twenty-day review period is complete, the Village
shall approve or deny the permit. If the permit is approved the
owner must agree to the stipulations prior to the issuance of
the permit.
(e) The stipulated conservancy permit application, site plan,
stipulations and legal description page shall be recorded and
filed with the Kenosha County Register of Deeds office by the
Village staff. The applicant must submit the filing and
recording fee to the Village.
(f) An individual, group, or agency may submit a conservancy
management plan and/or a restoration plan for review and
approval for the above-listed activities.
(g) A stipulated conservancy permit may be for valid for up to two
years with a renewal of said permit only if the management/
restoration plan has not been changed or altered in any
manner.
(h) Fee for a stipulated conservancy permit: See § 420-29F of this
chapter.
F. Conditional uses (see also Article XVIII). No conditional uses shall be
permitted in the C-1 District except:
§ 420-128 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-128
344:1171
(1) Harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice,
berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious
to the natural reproduction of such crops;
(2) The construction or maintenance of piers, docks or walkways built
on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for
such construction and maintenance;
(3) The maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction of existing
Village, county, state or federal highways and bridges, including
limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance,
repair, replacement or reconstruction;
(4) Wildlife management structures needed to support open space or
wetland preservation uses, provided that impacts on the wetlands
are minimal;
(5) The construction or maintenance of duck blinds;
(6) (Reserved)169
(7) Park and recreation areas; and
(8) Railroad lines; and
(9) 170Transmission lines (electric power or natural gas). [Added
3-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-14]
G. Lot area.
(1) Where a property is proposed to be further subdivided and the lot is
located partially within a C-1 District and partially within an
adjoining use district, that area of the lot or parcel in the C-1
District shall not be used to meet the lot area requirements of the
adjoining district.
(2) The platting of new lots within a C-1 District and partially within an
adjoining use district shall be discouraged by the Village. Where
new platted areas are proposed, building lot areas should be
located entirely outside of the C-1 District and as a separate lot or
outlot.
(3) Where an existing platted lot is located partially within a C-1
District and partially within an adjoining use district, that area of
the lot or parcel in the C-1 District may be used to meet the lot area
requirements of the adjoining district, provided that at least 50% of
the minimum lot area requirements is provided outside the C-1
District where public sanitary sewerage facilities are available and
sufficient land area per the Kenosha County Sanitary Ordinance is
169. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(6), regarding retention, detention or stormwater
facilities, was repealed 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-18.
170. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(9), Utilities, was repealed 3-16-2009 by Ord. No.
09-17.
§ 420-128 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-128
344:1172
§ 420-129. C-2 Upland Resource Conservancy District.
provided outside the C-1 District where public sanitary sewerage
facilities are not available.
H. Structures.
(1) No building or structure shall be permitted, except those permitted
by conditional use permits of this C-1 District section or as allowed
under Subsection D(4) of this C-1 District section. Furthermore, no
on-site soil absorption sanitary sewerage system, holding tank, or
private well shall be constructed in the C-1 District. [Amended
5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-18]
(2) No building or part of a building permitted by a conditional use
permit shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(3) No maximum or minimum building area shall be required in the C-1
District.
I. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Side setback: 40 feet minimum.
(4) Rear setback: 40 feet minimum.
(5) Setback between structures: 40 feet minimum.
J. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
K. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
L. Signs shall be allowed pursuant to and in accordance with Article X of
this chapter.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The C-2 Upland Resource
Conservancy District is intended to preserve, protect, enhance and
restore all significant woodlands, areas of rough topography, and
related scenic areas. Regulation of these areas will serve to control
erosion and sedimentation and will promote and maintain the natural
beauty of the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
B. Principal uses.
(1) Agricultural uses.
(2) Hunting and fishing.
§ 420-128 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-129
344:1173
(3) Preservation of scenic, historic and scientific areas.
(4) Forest and game management.
(5) Park and recreation areas.
(6) One single-family dwelling.
(7) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89). [Added
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Gardening, tool and storage sheds incidental to the residential use.
(2) General farm buildings, including barns, silos, stables, sheds, and
storage bins.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Private garages and carports.
D. Conditional uses (see also Article XVIII).
(1) (Reserved)171
(2) Wind energy conversion system.
E. Lot size and width. [Amended 7-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-34]
(1) Lot size: five acres minimum, except as provided below in
Subsection E(2).
(2) If a tree survey which has identified and surveyed all trees eight
inches or larger in diameter shows that the tree area is less than
five acres, then the Village Board may allow for a new lot to be
created in the C-2 District to be reduced to the size of the tree area;
however, the lot size shall not be less than 20,000 square feet.
(3) Lot frontage on a public street: 300 feet minimum; provided,
however, that on a curve or a cul-de-sac the public street frontage
may be reduced as necessary to an absolute minimum of 150 feet if
all other requirements are satisfied, except as provided below in
Subsection E(4).
(4) If a tree survey which has identified and surveyed all trees eight
inches or larger in diameter shows that the tree area is less than
five acres, then the Village Board may allow for the lot frontage to
be reduced to the amount of the tree frontage; however, the
frontage shall not be less than 100 feet; provided, however, that on
a curve or a cul-de-sac, the public street frontage may be reduced
171. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(1), which listed utility substations as a conditional
use, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-129 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-129
344:1174
as necessary to an absolute minimum of 50 feet if all other
requirements are satisfied.
(5) If the lot size and lot frontage are reduced pursuant to Subsection
E(2) and (4) above, then the only permitted uses allowed in the
district shall include:
(a) Preservation of scenic, historic and scientific areas.
(b) Park and recreation areas.
(c) One single-family dwelling.
(6) If the lot size and lot frontage are reduced pursuant to Subsection
E(2) and (4) above, then the only accessory uses allowed in the
district shall include:
(a) Gardening, tool and storage sheds incidental to the residential
use.
(b) Home occupations.
(c) Private garages and carports.
F. Building height and area.
(1) No building or part of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(2) The total minimum floor area of a dwelling shall be 1,400 square
feet with a minimum first floor area of 1,000 square feet.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 25 feet minimum.
(5) Rear setback: 50 feet minimum.
(6) Setback between structures: 25 feet minimum.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
I. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
§ 420-129 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-130
344:1175
§ 420-130. C-3 Natural and Scientific Area Resource Conservancy
District.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The C-3 Natural and Scientific
Area Resource Conservancy District is intended to preserve and
enhance existing natural features, including scenic, historic, and
scientific areas and associated plant and animal communities, and to
prevent the destruction of valuable natural, scenic and scientific
resources, including wetlands, shorelands or navigable waters,
prairies, meadows, sand dunes, woodlands, wildlife habitat and areas
with high erosion hazard. Incompatible development in these areas may
result in hazards to the public health and safety, may deplete or destroy
invaluable and irreplaceable natural resources, or may be otherwise
detrimental to public welfare.
B. Designation of the natural and scientific area resource conservancy
areas.
(1) Lands mapped as natural and scientific areas include those lands
identified in a continuous open space preservation consisting of
continuous environmental corridor, including valuable natural,
scenic and scientific resources of special scientific interest, wildlife
habitat areas, and critical plant habitat areas where several
Wisconsin rare, threatened or endangered plant species are
identified, wetlands, prairies, meadows, sand dunes, woodlands
and areas subject to flooding and high erosion hazards.
(2) For the purpose of determining which areas are to be located in the
C-3 Natural and Scientific Area Resource Conservancy District, the
Village Community Development Department has conservancy
areas mapped as natural and scientific resources as a result of the
planning and study efforts encompassed in the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission's Community Assistance
Planning Report, titled "A Land Use Management Plan for the
Chiwaukee Prairie - Carol Beach Area of the Town of Pleasant
Prairie." The resulting Land Use Management Plan provides a
technically sound, long-term guide to natural resource base
protection and preservation. The Land Use Management Plan
seeks to preserve a substantial portion of the existing natural
features of the area through the maintenance of a continuous
environmental corridor connecting the Kenosha Sand Dunes on the
north end and the area with the Chiwaukee Prairie Preserve on the
south end. The Land Use Management Plan identifies the lands
within the corridor to be acquired and maintained as a natural
area/wildlife area by a combination of state and private
conservancy interests. The Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources and the Nature Conservancy of Wisconsin have
identified land acquisition areas for permanent resource
protection.
§ 420-130 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-130
344:1176
C. Mapping corrections in the C-3 District. Upon the public or the private,
nonprofit purchase of land within the Chiwaukee Prairie and Carol
Beach Area pursuant to Map 35 on Page 166 of the Community
Assistance Planning Report No. 88 prepared by SEWRPC entitled "A
Land Use Management Plan for the Chiwaukee Prairie - Carol Beach
Area of the Town of Pleasant Prairie," the Village shall initiate the
process to rezone the property into the C-3 Natural and Scientific
Resource Conservancy District. [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No.
16-04]
D. Principal uses. [Amended 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08]
(1) Commercial communication structures (per § 420-89) unless
otherwise prohibited by law, provided that the activity does not
involve filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tilling or
excavation.
E. Stipulated conservancy permit.
(1) A stipulated conservancy permit may be issued by the Community
Development Department only after a completed application is
reviewed and approved by the Village for the following uses within
the C-3 District:
(a) Removing of non-native wetland or prairie plants;
(b) Mowing or cutting of any non-native plants, bushes or trees;
(c) Planting of native plants and plant materials; or
(d) Burning, debrushing or any other form of wetland
maintenance.
(2) The procedures for the review of a stipulated conservancy permit
shall be followed.
(a) An owner/agent shall submit a complete application, related
materials and fee for the stipulated conservancy permit to the
Community Development Department.
(b) The owner/agent is required to obtain any and all necessary
permits from the ACOE and the DNR. These permits, if
required, shall be obtained prior to the Village issuing the
stipulated conservancy permit.
(c) Copies of the application and related materials will be sent to
all abutting property owners within 200 feet, the DNR, the
SEWRPC, and the ACOE for a twenty-day review period of the
application.
(d) After the twenty-day review period is complete, the Village
shall approve or deny the permit. If the permit is approved, the
§ 420-130 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-130
344:1177
owner must agree to the stipulations prior to the issuance of
the permit.
(e) The stipulated conservancy permit application, site plan,
stipulations and legal description page shall be recorded and
filed with the Kenosha County Register of Deeds office by the
Village staff. The applicant must submit the filing and
recording fee to the Village.
(f) An individual, group, or agency may submit a conservancy
management plan and/or a restoration plan for review and
approval for the above-listed activities.
(g) A stipulated conservancy permit may be for valid for up to two
years with a renewal of said permit only if the management/
restoration plan has not been changed or altered in any
manner.
(h) Fee for a stipulated conservancy permit. See § 420-29F of this
chapter.
F. Conditional uses (see also Article XVIII). No conditional uses shall be
permitted in the C-3 District except:
(1) The development of public and private parks and recreation areas,
marinas and boat access sites, natural and outdoor education
areas, historic and scientific areas, wildlife refuges, game
preserves, and private wildlife habitat areas, provided that:
(a) Any private recreation or wildlife habitat area or structure is
used exclusively for that purpose.
(b) No filling is involved in the activity.
(c) Ditching, excavating, dredging and dike and dam construction
may be done in wildlife refuges, game preserves and private
wildlife habitat areas but only for the purpose of improving
wildlife habitat or otherwise enhancing wetland valves.
(d) Fencing may be permitted insofar as it does not exceed six feet
in height and meets the fencing requirements as set forth in
Article XI.
(2) The establishment of roadways and trails for access to scenic,
historic and scientific areas, provided that the roadway or trail is
located, designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact
upon the natural functions of the area and meets the following
standards:
(a) The roadway or trail shall be designed and constructed with
the minimum cross section practical to serve the intended use;
§ 420-130 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-130
344:1178
(b) Roadway and trail construction activities are to be carried out
in the immediate area of the roadbed only; and
(c) Any filling, flooding, drainage, dredging, ditching, tiling or
excavating that is to be done must be necessary for the
construction or maintenance of the roadway or trail.
(3) (Reserved)172
(4) The maintenance of railway lines.
(5) Harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice,
berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious
to the natural reproduction of such crops.
(6) The construction or maintenance of piers, docks or walkways built
on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary for
such construction and maintenance.
(7) The maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction of existing
Village, county, state or federal highways and bridges, including
limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance,
repair, replacement or reconstruction.
(8) Wildlife management structures needed to support open space or
wetland preservation uses, provided that impacts on the wetlands
are minimal.
(9) Park and recreation areas.
G. Lot area.
(1) Where an existing platted lot is located partially within a C-3
District and partially within an adjoining use district, that area of
the lot or parcel in the C-3 District may be used to meet the lot area
requirements of the adjoining district, provided that at least 50% of
the minimum lot area requirements is provided outside the C-3
District where public sanitary sewerage facilities are available and
sufficient land area per the Kenosha County Sanitary Ordinance is
provided outside the C-3 District where public sanitary sewerage
facilities are not available.
(2) Where a property is proposed to be further subdivided and the lot is
located partially within a C-3 District and partially within an
adjoining use district, that area of the lot or parcel in the C-3
District shall not be used to meet the lot area requirements of the
adjoining district. The platting of new lots within a C-3 District and
partially within an adjoining use district shall be discouraged by
the Village. Where new platted areas are proposed, building lot
172. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(3), concerning the construction and maintenance of
utility lines and facilities, was repealed 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-17.
§ 420-130 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-130
344:1179
§ 420-131. FPO Floodplain Overlay District. [Amended 1-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-04173; 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 05-58; 12-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-61; 6-16-2008 by Ord. No. 08-34; 10-18-2010 by Ord. No.
10-61; 6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 12-19]
areas should be located entirely outside of the C-3 District and as a
separate lot or outlot.
H. Structures.
(1) No building structure shall be permitted, except those permitted by
conditional use permits, in the C-3 District. Furthermore, no on-site
soil absorption sanitary sewerage system, holding tank, or private
well shall be constructed in the C-3 District.
(2) No building or part of a building permitted by a conditional use
permit shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(3) No maximum or minimum building area shall be required in the C-3
District.
I. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: minimum of 65 feet from arterial streets or
highways and a minimum of 40 feet from nonarterial streets or
private roads.
(2) Shore setback: 50 feet minimum adjacent to Lake Michigan, 35 feet
minimum adjacent to all other navigable waterways. [Amended
7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
(3) Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on the same
property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands on adjacent
properties.
(4) Side setback: 40 feet minimum.
(5) Rear yard: not less than 40 feet from rear property lines; rear
setback: 40 feet minimum.
(6) Setback between structures: 25 feet minimum.
J. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
K. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
L. Signs shall be allowed pursuant to and in accordance with Article X of
this chapter.
A. Authorization. The Floodplain Overlay District (or FPO), which includes
both the floodway and flood-fringe areas, is hereby created, and the
173. Editor's Note: This ordinance was included with the codification 4-18-2005 by Ord. No.
05-13.
§ 420-130 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1180
regulations set out in this section are hereby adopted, pursuant to the
authorization and mandate of §§ 61.35, 62.23 and 87.30, Wis. Stats.
B. Finding of fact. Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains,
rivers and streams of the Village of Pleasant Prairie would adversely
affect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare and
impair the tax base of the Village.
C. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate land use,
development and development-related activities in flood hazard areas
in order to:
(1) Protect life, health and property;
(2) Minimize expenditures of public moneys for costly flood-control
projects;
(3) Minimize rescue and relief efforts which are generally undertaken
at the expense of the taxpaying public;
(4) Minimize business interruptions which usually result in the loss of
local incomes;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities, such as water mains, sewer
lines, streets and bridges, which are located within floodplain
areas;
(6) Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas;
(7) Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
(8) Prevent increases in regional flood heights that could increase
flood damage and result in conflicts or litigation between property
owners; and
(9) Prohibit development in the floodplain that is not expressly allowed
as a conditional use pursuant to this section.
D. Title. This section shall be known as the "Floodplain Zoning Ordinance
of the Village of Pleasant Prairie."
E. Areas regulated. Areas regulated by this section include all areas within
the limits of the Village of Pleasant Prairie (Village) that would be
covered by water in the event of a regional flood or base flood as shown
the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
or other maps approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (DNR), FEMA, and described in Subsection I below or that
would become a floodplain island surrounded by water in the event of a
regional flood. Regional flood elevations (RFE) may be derived from
other studies as referenced in this section. If more than one map or
revision is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
F. Establishment of FPO District. The FPO Floodplain Overlay District
established by this section consists of the floodplain or A Zone (as
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1181
defined in Subsection CC below) and includes both the floodway and
the flood-fringe (as defined in Subsection CC below). The floodplain or
A Zone may contain lands within the A, AE, AH and AO Zones on the
Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
G. Annexed areas. This section shall automatically apply to any floodplain
area within land annexed by the Village from and after the time the
annexation takes effect. The Kenosha County floodplain zoning
provisions and mapping in effect with respect to any annexed land at
the time the annexation takes effect shall remain in effect and be
enforced by the Village to the extent provided by law, and in any event
the county floodplain mapping shall remain effective until such time as
a Village floodplain map amendment takes effect. The ordinance
amendment shall meet the requirements of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm.
Code, and 44CRF59-72, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
H. Relationship of FPO regulations to regulations imposed by underlying
basic zoning ordinance and other Village ordinances. Any land use,
development or development-related activity within the Floodplain
Overlay District shall satisfy all requirements imposed by this chapter
(including, without limitation, general requirements, requirements
relating to specific conditional uses, and requirements relating to basic
underlying zoning districts) and all requirements imposed by all other
applicable Village ordinances, as well as all requirements imposed by
this section with respect to floodplain areas. In the event of any conflict
between any such requirements, the most restrictive shall be
controlling.
I. Official floodplain maps and studies.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections O, R and S below, the
boundaries of the floodplain areas, including both the floodway and
the flood-fringe areas, and the boundaries of the floodway areas (all
as defined in Subsection CC below), and the water surface
elevations of the regional flood profile, are as designated on the
official floodplain maps or as stated in or determinable from other
official DNR- and FEMA-approved technical studies, listed below,
which are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. These
official floodplain maps and studies are on file in the office of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie Zoning Administrator. In the event of a
conflict between any of the maps or studies referred to in this
Subsection I, the most restrictive information shall apply.
[Amended 2-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-07]
(a) Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) prepared by FEMA for the
Kenosha County and Incorporated Areas, Map Number
55059CIND0B, effective date March 7, 2017, Panels
55059C0179D, 55059C0183D, 55059C0187D, 55059C0188D,
55059C0189D, 55059C0191D, 55059C0193D, 55059C0194D,
55059C0203D, 55059C00211D, 55059C00212D,
55059C00213D, 55059C00214D, 55059C00216D,
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1182
55059C00218D, 55059C00302D, 55059C00306D,
55059C00307D, 55059C00326D, 55059C00327D and
55059C00331D, prepared by FEMA, effective June 19, 2012.
The following amendments included:
[1] FIRM Map Number 55059C0189D amended pursuant to
FEMA LOMR Case 16-05-7542P dated November 2, 2016,
and effective March 23, 2017.
[2] FIRM Map Numbers 55059C0184E and 55059C0192E as
amended with a map revision date of March 7, 2017.
[3] Flood Insurance Study for Kenosha County, Wisconsin, and
Incorporated Areas, prepared by FEMA, with an effective
date of March 7, 2017, Flood Insurance Study Numbers
55059CV001B, 55059CV002B.
[4] FIRM MAP Number 55059C0191D amended pursuant to
FEMA LOMR-F Case No. 16-05-2410X dated January 29,
2016. [Added 4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-18]
[5] FIRM MAP Numbers 55059C0191D and 55059C0193D
and Date of Effective Flood Insurance Study; June 19,
2012, Profile: 105P and Floodway data Table: 9 amended
pursuant to FEMA-LOMR-APP Case No.: 17-05-1426P
effective September 12, 2017. [Added 8-28-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-41]
(b) Map A-2 titled "Floodplains in the Chiwaukee Prairie - Carol
Beach Study Area Under Existing and Future Development
Conditions" and Table A-3 titled "One-Hundred-Year
Recurrence Interval Flood Stages for the Chiwaukee Prairie -
Carol Beach Study Area Under Existing and Future
Development Conditions," pages 189 and 188, respectively, of
SEWRPC Community Assistance Planning Report No. 88, titled
"A Land Use Management Plan for the Chiwaukee Prairie -
Carol Beach Area of the Town of Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha
County, Wisconsin," prepared by the Southeastern Regional
Planning Commission, February 1985.
(2) Public information.
(a) Marks should be placed on structures, where and when
appropriate, by local or state agencies to show the depth of
inundation during the regional flood.
(b) All maps, engineering data and regulations as specified in this
§ 420-131 are available for viewing during regular Village
business hours and can be purchased.
(c) Real estate transfers shall show the floodplain district that any
real property is located in.
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1183
(3) Development is restricted within the floodplain, and all permit
applications shall be reviewed by the Village to determine whether
the proposed building site will reasonably be safe from flooding. If
a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall be designed and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be
constructed with flood-resistant material; be constructed to
minimize flood damages; and to ensure that utility and mechanical
equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the equipment during conditions
of flooding. A land division shall be reviewed for compliance with
the above standards. All proposed land divisions shall include
regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development
that meets the land division definition of this section and all other
requirements in Subsection M below. Adequate drainage shall be
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and all public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
(4) Amendments.
(a) Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if
amendments are made to this section, the official floodplain
zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles in
accordance with this § 420-131.
(b) In AE Zones within a mapped floodway or unmapped floodway,
no obstructions or increases shall be permitted unless the
applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map Revision from
FEMA and amendments are made to this section, the official
floodplain zoning maps, floodways lines and water surface
profiles in accordance with this section. Any such alterations
must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.
(c) In A Zones, increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only
be permitted if the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of
Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this
section, the official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water
surface profiles, in accordance with Subsection T.
J. General standards applicable to all floodplain districts.
(1) Village review.
(a) The Village shall review all permit applications to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all
new construction and substantial improvements shall be
designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1184
hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant
materials; be constructed to minimize flood damages and to
ensure that utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/
or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the equipment during conditions of
flooding.
(b) Land divisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above
standards. All subdivision proposals (including manufactured
home parks) shall include regional flood elevation and
floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision
definition of this section and all other requirements in
Subsection M(2)(c). Adequate drainage shall be provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards, and all public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
(2) Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
(a) No land use, development or development-related activity,
except as provided below, shall be permitted in floodplain
areas which will:
[1] Cause any obstruction to flow, defined as development
which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by itself or
with other development causing any increase in the
regional flood height; or
[2] Cause an increase in regional flood height due to
floodplain storage area lost.
(b) Any proposed land use, development or development-related
activity which will obstruct flow or result in an increase in the
regional flood height may be permitted only if appropriate
amendments are made to the applicable official floodplain
map(s), including floodplain and/or floodway boundary lines
and water surface profiles of the regional flood, as applicable,
in accordance with Subsection T below.
(c) The Village Zoning Administrator and other appropriate
Village officials and bodies shall deny any application for an
administrative permit or approval when it is determined that
the proposed land use, development or development-related
activity will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the
upstream or downstream regional flood height, based on the
available data, or when the applicant fails to satisfy the
applicant's burden of proof relating to such issues.
K. Floodplain issues and discrepancies.
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1185
(1) Whenever an issue relating to floodplain-related matters arises, it
shall be administratively determined in the first instance by the
Village Zoning Administrator.
(2) Where an apparent discrepancy exists between the location of the
floodplain boundary [as shown on the applicable official floodplain
map(s)] and actual field conditions, the location of such boundary
shall be initially determined by the Village Zoning Administrator or
other appropriate Village officials or bodies, depending upon the
nature of the permit, approval or issue involved, using the following
criteria:
(a) Where flood profiles of the regional flood exist, the location of
the floodplain boundary line shall be determined using both the
scale and contours appearing on the official floodplain map (or
on a more accurate topographic map if available) and the
water surface elevations shown on the flood profile of the
regional flood. Where a discrepancy exists between the official
floodplain map and actual field conditions, the regional flood
elevations shall govern.
(b) Where the base flood elevation has been determined pursuant
to the official floodplain map (Zone A of the FIRM) or any
designated navigable waterway where a floodplain study has
not been completed, a detailed study to determine the base
flood elevation shall be completed and approved by the DNR
and FEMA and this section shall be amended.
(c) Where flood profiles of the regional flood do not exist, the
location of the floodplain boundary line shall be determined
using the scale and contours appearing on the official
floodplain map (or on a more accurate topographic map if
available) and any other credible information which is
available.
(3) A floodplain map amendment is required whenever an
administrative determination is made that a significant discrepancy
exists between the official floodplain map and actual field
conditions. The Village Zoning Administrator shall be responsible
for initiating any such map amendments within a reasonable period
of time.
(4) Notwithstanding any language in any Village ordinance apparently
to the contrary, the Village Zoning Administrator and other Village
officials and bodies, as appropriate to the type of permit or
approval in question, shall have the authority to deny or condition a
building, zoning or land disturbance permit, or a land division
approval, or any other land use or development-related permit or
approval, to ensure compliance with this section. Such permits or
approvals may be denied or conditioned upon the basis of an
administrative determination, such as the location of a floodplain
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1186
boundary or the location of a floodway boundary, whether or not an
amendment of the official floodplain map is required.
(5) Disputes regarding the administrative determination of the
location of a floodplain boundary line or other administrative
floodplain-related determinations, decisions or orders made under
this section shall be resolved in the first instance by an appeal to
the Village Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Subsection
R below.
L. Burden of proof. In the event of any issue regarding the location of the
boundary of any floodplain or floodway, or whether any proposed or
existing land use or development or development-related activity is
subject to this section, or whether or the extent to which a proposed
land use or development will obstruct flow or raise the height of the
regional flood elevation, or the flow rate to which a proposed land use
or development will be subjected, or whether the flood-carrying
capacity of a watercourse will be maintained, or any other issue arising
under or in connection with this section, the applicant, or the owner,
developer or user who is the proponent of the land use or development
or development-related activity in question, shall have the burden of
proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, demonstrating that the land
use or development or development-related activity in question is in
compliance with and satisfies all applicable provisions of this section.
M. Administration.
(1) Duties and powers. The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee is
authorized to administer this section, and in addition to the duties
and powers specified in § 420-17, the Zoning Administrator shall
have the following duties and powers:
(a) Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in
preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the
regional flood or base flood elevation for the proposed
development is shown on all permit applications.
(b) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this section and issue certificates of compliance
where appropriate.
(c) Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures and
perform a substantial damage assessment to determine if
substantial damage to the structures has occurred.
(d) Keep records of all official actions such as:
[1] All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
[2] Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations;
[3] Floodproofing certificates.
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1187
[4] Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and
ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures, including
changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
[5] All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures.
[6] List of nonconforming structures and uses.
(e) Submit copies of the following items to the DNR:
[1] Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and
map or text amendments.
[2] Copies of any case-by-case analyses and any other
required information required by the DNR, including an
annual summary of the number and types of floodplain
zoning actions taken.
[3] Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and
all related correspondence concerning the assessments.
(f) Investigate, prepare reports, report violations and enforce this
section pursuant to Subsection AA. Provide copies of the
reports to the DNR.
(g) Submit copies of amendments and biennial reports to the
FEMA regional office.
(2) Application submission requirements. Any applicant for any Village
permit or approval for or in connection with any land use,
development or development-related activity (as defined in
Subsection CC below) within or potentially within the floodplain
shall submit to the Village Zoning Administrator or other
appropriate Village officials or bodies, depending upon the nature
of the permit or approval in question, the following documents or
information at the time such application is filed, in addition to any
other documents or information required to be submitted by any
other section of this chapter or any other applicable Village
ordinance. The Village may transmit to the DNR a copy of the
information submitted with a written request for technical
assistance to establish regional flood elevations and, where
applicable, floodway data.
(a) Site development plan. Twelve copies (plus one copy reduced
to 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches or 11 inches by 17 inches) of a site
development plan, drawn to scale (or superimposed on a scaled
aerial photograph), which accurately locates the proposed land
use, development or development-related activity with respect
to real property boundaries, floodplain boundaries, floodway
boundaries, or channel of stream if the floodway boundaries do
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1188
not appear on the applicable official floodplain map(s) and
which shows the following:
[1] Name and address of the application, property owner and
contractor;
[2] Legal description, proposed use and whether it is new
construction or modification;
[3] Location, dimensions and area of the lot or parcel and its
elevation(s) using the vertical datum from the adopted
study, either National Geodetic Vertical Datum 1929
(NGVD29) or North American Vertical Datum 1988
(NAVD88);
[4] Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
[5] Location, type, dimensions and spatial arrangement of any
existing or proposed structures with distances measured
from the lot or parcel boundary lines;
[6] Location of any existing or proposed private sewage
systems or private water supply systems;
[7] Location and elevation of existing or proposed access
roads using the vertical datum from the adopted study,
either NGVD29 or NAVD88;
[8] Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property
as determined from the official floodplain maps;
[9] The elevation of the lowest floor of any proposed buildings
using the vertical datum from the adopted study, either
NGVD29 or NAVD88;
[10] The location, dimensions, volume and resulting
elevation(s), using the vertical datum from the adopted
study, either NGVD29 or NAVD88, of any proposed fill or
other deposition or storage of materials, or of any
proposed cut or excavation of materials;
[11] The location, dimensions and elevations, using the vertical
datum from the adopted study, either NGVD29 or NAVD88,
of all existing or proposed streets, bridges and public
utilities; and
[12] The vertical datum, either NGVD29 or NAVD88, shall be
clearly shown on the plans and calculations.
(b) The Village Zoning Administrator, his or her designee, or other
appropriate Village officials or bodies, depending upon the
nature of the permit or approval in question, shall have
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1189
authority to waive in writing any of the foregoing requirements
in Subsection M(2)(a) to the extent the information is not
necessary to determine compliance with this section.
(c) Such additional documents and information as deemed
necessary by the Village or the DNR to determine compliance
of the proposed land use, development or development-related
activity with all of the requirements of this section, including
the following, without limitation:
[1] Data and computations sufficient to determine the
regional flood elevation, using the vertical datum from the
adopted study, either NGVD29 or NAVD88, at the location
of the proposed land use, development or developmentrelated
activity and to determine whether or not the
requirements of this section are satisfied.
[2] Data and computations sufficient to determine if the
proposed land use, development or development-related
activity will cause either an obstruction to flow or an
increase in regional flood height or the regional flood
discharge and to quantify any such obstruction or
increase.
[3] Any available documented historical high-water
information.
[4] Typical valley cross section(s) (elevation view) showing the
channel of the stream, the floodplain adjoining each side of
the channel, and the cross-sectional area to be occupied by
the proposed land use, development or developmentrelated
activity (perpendicular to the watercourse) and
indicating whether the proposed use, development or
development-related activity will obstruct the regional
flood flow.
[5] Specifications for all proposed buildings and structures,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement,
storage of materials, streets, bridges, public utilities, and
all related materials.
[6] An analysis of the effect of the proposed land use,
development or development-related activity on the
velocity of flow or the floodplain storage capacity.
[7] A surface drainage plan with adequate details showing
how flood damage will be minimized.
[8] The estimated cost of the proposed development or
development-related activity.
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1190
(d) Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development as
required in Subsection J(2).
[1] All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed
under the direct supervision of a professional engineer
licensed and registered in the state. The licensed and
registered professional engineer shall be responsible for
the technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be
reviewed and approved by DNR.
[2] Zone A floodplains.
[a] Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on
the standards in Ch. NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Discharge.
[b] Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall
be based on the standards in Ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis.
Adm. Code, Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Elevation, and the following:
[i] Determination of the required limits of the
hydraulic model shall be based on detailed study
information for downstream structures (dam,
bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting
water surface elevation for the study.
[ii] Channel sections must be surveyed.
[iii] Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks
shall be used for the development of cross-section
overbank and floodplain mapping.
[iv] A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross
sections is allowed in developed areas with
additional intermediate cross sections required at
transitions in channel bottom slope, including a
survey of the channel at each location.
[v] The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be
used.
[vi] A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the
top of road is required at each structure.
[vii] Additional cross sections are required at the
downstream and upstream limits of the proposed
development and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length of the reach if
greater than 500 feet.
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1191
[viii] Standard accepted engineering practices shall be
used when assigning parameters for the base
model such as flow, Manning's N values,
expansion and contraction coefficients or effective
flow limits. The base model shall be calibrated to
past flooding data such as high water marks to
determine the reasonableness of the model
results. If no historical data is available, adequate
justification shall be provided for any parameters
outside standard accepted engineering practices.
[ix] The model must extend past the upstream limit of
the difference in the existing and proposed flood
profiles in order to provide a tie-in to existing
studies. The height difference between the
proposed flood profile and the existing study
profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet.
[c] Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be
provided, showing all cross-section locations,
floodway/floodplain limits based on best available
topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed
development and whether the proposed development
is located in the floodway.
[i] If the proposed development is located outside of
the floodway, then it is determined to have no
impact on the regional flood elevation.
[ii] If any part of the proposed development is in the
floodway, it must be added to the base model to
show the difference between existing and
proposed conditions. The study must ensure that
all coefficients remain the same as in the existing
model, unless adequate justification based on
standard accepted engineering practices is
provided.
[3] Zone AE Floodplains.
[a] Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the
existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall
be based on Ch. NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Discharge.
[b] Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in Ch. NR 116.07(4), Wis.
Adm. Code, Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Elevation, and the following:
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1192
[i] Duplicate Effective Model. The Effective Model
shall be reproduced to ensure correct
transference of the model data and to allow
integration of the revised data to provide a
continuous FIS model upstream and downstream
of the revised reach. If data from the effective
model is available, models shall be generated that
duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations
shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS
report to within 0.1 foot.
[ii] Corrected Effective Model. The Corrected
Effective Model shall not include any man-made
physical changes since the Effective Model date
but shall import the model into the most current
version of HEC-RAS for DNR review.
[iii] Existing (Pre-Project Conditions) Model. The
Existing Model shall be required to support
conclusions about the actual impacts of the
project associated with the Revised (Post-Project)
Model or to establish more up-to-date models on
which to base the Revised (Post-Project) Model.
[iv] Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model. The
Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model shall
incorporate the Existing Model and any proposed
changes to the topography caused by the
proposed development. This model shall reflect
proposed conditions.
[v] All changes to the Duplicate Effective Model and
subsequent models must be supported by
certified topographic information, bridge plans,
construction plans and survey notes.
[vi] Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited
to the stream reach for which the revision is being
requested. Cross sections upstream and
downstream of the revised reach shall be identical
to those in the Effective Model and result in water
surface elevations and top widths computed by
the Revised Models matching those in the
Effective Models upstream and downstream of the
revised reach as required. The Effective Model
shall not be truncated.
[c] Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall
be submitted to the DNR for review which meet the
following conditions:
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1193
[i] Consistency between the revised hydraulic
models, the revised floodplain and floodway
delineations, the revised flood profiles,
topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or
Flood Boundary Floodway Maps (FBFMs),
construction plans, bridge plans.
[ii] Certified topographic map of suitable scale,
contour interval, and a planimetric map showing
the applicable items. If a digital version of the
map is available, it may be submitted in order that
the FIRM may be more easily revised.
[iii] Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised onepercent-
and 0.2-percent-annual-chance
floodplains and floodway boundaries.
[iv] If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital
mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used, then all
supporting documentation or metadata must be
included with the data submission along with the
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection
and State Plane Coordinate System in accordance
with FEMA mapping specifications.
[v] The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into
the effective floodplain boundaries.
[vi] All cross sections from the effective model shall
be labeled in accordance with the effective map,
and a cross-section lookup table shall be included
to relate to the model input numbering scheme.
[vii] Both the current and proposed floodways shall be
shown on the map.
[viii] The stream center line or profile baseline used to
measure stream distances in the model shall be
visible on the map.
(e) Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this
section shall expire in 180 days after issuance. The permit may
be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient
cause.
N. Conditional uses. The following land uses or development activities are
conditional uses in the Floodplain Overlay District, provided that they
are either permitted or conditional uses in the underlying basic zoning
district or that they satisfy the requirements of Subsection S below, and
further provided that they have a low flood damage potential and
comply with all other requirements of this section:
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1194
(1) Nonstructural agricultural uses, such as general farming,
pasturing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture,
forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, as defined in
Subsection CC, such as loading areas and parking areas, provided
that in addition to all other requirements such uses are not subject
to inundation depths exceeding two feet or flood velocities
exceeding two feet per second upon the occurrence of a regional
flood.
(3) Nonstructural private or public recreational uses, such as golf
courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic
grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife
and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting
preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and
fishing areas, and hiking and horseback riding trails.
(4) Uses or structures accessory to permanent open space uses, or
those classified as historic structures, shall comply with the
following requirements:
(a) The structures are not designed for human habitation or
associated with high flood damage potential and are
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(b) The structures are constructed and placed on the building site
with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flow of
floodwaters, insofar as the structure does not cause any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional
flood and offer minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwaters;
(c) The structures are firmly anchored to prevent them from
floating away and restricting bridge openings or other
constricted sections of the steam or river;
(d) The structures shall have all electrical and heating service
facilities and equipment at or above the flood-protection
elevation for the particular area; and
(e) Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls
having a total net area not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area and the bottom of all such
openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The
openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
(5) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or
wharves, including those used as part of a marina, and other waterrelated
uses, such as dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1195
aids and river crossings of transmission lines and pipelines, in
accordance with Chs. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats.
(6) Public utilities, streets and bridges, provided that in addition to all
other requirements:
(a) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the floodprotection
elevation (minor or auxiliary roads or nonessential
utilities may be constructed in the flood-fringe at lower
elevations, provided that they withstand flood forces to the
regional flood elevation);
(b) Construction meets the standards set forth in Subsection J(2);
and
(c) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges within the
flood-fringe would endanger public health or safety, or where
such facilities are deemed essential, construction or repair of
such facilities shall only be permitted if they are designed to
comply with Subsection S.
(7) Private on-site sewage disposal systems only in the flood-fringe
area (prohibited in the floodway area), provided that in addition to
all other requirements they shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system, pursuant to
Subsection S(2), to the flood-protection elevation and shall satisfy
the applicable provisions of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(8) Public or private wells only in the flood-fringe area (prohibited in
the floodway area), provided that in addition to all other
requirements they shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system, pursuant to Subsection
S(2), to the flood-protection elevation and shall satisfy the
applicable provisions of Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(9) Filling, or other deposition or storage of materials, provided that in
addition to all other requirements:
(a) The requirements of Subsections J and M above are satisfied;
(b) No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is
issued by the DNR pursuant to Ch. 30, Wis, Stats., and a permit
pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344 has been issued, if
applicable, and all other requirements of this section are
satisfied;
(c) The fill or other material will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading sufficient
to prevent erosion;
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1196
(d) Such filling or other deposition of material is not associated
with private or public waste disposal;
(e) The storage of materials, only in the flood-fringe area
(prohibited in the floodway area), that are buoyant, flammable
or explosive or which in times of flooding could be injurious to
property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic
life shall be at or above the flood-protection elevation for the
particular area or floodproofed in compliance with Subsection
S below, and adequate measures shall be taken to assure that
said materials will not enter the river or stream during
flooding;
(f) Excavation below the ordinary high-water mark shall not be
considered as providing any equal volume of storage capacity
for compensation purposes, unless Ch. NR 116 is more
restrictive. Any area of such compensating flood storage
capacity shall drain freely to the receiving stream, unless Ch.
NR 116 is more restrictive. The Village may impose slope,
safety shelf or other requirements to ensure that such areas of
compensating flood storage capacity are reasonably safe under
the circumstances, unless Ch. NR 116 is more restrictive; and
(g) The fill is not classified as a solid waste or hazardous waste
material.
(10) Levees or flood walls, provided that in addition to all other
requirements the requirements of § NR 116.17, Wis. Adm. Code,
and FEMA standards, are satisfied, the requirements of
Subsections J and N(9) above are satisfied, adequate arrangements
are made by the applicant to ensure that the levee or flood wall will
be properly maintained without cost to the Village, unless the
Village Board determines that such maintenance should be
undertaken by the Village, and all necessary permits and approvals
are obtained. The Village may impose requirements to ensure that
such improvements are reasonably safe under the circumstances.
(11) Channel improvements, provided that in addition to all other
requirements the applicable requirements of § NR 116.17, Wis.
Adm. Code, are satisfied, the requirements of Subsections T and U
below are satisfied, adequate arrangements are made by the
applicant to ensure that the channel improvements will be properly
maintained without cost to the Village, unless the Village Board
determines that such maintenance should be undertaken by the
Village, and all necessary permits and approvals are obtained. The
Village may impose requirements to ensure that such
improvements are reasonably safe under the circumstances.
(12) Open space land uses or development improvements or activities
listed above in Subsection N(1) to (11) which are not specifically
allowed as permitted, conditional or accessory uses in the
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1197
underlying basic zoning district may nonetheless be approved as
conditional uses in the Floodplain Overlay District, provided that
in addition to all other requirements the body with authority to
grant conditional use permits finds, in writing, that such uses are
compatible with the land uses allowed in the underlying basic
zoning district, are not adverse to the public health, safety or
welfare, and do not unreasonably interfere with the use and
enjoyment of other properties in the vicinity.
(13) Stormwater detention or retention facilities only in the flood-fringe
area (prohibited in the floodway area), provided that in addition to
all other requirements the requirements of Subsection N(9) above
are satisfied. Further, with respect to any stormwater detention or
retention facility designed to exclude the regional flood, the
requirements of Subsection N(10) above shall be satisfied. With
respect to any stormwater detention or retention facility designed
to allow the regional flood to flow into the facility, the facility shall
be designed so that all of the required detention or retention
capacity shall be above the water surface elevation of the regional
flood at the particular location in question.
(14) Any addition or modification to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming building allowed pursuant to Subsection Q below.
O. Conditional use procedures. Except as is specifically provided to the
contrary in this section, the conditional use permit procedures set out
in Article XVIII of this chapter shall apply to applications for conditional
use permits for any land use or development allowed by Subsection N
above. In addition to any requirements of Article XVIII, the following
conditions shall be imposed on all conditional use permits issued under
this section:
(1) Any land use or development so permitted shall be located,
constructed, installed, conducted and maintained in compliance
with this section.
(2) No development shall be used or occupied until it is completed and
inspected by the Village and until a certificate of compliance has
been issued by the Village Zoning Administrator or other
appropriate Village official or body.
(a) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof and the proposed use conform to the
provisions of this section;
(b) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit;
(c) The applicant shall submit a certification signed and sealed by
a Wisconsin-licensed and registered professional engineer,
architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and
floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1198
issued. Floodproofing measures also require certification by
a Wisconsin-licensed and registered professional engineer or
architect that floodproofing measures meet the requirements
of Subsection S; and
(d) If all requirements are met, the certificate of compliance shall
be issued within 10 days after the owner submits written
notification that the permitted work is completed.
(3) The applicant shall obtain all other necessary federal, state and
local permits and approvals, including, without limitation, those
required from the DNR under Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and those from
the United States Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. § 1344.
P. Prohibited uses. All land uses and development not listed as conditional
uses in Subsection N above are prohibited within the Floodplain
Overlay District, including, without limitation, the following:
(1) Structures in, on or over floodplain areas which are designed for
human habitation or associated with high flood damage potential or
not associated with permanent open space uses.
(2) The storage of any materials that are capable of floating,
flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water quality, or
human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life.
(3) Any land uses or development which is not in harmony with, or
which may be detrimental to, the uses permitted in the underlying
basic use zoning districts.
(4) Any private sewage systems in the floodway area, except portable
latrines that are removed prior to flooding, and systems associated
with recreational areas and DNR-approved campgrounds, that
meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(5) Any public or private wells in the floodway area which are used to
obtain water for ultimate human consumption, except those wells
in recreational areas that meet the requirements of local
ordinances and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(6) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites, whether public or
private.
(7) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those
permitted under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code.
(8) Any sanitary sewer or water supply mains in the floodway area,
except those to service existing or proposed development located
outside the floodway which complies with the regulations for the
floodplain area occupied.
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1199
(9) Any camping units within a public or private campground.
(10) Any residential structure or use, including a manufactured or
mobile home.
(11) Any accessory structures not specifically allowed with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Subsection N above.
(12) Any industrial or commercial structures or uses not specifically
allowed with a conditional use permit pursuant to Subsection N
above.
Q. Nonconforming uses.
(1) General.
(a) Applicability. These regulations apply to the modification of, or
addition to, any structure, and to the use of any structure or
premises, which was lawful before the passage of this section
or any amendment thereto, including, without limitation, any
text amendment or any amendment to the official floodplain
map or to the regional flood profiles.
(2) The existing lawful use of a structure or building which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this section may continue subject
to the following conditions:
(a) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or
nonconforming structure shall be permitted unless they are
made in conformity with the provisions of this section for the
area of the floodplain occupied and the other applicable
provisions of this chapter. The words "modification" and
"addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration,
addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or
replacement of any such existing use or structure or accessory
structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification.
Maintenance activities include such items as internal and
external painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of
doors, windows and other nonstructural components and the
maintenance, repair or replacement of existing private sewage
or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Any
costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not
considered maintenance.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure
is discontinued for 12 consecutive months it is no longer
permitted, and any future use of the property, and of any
structure or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable
requirements of this section.
(c) As requests are received by the Village for modifications or
additions to nonconforming uses or nonconforming structures,
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1200
a record shall be kept which lists the nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed
value, the cost of those additions or modifications which have
been permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total
current value such additions or modifications represent.
(d) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or
any structure with a nonconforming use which, over the life of
the structure, would equal or exceeds 50% of its present
equalized assessed value shall be allowed unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure
with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this section. Contiguous dry land access must
be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance
with Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code. The costs of elevating the
lowest floor of a nonconforming building or a building with a
nonconforming use to the flood-protection elevation are
excluded from the fifty-percent provisions of this subsection.
(e) If any nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use is destroyed or is so badly damaged that it
cannot be practically restored, it cannot be replaced,
reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure
satisfy the requirements of this section. For the purpose of this
subsection, restoration is deemed impractical where the total
cost of such restoration would equal or exceeds 50% of the
present equalized assessed value of the structure. For
nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or
destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction
of any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order
to restore it, to the size and use in effect prior to the damage
event, provided that the minimum federal code requirements
below are met and all required permits have been granted
prior to the start of construction.
[1] Residential structures.
[a] Shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation using fill,
pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter
walls must meet the requirements of Subsection S(2).
[b] Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy, and shall be constructed with
methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
[c] Shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1201
elevated so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
[d] In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data
available from a federal, state or other source.
[e] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, meet one of the
following conditions below, whichever is higher:
[i] At or above the flood-protection elevation; or
[ii] Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around
the structure; or
[iii] The depth as shown on the FIRM.
[f] In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from the structure.
[2] Nonresidential structures.
[a] Shall meet the requirements of Subsection Q(2)(e).
[b] Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the regional flood elevation, or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall meet the standards in Subsection S(1) and (2).
[c] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, meet one of the
following conditions below, whichever is higher:
[i] At or above the flood-protection elevation; or
[ii] Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around
the structure; or
[iii] The depth as shown on the FIRM.
(f) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure, the alteration will comply
with § 420-131J, M, N and O; flood-resistant materials are
used; and construction practices and floodproofing methods
that comply with § 420-131S are used. Repair or rehabilitation
of historic structures shall be exempt from the development
standards of Subsection Q(2)(e)[1] if it is determined that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure and
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1202
(g) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or
any structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which
would equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed
value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is
permanently changed to a conforming structure with a
conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this section. Contiguous dry land access shall
be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance
with Subsection S(4).
(h) If, on a per-event basis, the total value of the work being done
under Subsection Q(2)(d) and (g) equals or exceeds 50% of the
present equalized assessed value, the work shall be permitted
unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a
conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance
with the applicable requirements of this section. Contiguous
dry land access shall be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with Subsection S(4).
(3) Floodway areas.
(a) Modification or addition.
[1] No modification or addition shall be allowed to any
nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use in a floodway area unless such
modification or addition:
[a] Has been granted a permit or variance which satisfies
the requirements of this section;
[b] Satisfies the requirements of Subsection Q(1) above;
and
[c] Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or
increase the regional flood height.
[2] An addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed,
pursuant to Subsection S, by means other than the use of
fill, to the flood-protection elevation.
[3] If any part of the foundation below the flood-protection
elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
[a] The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered
and licensed architect or an engineer to allow for the
efficient entry and exit of floodwaters without human
intervention. A minimum of two openings must be
provided with a minimum net area of at least one
square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed
area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more
than 12 inches above the adjacent grade;
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1203
[b] The parts of the foundation located below the floodprotection
elevation must be constructed of floodresistant
materials;
[c] Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood-protection
elevation; and
[4] The use must be limited to parking, building access or
limited storage.
(b) No new private sewage disposal system, or addition to an
existing private sewage disposal system, except where an
addition has been ordered by a government agency to correct a
hazard to public health, shall be allowed in a floodway area.
Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing private
sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall satisfy the
applicable requirements of all applicable Village or other local
ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(c) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain
water for ultimate human consumption shall be allowed in a
floodway area. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an
existing well in a floodway area shall satisfy the applicable
requirements of all applicable Village or other local ordinances
and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(4) Flood-fringe areas.
(a) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any
nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has
been granted a permit or variance by the Village. In addition,
the modification or addition shall be placed on fill or
floodproofed to the flood-protection elevation in compliance
with the standards in Subsection S, except where Subsection
Q(4)(b) below is applicable.
(b) Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection Q(4)(a)
above would result in unnecessary hardship, and only where
the structure will not be used for human habitation or be
associated with a high flood damage potential, the Zoning
Board of Appeals, using the procedures established in
Subsection R, may grant a variance from those provisions for
modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below.
Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations
lower than the flood-protection elevation may be permitted,
provided that:
[1] No floor (excluding the basement or crawlway) is allowed
below the regional flood elevation for residential or
commercial structures;
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1204
[2] Human lives are not endangered;
[3] Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be
installed;
[4] Flood depths shall not exceed two feet;
[5] Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and
[6] The structure shall not be used for storage of materials
described in Subsection P(2) above.
(c) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to,
replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage
disposal system, shall meet all the applicable provisions of all
local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(d) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or
maintenance of a well, shall meet the applicable provisions of
this section and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(5) It is the intent of this section that in the event a building permit is
validly granted or issued on the basis of the best currently available
information relating to the floodplain, floodway or regional flood
profiles but a subsequently conducted floodplain study
demonstrates that such information was not accurate and that the
permit would not be granted or issued in light of the newer
information, such permit shall not be deemed to have been granted
or issued in error so as to prevent the vesting of rights based upon
reasonable detrimental reliance on such permit or approval. In the
event of reasonable detrimental reliance upon a Village building
permit under these circumstances, the status of the land use,
development or development-related activity in question shall be
that of a valid nonconforming use or valid nonconforming
structure, provided that the requirements for such status, in
addition to being lawful in its inception, are satisfied.
R. Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1) The Village Zoning Board of Appeals, created under § 62.23(7)(e),
Wis. Stats., is hereby authorized to hear and decide, pursuant to
the specific requirements of this section and in accordance with the
procedures and requirements specified in Article V of Chapter 18 of
the Village Municipal Code:
(a) Appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official or body in the enforcement or
administration of this section;
(b) Disputes concerning the location of the floodplain or floodway
boundaries; and
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1205
(c) Variances from the dimensional standards of this section.
(2) Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the
Zoning Board of Appeals in hearing disputes concerning the
location of floodplain or floodway boundaries:
(a) Whether a floodplain boundary is established by approximate
or detailed floodplain studies, the regional flood elevations or
profiles for the location in question shall be the governing
factor in locating the floodplain boundary. If no regional flood
elevations or profiles are available to the Board, other available
evidence may be examined.
(b) The person contesting the location of the floodplain or
floodway boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
present arguments and technical evidence to the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
(c) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Zoning Board of
Appeals should inform the person contesting the boundary
location to petition the Village for a map amendment according
to Subsection T.
(3) Variance.
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals may, upon appeal, grant a
variance from the dimensional standards of this section where
an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
[1] Literal enforcement of the provisions of this section will
result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship to the
applicant;
[2] The hardship is due to adoption of this section and to
special conditions unique to the property and not common
to a group of adjacent lots or premises (in such case, the
section or map must be amended);
[3] Such variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
[4] Such variance is consistent with the purpose of this
section.
(b) In addition to the criteria specified above, to qualify for a
variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must
be met:
[1] The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional
flood elevation;
[2] Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than 1/
2 acre and are contiguous to existing structures
constructed below the regional flood elevation; and
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1206
[3] Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good
and sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief
necessary, shall not cause increased risks to public safety
or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief
efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the
ordinance.
(c) A variance shall not:
[1] Grant, extend or increase any land use or development
prohibited in the floodplain (or in the floodway, if
applicable).
[2] Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic
gain or loss.
[3] Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
[4] Damage the rights or property values of other persons in
the area.
[5] Permit a lower degree of flood protection in the floodplain
than the flood-protection elevation.
[6] Allow any floor of a basement or crawl space below the
regional flood elevation for residential, commercial or
industrial structures.
[7] Allow any land use or development which requires an
amendment to this section, the official floodplain maps or
the regional flood profiles.
[8] Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its
use, which would preclude its continued designation as an
historic structure.
(d) When a variance is granted in a floodplain area, the Board shall
notify the applicant in writing that increased flood insurance
premiums and risks to life and property may result. A copy of
this notification shall be maintained with the variance appeal
record.
(4) Appeals. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by
any person aggrieved, or by any officer or department of the Village
affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator or other
administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days
unless otherwise provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with
the official whose decision is in question, and with the Board, a
notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official
whose decision is in question shall transmit to the Board all records
regarding the matter appealed.
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1207
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review all data related to
the appeal. This may include:
[1] Permit application data listed in Subsection L;
[2] Floodway/flood-fringe discrepancy, Subsection K;
[3] Data listed in Subsection M where the applicant has not
submitted this information to the Zoning Administrator;
and
[4] Other data submitted with the application or submitted to
the Board with the appeal.
(b) For appeals of all denied permits, the Board shall:
[1] Follow the procedures of Subsection R;
[2] Consider the recommendations of the Zoning
Administrator, or his/her designee or other appropriate
Village officials or bodies, depending upon the nature of
the permit; and
[3] Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
(c) For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation,
the Board shall:
[1] Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data
showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases equal to
or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed after
amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate
legal arrangements are made with all adversely affected
property owners as per the requirements of Subsections I
and T; and
[2] Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data
properly demonstrates that the project does not cause an
increase, provided that no other reasons for denial exist.
S. Floodproofing for nonconforming structures.
(1) No conditional use permit or variance shall be granted or issued for
a nonresidential structure designed to be watertight below the
regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan or
document certified by a Wisconsin licensed and registered
professional engineer or architect that any required floodproofing
measures are adequately designed to protect the structure or
development to the flood-protection elevation and submits a FEMA
floodproofing certificate.
(2) For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no
permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan
that is certified by a Wisconsin licensed and registered professional
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1208
engineer or architect that the design meets or exceeds the
following standards:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
(a) Withstand the flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and
impact forces, and other factors associated with the regional
flood.
(b) Assure protection to the flood-protection elevation.
(c) Provide anchorage of structures to foundations to resist
flotation and lateral movement.
(d) Ensure that the structural walls and floors are watertight to
the flood-protection elevation and the interior remains
completely dry during flooding, without human intervention.
(e) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
(4) Floodproofing measures may include, without limitation, the
following:
(a) Reinforcement of walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse
caused by water pressure or floating debris.
(b) Addition of mass or weight to structures to prevent flotation.
(c) Placement of essential utilities above the flood-protection
elevation.
(d) Surface or subsurface drainage systems, including pumping
facilities, to relieve external foundation wall and basement
floor pressures.
(e) Construction of water supply wells and waste treatment
systems to prevent the entrance of floodwaters into the
systems.
(f) Cutoff valves on sewer mains or elimination of gravity flow
basement drains.
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1209
(5) Dry land access. All residential or commercial uses or any habitable
structure shall provide dry land access from the public road to said
structure.
T. Removal of lands from floodplain; amendments. Compliance with the
provisions of this section shall not be grounds for removing lands from
the floodplain, unless they are removed by filling to a height of at least
two feet above the regional flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land
lying outside the floodplain, the official floodplain map is amended, and
FEMA revises the Flood Insurance Rate Map or issues a letter of map
amendment or revision.
(1) Official floodplain map amendments are required for any changes
in the official regional floodwater surface profiles or the delineation
of the floodplain or floodway. Examples of actions requiring
floodplain map amendments are listed below:
(a) Any change to the boundary of the floodplain and/or
watercourse alterations on the FIRM;
(b) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles
of the regional flood and the official floodplain maps;
(c) Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled
area to a height at or above the flood-protection elevation and
is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain;
(d) Any fill, deposition of materials, storage of materials or
encroachment into the floodplain that will obstruct flow or
causing any increase in the regional flood height;
(e) Any upgrading of this section; or
(f) Any correction to an existing mapped floodplain.
(g) All channel relocations and changes to the official floodplain
maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area from the
floodplain that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM
requires prior approval by FEMA.
(2) Criteria for amending the floodplain boundary. The Village shall not
permit amendments to the floodplain boundary that are
inconsistent with the purposes of this section or in conflict with the
applicable rules of the DNR and FEMA. In addition:
(a) Amendments to the floodplain boundaries shall not be
permitted where the change will increase the regional flood
stage elevation unless the applicant has made appropriate
legal arrangements with the Village, any other affected
governmental units, and any other property owners affected by
the flood stage increase.
(b) The floodplain boundary shall not be amended without first:
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1210
[1] Providing the Village with updated engineering data and
computations necessary to correctly determine the
floodplain boundary and submitting detailed engineering
plans for redelineating the floodplain boundary;
[2] Amending this section;
[3] Obtaining approval from the DNR; and
[4] Obtaining approval from FEMA in the form of a letter of
map change approved by FEMA.
(c) Petitions for the floodplain amendments shall provide adjusted
water surface profiles and adjusted floodplain limits to reflect
the increased flood elevations.
(d) Any area removed from the floodplain shall be contiguous to
land lying outside the floodplain.
(e) Whenever any volume of flood storage capacity is removed
from the floodplain, as defined by the ground surface and the
regional flood elevation, an equal volume of flood storage
capacity shall be created within the existing or newly created
floodplain boundary, in the vicinity of the removal, to
compensate for the lost flood storage capacity. Excavation
below the ordinary high-water mark shall not be considered as
providing any equal volume of storage capacity for
compensation purposes. Any such area of compensating flood
storage capacity shall drain freely to the receiving stream.
[Amended 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-04]
(f) Removal of land from the floodplain shall not be permitted
unless the land has been filled to an elevation at least two feet
above the elevation of the floodplain.
(g) Amendments to the boundaries of the floodplain or the
unnumbered A Zones shall not be permitted unless the
petitioner provides the Village with all necessary data and
computations to justify and determine the effects of the
proposed amendment. The Village may require the applicant to
submit any or all of the information that is required pursuant to
Subsection M above in connection with applications for a
conditional use permit. The effects of any change in the
floodplain boundary shall not increase the regional flood
elevation unless appropriate legal arrangements have been
made to protect the rights of the Village and all affected
governmental entities and landowners. If the affected area of
the floodplain or the unnumbered A Zone is less than five acres
in area and the cost of the proposed development is less than
$125,000, the DNR may assist the petitioner in determining
the required flood elevations.
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1211
(h) No river or stream or watercourse shall be altered or relocated
until a floodplain map amendment has been conditionally
approved, and in no case shall the flood-carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse be
less.
(3) Procedures. Amendments to this section, including text
amendments, floodplain map amendments relating to the boundary
of the floodplain or floodway, or amendments to the regional flood
profiles, may be made upon petition of any interested party in
accordance with the provisions of § 420-13 of this chapter.
Additionally, the following requirements shall apply, and in the
event of any conflict between the provisions of this Subsection T
and § 420-13, the requirements of this subsection shall be
controlling:
(a) Any amendment proposed shall be submitted to the Village
with the completed application, all required information and
materials and the required fee.
(b) Upon receipt of a completed application, the Village will set a
date for the public hearing a minimum of 30 days from the date
such completed application was received. Copies of the
proposed amendment and notice of the public hearing shall be
submitted to the DNR for review prior to the hearing, and a
Class 2 notice shall be published.
(c) The Village Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing and
make a recommendation to the Village Board.
(d) Upon receiving Village Board approval for the floodplain
boundary amendment, DNR approval, a FEMA conditional
approval (if applicable), and an erosion control permit, the
petitioner may proceed with any cut and fill project.
(e) Upon completion of the work, an as-built grading plan and
supporting documentation certified and stamped by a
Wisconsin registered and licensed profession engineer shall be
submitted to the Village to verify compliance will all approvals.
(f) In the case of floodplain boundary corrections based on actual
field surveys, a certified plat of survey or site plan providing
detailed data which precisely delineates the actual floodplain
limits compared to the existing floodplain lines as identified on
the corresponding official floodplain overlay maps shall be
provided.
(g) No amendment to the maps or text of this section shall become
effective until reviewed and approved by state and federal
agencies as required by law.
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1212
(h) All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs
flow, causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall
obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal
arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and
provide copies of said legal arrangements before the
amendment can be approved by the Village.
U. Watercourse alterations. Prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and prior to the issuance of any zoning, building, land
disturbance or other Village permit or approval which may be required
for the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the Village Zoning
Administrator shall notify, in writing, any adjacent municipality, the
appropriate district office of the DNR and the appropriate office of
FEMA within six months and shall require the applicant to obtain all
necessary state and federal permits and approvals. Without respect to
any other restrictions that may be imposed, the flood-carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be
maintained and standards specified in Subsection J above are required.
V. Development or development-related activity requiring a DNR permit.
Any development or development-related activity which requires a
permit from the DNR under Ch. 30 or 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks,
piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams, navigational aids or channel
improvements, may be allowed, provided that such DNR permits and all
necessary local permits or approvals are obtained and that all
necessary amendments to this section, including amendments of the
official floodplain map, the boundaries of the floodplain and floodway,
and the water surface elevations of the regional flood, as applicable, are
made in accordance with Subsection T above.
W. Compliance. Any land use development or development-related activity
within the areas regulated by this section shall be in full compliance
with the terms of this section and all other applicable local, state, and
federal statutes, ordinances, regulations and permits. Unless
specifically exempted by law, the Village is required to comply with this
section and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to
comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The construction,
reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges
by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt when
§ 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
X. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(1) This section supersedes all of the provisions of any municipal
zoning ordinance relating to the floodplain areas or enacted under
§ 61.35 or 87.30, Wis. Stats., which relate to floodplains, except
that where any other such municipal zoning provision is more
restrictive than the provisions contained in this section, such other
provision shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the
greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1213
(2) This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, convents or easements. However, where
this section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
section shall prevail.
Y. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this section shall be held to be minimum requirements liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a
limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes. Where a provision of this section is required by a standard in
Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the provision in this section is
unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Ch. NR 116
standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this section or in effect
on the date of the most recent text amendment to this section.
Z. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
provided by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on engineering experience and methods of study.
Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by manmade
or natural causes, such as ice jams or bridge openings restricted
by debris. Therefore, this section does not imply that areas outside of
the delineated floodplain or permitted land uses within the floodplain
will be totally free from flooding and associated flood damages, nor
does this section create liability on the part of, or a cause of action
against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damage that may result from reliance on this section.
AA. Enforcement and penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this
section by any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the
Village Attorney for expeditious prosecution of all such violations. A
violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the Village a penalty of not less
than $5 and not more than $50, together with the current cost and
processing fees of such action. Each day of continued violation shall
constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this section is a public
nuisance, and the creation of such nuisance may be enjoined and its
maintenance may be abated by action or suit of the Village, the state, or
any citizen thereof pursuant to § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
BB. Severability. Should any portion of this section be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remained of this section shall not be affected.
CC. Definitions. For purposes of this section, words and phrases defined in
this Subsection CC shall have the meaning stated below. Words and
phrases not defined below in this subsection shall have the common,
ordinary meaning which results in the most reasonable interpretation
and application of this section in light of the stated purposes of this
section. Words used in the present tense include the future, and vice
versa. Words indicating the singular number include the plural, and
vice versa. The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory
and not discretionary.
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1214
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or ACCESSORY USE — A detached
subordinate structure or a use which is clearly incidental to and
customarily found in connection with the principal structure or use to
which it is related and which is located on the same lot as that of the
principal structure or use.
AH ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
ALTERATION — An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change
or modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to
electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other
systems within a structure.
AO ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/
AH, or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average
depth of one foot to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity
flood may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
A ZONES — Those areas shown on the official floodplain maps which
would be inundated by the regional flood, as defined below. These areas
may be numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may
not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data
for a particular area.
BASE FLOOD — Means the flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of
a Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and depicted on a FIRM.
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor below
ground level on at least three sides.
BUILDING — A roofed and walled structure.
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
Department pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and which allows limited
filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water
mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions
of this section.
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent
overnight use by four or more camping units or which is advertised or
represented as a camping area.
CAMPING UNIT — Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet
in area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a
camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup truck, or tent or other
mobile recreational vehicle that is fully licensed, if required, and ready
for highway use.
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1215
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification issued by the Village
Zoning Administrator stating that the use of land, or the construction,
installation, placement or relocation of a building, structure, facility
or site improvement, or the making of an addition or a substantial
improvement to a building, structure, facility or site improvement, or
the extent and elevation of fill, or the lowest floor of a structure, or any
other development activity or improvement regulated by this section,
is in compliance with all of the provisions thereof and the provisions of
any authorizing conditional use permit.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and
banks to confine and conduct the normal flow of water.
COMMERCIAL USE — A use involving commerce or manufacturing,
without regard to the type of zoning district in which the use is located,
including but not limited to commercial, industrial, institutional,
governmental or park and recreational uses.
CRAWLWAY OR CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first
usable floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used
for limited access to plumbing and electrical utilities.
DEVELOPMENT or DEVELOPMENT-RELATED ACTIVITY — Any manmade
or nonnatural change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to the construction, installation, placement or
relocation of buildings, structures, facilities or site improvements; the
construction or installation of additions or substantial improvements to
buildings, structures, facilities or site improvements; mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage,
deposition or extraction of materials; the repair of any damaged
structure; or the construction or installation of public or private streets
or roads or public or private facilities for sewage treatment or disposal,
water supply or stormwater drainage or control. The phrase
"development-related activity" specifically includes any land division
(and any neighborhood sketch plan, conceptual plan, preliminary plat,
final plat, certified survey map or development agreement leading up
to, constituting or relating to a proposed land division) which
contemplates or may influence development or other developmentrelated
activities.
DNR — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or any
successor state agency having authority with respect to matters
relating to floodplains.
DRY LAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route, the elevation of which
is above the one-hundred-year flood elevation, which is wide enough for
wheeled rescue and relief vehicles and which connects land located in
the floodplain to land outside the floodplain.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, building, land use or other
development improvement or activity in the floodway.
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1216
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency or any
successor federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance
Program.
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence which
is generally determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a
particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average,
once in a specified number of years or as a percent chance of occurring
in any given year.
FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the
floodway which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and
generally associated with standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both
special flood hazard areas (the floodplain and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — A technical engineering
examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard
areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional
flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood
elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are
designated as numbered and unnumbered A Zones. Flood Insurance
Rate Maps, that accompany the Flood Insurance Study, form the basis
for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by:
FLOODPLAIN — That land which has been or may be hereafter covered
by floodwater during the regional flood. The floodplain includes the
floodway and the flood-fringe and may include other designated
floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation that is
surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood.
(1) The overflow or rise of inland waters;
The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source;
(2)
The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan; and/or
(3)
The sudden increase in surface water elevation caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
seiche, or by some similarly unusual event.
(4)
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1217
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to insure wise
use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation,
education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT (FPO) — The zoning designation
that includes both the floodway and flood-fringe areas that are
regulated by this section.
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship at particular locations along a watercourse of the water
surface elevations of a flood event to surface elevations of the land.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions,
changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and
sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding for the
purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage.
FLOOD-PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation two feet above the
regional flood elevation.
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of
floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the
regional flood discharge.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FREEBOARD — A flood-protection elevation requirement designed as a
safety factor which is usually expressed in terms of a specified number
of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for the
effects of any factors that contribute to flood heights greater than
those calculated. These factors include, but are not limited to, ice
jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings
and floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology of the
watershed, loss of flood storage areas due to development, and
sedimentation of the river or stream bed.
HABITABLE BUILDING — Any building or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — The land use or development so
described carries with it a significant risk of danger to life or health or
of substantial economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1218
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward rise
in the regional flood elevation, greater than 0.00 foot, resulting from
a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which
are directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not
attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables, such as
roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and
discharge.
LAND DIVISION — Any division or conveyance of land or of an interest
in land that results in the creation of one or more additional lots
or parcels, including, without limitation, any subdivision, large lot
subdivision or minor land division (all as defined in § 395-101 of
Chapter 395, Land Division and Development Control, of the Village
Code) or the creation of any condominium other than a conversion
condominium or a condominium involving a maximum of one principal
building per lot or parcel. A land division can be legally created or
accomplished only by means of a preliminary and final plat approved
by the Village Board, or a certified survey map approved by the Village
Board, or, in the case of a condominium, by means of condominium
instruments approved by the Village Board.
LAND USE — Any use made of unimproved or improved real estate.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE — Elevation of the lowest ground surface
that touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR
60.3.
MAINTENANCE — The act or process of restoring to original
soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs,
or the replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with
equivalent fixtures, systems or structures.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program, as determined by
the Secretary of the Interior, or directly by the Secretary of the
Interior in states without approved programs.
(4)
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1219
MANUFACTURED HOME — A factory-built, single-family structure that
is manufactured under the authority of 42 U.S.C. § 5401, the National
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, is
transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis
and fitted with wheels, is intended to be hauled to a site and is
registered and titled with the Wisconsin Department of Transportation.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, factory-built home designed to
be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to the
enactment of the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976.
MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE — A hydraulic engineering model
that corrects any errors that occur in the Duplicate Effective Model,
adds any additional cross sections to the Duplicate Effective Model, or
incorporates more detailed topographic information than that used in
the current effective model.
MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE — A copy of the hydraulic analysis
used in the effective FIS and referred to as the "Effective Model."
MODEL, EFFECTIVE — The hydraulic engineering model that was used
to produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT) — A modification of the Duplicate
Effective Model or Corrected Effective Model to reflect any man-made
modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date
of the Effective Model but prior to the construction of the project for
which the revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred
since the date of the Effective Model, then this model would be identical
to the Corrected Effective Model or Duplicate Effective Model.
MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) — A modification of the Existing or
Pre-Project Conditions Model, Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected
Effective Model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
NAVD88 or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM 1988 — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment. The data
conversion factor from NGVD29 to NAVD88 in Kenosha County is -0.3
feet (0.0 feet NGVD29 = -0.3 feet NAVD88).
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning
regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For the purpose of determining flood
insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial
FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
NGVD29 or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM 1929 —
Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment, to
which elevations are referenced. The data conversion factor from
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1220
NGVD29 to NAVD88 in Kenosha County is -0.3 feet (0.0 feet NGVD29 =
-0.3 feet NAVD88)
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — An existing lawful structure or
building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural
requirements of this section for the area of the floodplain which it
occupies.
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing lawful use of unimproved or
improved real estate which is not in conformity with the provisions of
this section for the area of the floodplain which it occupies.
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which physically blocks
the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development, by itself or
in conjunction with any future development, will cause an increase in
regional flood height.
OPEN SPACE USE — Those land uses having a relatively low flood
damage potential and not involving structures.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up
to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention
of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other
easily recognized characteristic.
PERSON — An individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, municipality, state agency or any other legal
entity.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving a single structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field
located on the same parcel as the structure. This term also means an
alternative sewage system approved by the Wisconsin Department of
Commerce (or any successor state agency), including a substitute for
the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving
more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than
the structure.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines, such as electric, telephone and telegraph, or using
distribution and collection systems, such as water, sanitary sewer and
storm sewer.
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — The base floodwaters will
not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the
floodplain and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will
not damage existing or proposed buildings.
REGIONAL FLOOD — The one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood
on the particular stream, river or lake in question.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was
issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-131
344:1221
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual
start" means either the first placement of permanent construction on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured or mobile home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main structure. For an alteration, the "actual start of construction"
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object with form, shape and utility,
either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into
the ground, streambed or lake bed, including but not limited to roofed
and walled buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and
culverts.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized
assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the equalized assessed value
of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the
structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered
substantial improvement regardless of the work performed. The term
does not, however, include either any project for the improvement of
a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code
violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of an
historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict
conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height
or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the
purposes of this section.
VARIANCE — An authorization by the Village Zoning Board of Appeals
for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a
manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses)
contained in this section.
VILLAGE — The Village of Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin.
§ 420-131 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-131
344:1222
§ 420-132. (Reserved)174
§ 420-133. AGO General Agricultural Overlay District. [Amended
7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44; 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-07]
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance. A structure or
other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation
documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway
encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such
time as that documentation is provided.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area contributing runoff or
surface water to a particular watercourse or body of water.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along
a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile
of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of
its intended use.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The AGO General Agricultural
Overlay District is intended to provide for existing agricultural lands to
continue in their current uses until such time as the land is proposed to
be developed for urban purposes in accordance with the underlying
zoning district and pursuant to the Village's Comprehensive Plan. No
such district shall be established unless it is in compliance with adopted
or amended comprehensive, neighborhood and conceptual plans.
B. Permitted uses. The following listed principal uses and certain
unspecified principal uses approved pursuant to Subsection C below
are allowed as permitted uses in the AGO District, subject to the
requirements of this chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes:
(1) Any permitted uses allowed in the A-2 District.
(2) Any permitted uses allowed in the underlying district are only
allowed if the AGO District is removed pursuant to § 420-13.
C. Unspecified permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to approve as a permitted use in the AGO District a proposed
principal use not listed in Subsection B above if the proposed use is
similar in character to one or more of the listed permitted uses in the
AGO District and is free of potential problems requiring special
regulation. The Zoning Administrator shall make written findings
supporting any such decision. Any use so approved shall be subject to
all requirements of Subsection B above. Notwithstanding the foregoing
174. Editor's Note: Former § 420-132, APO Agricultural Preservation Overlay District, as
amended, was repealed 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-27.
§ 420-131 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-133
344:1223
authorization, the following uses shall not be construed to be permitted
uses in the AGO District:
(1) Any listed permitted use or conditional use specifically listed in any
other zoning district that is not specifically listed in Subsection B
above.
(2) Any adult-oriented uses, including, without limitation, an adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club, adult dry cabaret, adult movie
theater, adult video rental store, adult video store or adult viewing
facility.
(3) Any listed unspecified permitted use in any zoning district that is
not specifically listed in Subsection B above.
(4) Any use involving the serving or selling of alcoholic beverages.
(5) Anhydrous ammonia (bulk storage facility or retail sale).
(6) Composting (commercial).
(7) Egg production (commercial).
(8) Farm implement business.
(9) Feed lot (commercial).
(10) Fertilizer (production, sales, storage, mixing or blending).
(11) Fireworks (manufacturing, storage or sale).
(12) Flea markets.
(13) Fur-bearing animals (keeping or raising).
(14) Livestock sale facilities.
(15) Propane (bulk storage facility or retail sale).
(16) Refuse incineration.
(17) Slaughterhouse.
(18) Truck stop and/or truck service facility.
(19)Wrecking, junk, demolition and scrap yards.
(20) Livestock sale facilities.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses in the AGO District (as principal uses or accessory uses, as
appropriate) pursuant to and in accordance with Article XVIII of this
chapter, subject to the requirements of Article IX, if applicable, and all
other applicable provisions of this chapter and of other Village
ordinances and codes:
§ 420-133 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-133
344:1224
(1) Any conditional uses allowed in the A-2 District.
(2) Any conditional uses allowed in the underlying district are only
allowed if the AGO District is removed pursuant to § 420-13.
E. Special licensed uses. Some uses require a special license approved by
the Village Board and may only be operated pursuant to and in
accordance with such license. The granting of a Village license by the
Village Board is not assured either by permitted use status or by the
granting of a conditional use permit or of any other permit or approval
under this chapter.
F. Combination of uses. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in
this section, two or more principal uses and their related accessory uses
may be located and conducted in the same principal building in the
AGO District, subject to Article IX and all other applicable provisions of
this chapter and of other Village ordinances and codes, in accordance
with each of the following restrictions to the extent such restrictions
are applicable:
(1) Permitted uses allowed in the AGO District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such permitted uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the A-2 District.
(2) Conditional uses allowed in the AGO District and their related
accessory uses may be located separately or together, and may be
conducted separately or together, with other such conditional uses
and their related accessory uses in the same principal building in
the AGO District; provided, however, that the area of a building
occupied by a conditional use and any related accessory uses shall
be a physically separate defined area in which any proposed new
use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing as of the time when
the conditional use permit for such conditional use or any
amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed only
pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Permitted uses allowed in the AGO District and their related
accessory uses and conditional uses allowed in the AGO District
and their related accessory uses may be located separately or
together, and may be conducted separately or together, in the same
principal building in the A-2 District; provided, however, that the
area of a building occupied by a conditional use and any related
accessory uses shall be a physically separate defined area in which
any proposed new use of any kind (or any use of any kind existing
as of the time when the conditional use permit for such conditional
use or any amendment of such permit is approved) shall be allowed
only pursuant to and in accordance with the conditional use permit
issued for such conditional use under Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 420-133 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-133
344:1225
(4) Nonconforming uses existing in the AGO District as of the effective
date of Ordinance No. 10-07 (March 15, 2010) and any related
accessory uses existing as of such date may be continued in the
same principal building with other uses; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use and no accessory use to a nonconforming use
may be extended or expanded into new areas, and no new
accessory use related to such nonconforming use (and no prior
accessory use to such nonconforming use that has been
discontinued as an actively conducted use for a period of 12 or
more consecutive months) may be commenced or recommenced,
and further provided that the area of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use and any related accessory uses shall be a
physically separate defined area in which any proposed new use of
any kind shall be prohibited.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, accessory
uses to principal uses allowed in the AGO District are allowed,
subject to all other Village ordinances and codes, as follows:
(a) Accessory uses to principal permitted uses in the AGO District
are allowed.
(b) Accessory uses to principal conditional uses allowed in the
AGO District are allowed, but only pursuant to and in
accordance with a conditional use permit issued under Article
XVIII of this chapter.
(c) In the event of any issue about whether a particular use is
properly an accessory use, the Zoning Administrator shall have
authority to decide. The Zoning Administrator shall make
written findings to support any such decision.
(2) Specific permitted accessory uses that are allowed in the AGO
District include:
(a) General farm buildings, including agricultural windmills,
barns, and sheds incidental to the agricultural use (per
§ 420-86).
(b) Silos and grain/storage bins, provided that the height does not
exceed 100 feet.
(c) Feedlots (not commercial and only for permitted farm uses).
(d) Storage, curing, drying, churning and packaging of products
and crops produced on the land; provided, however, that such
products are not processed on the land; and provided, further,
that such products are not commercially sold as part of a retail
business conducted on the land.
(e) Roadside stands (per § 420-88.1).
§ 420-133 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-133
344:1226
§ 420-134. (Reserved)175
(f) Private garages; gardening, tool, and storage sheds; or
gazebos incidental to the residential use (per § 420-86).
(g) Home occupations (per Article VII).
(h) Driveways (per § 420-46).
(i) Swimming pools/hot tubs (per Article XII).
(j) Fences (per Article XI).
(k) Decks (per § 420-87).
(l) Sport courts (per § 420-88).
(m) Residential communication structures (per § 420-90).
(3) New proposed accessory uses to nonconforming uses (and any
prior accessory uses to a nonconforming use that have been
discontinued as actively conducted uses for 12 or more consecutive
months) are prohibited.
(4) Any accessory uses allowed in the underlying district are only
allowed if the AGO District is removed pursuant to § 420-13.
H. Temporary uses. Temporary uses may be allowed in the AGO District
pursuant to § 420-140.1 of this chapter.
I. Prohibited uses. Uses that are not specifically allowed in the AGO
District by this chapter as specified in the foregoing sections are
prohibited in the AGO District.
J. Dimensional standards. Except as specifically provided in this chapter,
and without limitations, all uses, sites, buildings and structures in the
AGO District shall comply with the dimensional standards to the extent
applicable as set forth in the A-2 District.
K. Design standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the AGO District shall comply with the design standards set forth in
the A-2 District.
L. Operational standards. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, and without limitation, all uses, sites, buildings and structures
in the AGO District shall comply with the operational standards set
forth in the A-2 District.
M. Authorized sanitary sewer system. See § 420-32 of this chapter.
N. Authorized water supply system. See § 420-33 of this chapter.
175. Editor's Note: Former § 420-134, Auto Agricultural Land Holding Overlay District, as
amended, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-09.
§ 420-133 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-135
344:1227
§ 420-135. UHO Urban Land Holding Overlay District.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics.
(1) This district is intended to be used where land is expected to
experience further urban or suburban development in accordance
with underlying zoning but where such development cannot be
permitted at the present time due to the existence of one or more
deficiencies, including lack of essential services, such as municipal
sanitary sewers, water or stormwater management facilities and
proper drainage, or the need to provide for access to landlocked
lands, or the establishment of street grades that are coordinated,
or similar neighborhood development matters.
(2) Accordingly, existing uses are permitted to continue as they are,
but any expansions or additions thereof are only allowable with
approval of site plans as noted under Subsection I below.
(3) New uses requiring the issuance of building or zoning permits shall
not be permitted until this overlay district is first removed by the
Village of Pleasant Prairie by a Zoning Map amendment, and the
petition to remove such overlay shall address the neighborhood
development matters requiring consideration, unless neighborhood
plans or other actions, such as municipal utility extensions, have
already been made.
B. Principal uses. Any existing principal use as permitted in the underlying
basic use district, except that any expansions thereof shall be subject to
review of site plans under Subsection I below.
C. Accessory uses. Any existing accessory use as permitted in the
underlying basic use district, except that any expansions thereof shall
be subject to review of site plans under Subsection I below.
D. Conditional uses. Any existing conditional use, or existing uses entitled
to conditional use status which apply for such status, except that any
expansion thereof shall, in addition to meeting the requirements for
conditional uses of this chapter, in the process of having its conditions
set, be subjected to the criteria established under Subsection I below.
E. Lot area and width.
(1) Lots shall have a lot area as required in the underlying basic use
district.
(2) All lots shall have a lot width as required in the underlying basic
use district.
F. Building height and area.
(1) No building or part of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
§ 420-135 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-135
344:1228
§ 420-136. LUSA Limited Urban Service Area Overlay District.
(2) The total floor area of any use shall not be less than that which is
required in the underlying basic use district.
G. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: as required in the underlying basic use district.
(2) Shore setback: as required in the underlying basic use district.
(3) Side setback: as required in the underlying basic use district.
(4) Rear setback: as required in the underlying basic use district.
H. Authorized sanitary sewer system and water supply system. As
permitted in the underlying basic use district.
I. Review of site plans.
(1) Where existing uses wish to expand prior to removal of this district,
before building and zoning permits are issued the applicant shall
first obtain site plan approval from the Village Plan Commission.
The purpose of such review is to establish that the expansion will
not worsen an existing deficiency of the property or neighborhood
nor prevent the eventual solution of such deficiencies. As
experience with this problem is gained, the Village may from time
to time issue checklists or guidelines for the applicant's use which
outline information or analyses required to answer the issues often
posed in such reviews. An applicant under this provision shall be
entitled to an acceptance, rejection, or suggested modification of
the submitted site plan or related information within 45 days from
the date of submittal to the Community Development Department.
The aforesaid review may be waived by the Zoning Administrator of
the Community Development Department if it is determined that
the proposed expansion or addition of the existing use does not
interfere with future expansion of streets or stormwater drainage
or adversely affect future development or platting of the remainder
of the site.
(2) New uses may only be permitted by the staff of the Zoning
Administrator of the Community Development Department when it
is determined that adequate neighborhood plans for future
development exist or where such actions as extension of utilities
have already been completed and a Zoning Map amendment has
been adopted.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. This district is intended to be
placed on existing platted land where urban development could legally
occur but where typical urban municipal services, such as municipal
sanitary sewer, municipal water and effective stormwater management
§ 420-135 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-136
344:1229
improvements, are not available and will not be available in the
foreseeable future.
B. Limited urban services available.
(1) Properties within this district are not located within the Village of
Pleasant Prairie Master Sanitary Sewer System Master Plan, which
means that the Village has no plans in the foreseeable future to
extend municipal sanitary sewer to service these properties and
that these properties, if developed, will require a private on-site
sewage disposal system or holding tank. In addition, the State of
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources has not included the
properties within this district in the Sanitary Sewer Service Area,
which means that the Village cannot extend sanitary sewers within
this area.
(2) Properties within this district are not located within the Village of
Pleasant Prairie Master Water Utility System Master Plan, which
means that the Village has no plans in the foreseeable future to
extend municipal water to service these properties and that if
developed these properties will required a private well to be
installed for potable water. In addition, since there is no municipal
water service, no municipal fire hydrants are located in the area,
and water for fire protection must be hauled by tanker.
(3) Properties within this district are known to have high groundwater
levels, which are influenced both by Lake Michigan water levels
and weather conditions.
(4) Properties in this district are frequently subject to standing surface
water, in part because this area is not served by urban stormwater
systems that can effectively and efficiently convey stormwater, and
this situation may be exacerbated by further development. Such
stormwater improvements would be very difficult or impossible to
provide due to the high groundwater table, the generally level
topography which precludes efficient drainage, the fact that any
improvements would require a permit under Ch. 30, Wis. Stats.,
from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, and the fact
that the DNR has expressed serious concern that any such
improvements would dewater the wetlands in the area.
(5) Properties within this district may be located adjacent to a
dedicated public road right-of-way that is not improved, and the
Village has no plans in the foreseeable future to make such
improvements on roads in the area which have not already been
improved.
C. Principal uses. Any principal use permitted in the underlying basic use
zoning district.
D. Accessory uses. Any accessory use permitted in the underlying basic
use zoning district.
§ 420-136 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-136
344:1230
§ 420-137. PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District.
E. Conditional uses. Any conditional use permitted in the underlying basic
use zoning district.
F. Lot area and width.
(1) All lots shall have the minimum lot area required in the underlying
basic use zoning district.
(2) All lots shall have the minimum lot width required in the underlying
basic use zoning district.
G. Building height and area.
(1) Building height shall not exceed the height limitation in the
underlying basic use zoning district.
(2) The total floor area of any use shall not be less than that which is
required in the underlying basic use zoning district.
H. Setbacks.
(1) Street setback: as required in the underlying basic use zoning
district.
(2) Shore setback: as required in the underlying basic use zoning
district.
(3) Side setback: as required in the underlying basic use zoning
district.
(4) Rear setback: as required in the underlying basic use zoning
district.
I. Authorized sanitary sewer system. As permitted in the underlying basic
use district.
J. A property owner who develops property located in the LUSA Overlay
District, notwithstanding the nonavailability of typical urban municipal
services within the foreseeable future, necessarily accept the risks of
doing so and needs to design any such development to take account of
the nonavailability of such services. The Village disclaims any
responsibility for any loss or damage arising out of or resulting from the
nonavailability or inadequacy of municipal services in the LUSA
District.
A. Primary purpose and characteristics. The Village Board of Trustees has
the authority to create planned development districts. The PUD
Planned Unit Development Overlay District, set forth herein, is
intended to permit developments that will, over a period of time, be
enhanced by coordinated area site planning and diversified location of
structures. Such developments are intended to provide a safe and
efficient system for pedestrian and vehicle traffic; to provide attractive
§ 420-136 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-137
344:1231
recreation and open spaces as integral parts of the developments;
to provide for development opportunities to be designed to protect,
enhance and benefit from unique environmental features on a site; to
enable economic design in the location of public and private utilities
and community facilities; and to ensure adequate standards of
construction and planning. The PUD Overlay District under this chapter
will allow for flexibility of overall development design, with benefits
from such design flexibility intended to be derived by both the
developer and the community, while at the same time maintaining,
insofar as possible, the land use density and other standards or use
requirements set forth in the underlying basic zoning district. The
unified and planned development of a site in a single or corporate
ownership or control or in common ownership under the Unit
Ownership Act176 set forth in Ch. 703, Wis. Stats. (condominiums), may
be permitted by the Village Board upon specific application under this
section and after public hearing, with such development encompassing
one or more principal uses or structures and related accessory uses
or structures, when all regulations and standards as set forth in this
section have been met. [Amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 06-13]
B. District created. So as to ensure a maximum benefit to both the
community and to developers and so as to provide flexibility in planning
in all the districts created under this chapter, there is hereby created
the Planned Unit Development Overlay District. [Amended 3-20-2006
by Ord. No. 06-13; 1-16-2012 by Ord. No. 12-01]
C. Principal, accessory and conditional uses. Principal, accessory and
conditional uses permitted in a planned unit development overlay
district shall conform to uses permitted in the underlying basic use
district, except that the PUD Overlay District may prohibit certain
permitted principal, accessory and conditional uses specified in the
basic use district, as determined by the Village Board. [Amended
3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-09]
D. Ownership. Areas designated as PUD Overlay Districts shall be under
single or corporate ownership or control at the time of their creation.
E. Modifications allowed. The PUD Overlay District may also modify, with
approval of the Village Board, dimensional requirements including but
not limited to setbacks, structure height, lot width and area
requirements of the underlying basic zoning district. In addition the
PUD Overlay District may also modify, with approval of the Village
Board, other sections of the Zoning Ordinance including but not limited
to traffic, parking and access requirements and sign requirements.
[Amended 3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-09177]
176. Editor's Note: Now titled the "Condominium Ownership Act."
177. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Subsection E, regarding minimum
area requirements, as amended.
§ 420-137 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-137
344:1232
F. Minimum sanitary sewer and water requirements. All planned unit
developments shall be on public sanitary sewer. All planned unit
development shall be on public water system, except for the planned
unit developments in the A-2, A-3, A-4 that create four or fewer lots
wherein water is not readily available as determined by the Village
Administrator. [Amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 06-13]
G. Preapplication conference and general layout conceptual plan. Prior to
the official submission of the application for the approval of a planned
unit development overlay district, the owner or his agent making such
application shall meet with the Community Development Department to
discuss the scope and proposed nature of the contemplated
development and data and other information as deemed appropriate
and pertinent for presentation to the Village. At the preapplication
conference, the owner or agent shall present a general layout
conceptual plan, including drawings and sketches of the proposed
development and figures or calculations that are pertinent to the
development, using as a general guideline the requirements set forth in
Subsection H(2) below.
H. Application. Following the preapplication conference, the owner or his
agent may file an application with the Zoning Administrator on forms
furnished by the Community Development Department for approval of a
planned unit development overlay district. Such application shall be
accompanied by the review fee required under Article V of this chapter
as well as the following information:
(1) A statement which sets forth the relationship of the proposed
planned unit development to any existing or proposed master
plans, or any adopted component thereof, and the general
character of and the uses to be included in the proposed planned
unit development, including the following information:
(a) Total area to be included in the planned unit development, area
of open space, residential density computations, proposed
number of dwelling units, population analysis, availability of or
requirements for municipal services and any other similar data
pertinent to a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed
development.
(b) A general summary of the estimated value of structures and
site improvement costs, including landscaping and special
features of common open spaces.
(c) A general outline of the organizational structure of a property
owners' association which may be proposed to be established
for the purpose of providing any necessary private services or
maintenance of common open spaces.
(d) Any proposed departures from the standards of development
as set forth in this chapter, other Village regulations or
§ 420-137 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-137
344:1233
administrative rules or applicable county, state or federal
requirements.
(e) The expected date of commencement, schedule of development
by phases, and completion of physical development as set forth
in the proposal.
(2) A detailed development site plan, including:
(a) A survey and legal description of the boundaries of the subject
property included in the proposed planned unit development
and its relationship to surrounding properties prepared by a
land surveyor registered by the State of Wisconsin.
(b) The location of public and private roads, driveways, and
parking facilities.
(c) The size, arrangement, and location of any individual building
sites and proposed building groups on each individual site.
(d) The location of institutional, recreational, and open space
areas and areas reserved or dedicated for public uses,
including schools, parks, and drainageways.
(e) The type, size, location and setback of all structures.
(f) Landscape plan.
(g) Architectural plans, elevations and perspective drawings and
sketches illustrating the design and character of the proposed
structures.
(h) The existing and proposed location of public sanitary sewer
and water supply facilities.
(i) The existing and proposed location of all private utilities or
other easements.
(j) Soil characteristics.
(k) Existing and proposed topography on the site.
(l) Detailed stormwater drainage plans prepared by a professional
engineer licensed by the State of Wisconsin.
(m) Uses of adjoining lands in regard to roads, surface water
drainage, and compatibility with existing adjacent land uses.
(n) Any other data or information requested at the preapplication
conference.
I. Public hearing. The Plan Commission, before formulating its
recommendations to the Village Board, shall hold a public hearing
pursuant to the requirements of § 420-13 of this chapter. Notice for
such hearing shall include reference to the development plans filed in
§ 420-137 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-137
344:1234
conjunction with the requested planned unit development overlay
district.
J. Basis for application approval. The Plan Commission in making its
recommendation to the Village Board and the Village Board in making
its determination shall find that:
(1) The applicants for the proposed planned unit development overlay
district have indicated that they intend to begin the physical
development of the planned unit development within 12 months
following the approval of the application and the development will
be carried out according to a reasonable construction schedule
satisfactory to the Village.
(2) The proposed planned unit development overlay district is
consistent in all respects with the purpose of this section and with
the spirit and intent of this chapter and is in conformity with any
existing or proposed master plans or any adopted components
thereof and the development would not be contrary to the general
welfare and economic prosperity of the community.
(3) The proposed site is provided with adequate drainage facilities for
surface and storm waters.
(4) The proposed site is accessible from public roads that are adequate
to carry the traffic that can be expected to be generated by the
proposed development.
(5) No undue constraint or burden will be imposed on public services
and facilities, such as, but not limited to, fire and police protection,
street maintenance, and maintenance of public areas by the
proposed development.
(6) The streets and driveways on the site of the proposed development
are adequate to serve the proposed development and do meet the
minimum standards of all applicable ordinances or administrative
regulations of the Village.
(7) Municipal public water and sewer facilities are provided, except as
specified in § 420-137F above. [Amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No.
06-13]
(8) The entire tract or parcel of land to be included in a planned unit
development overlay district is held under single ownership or, if
there is more than one owner, the application for such planned unit
development overlay district is considered as one tract, lot or
parcel and the legal description defines said planned unit
development as a single parcel, lot or tract and is jointly petitioned
by the several owners. This requirement shall not be deemed to
prevent further divisions of the land after creation of the planned
unit development overlay district, provided that all further
§ 420-137 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-137
344:1235
divisions are in accordance with the restrictions placed on the
particular planned unit development.
(9) In the case of a proposed residential planned unit development
overlay district:
(a) Such development creates an attractive residential
environment of sustained desirability and economic stability,
including structures in relation to terrain, consideration of safe
pedestrian flow, ready access to recreational space, and
coordination with overall Village plans.
(b) Provision has been made for the installation of adequate public
facilities and the continuing maintenance and operation of
such facilities.
(c) Provision has been made for adequate, continuing fire and
police protection.
(d) The population composition of the development will not have
an adverse effect upon the Village's capacity to provide needed
municipal service facilities.
(e) Adequate guarantee is provided for permanent preservation of
open space areas as shown on the approved site plan either by
private reservation and maintenance or by dedication to the
public.
(f) Other requirements as set forth by the Village.
(10) In the case of a proposed commercial, manufacturing and
institutional planned unit development overlay district:
(a) The economic practicality of the proposed development can be
justified.
(b) The proposed development will be adequately served by offstreet
parking and truck service facilities.
(c) The proposed development is adequately provided with and
does not impose any undue burden on public services and
facilities, such as fire and police protection, street
maintenance, and maintenance of public areas.
(d) The locations for entrances and exits have been designated to
prevent unnecessary interference with the safe and efficient
movement of traffic on surrounding streets, and the
development will not create an adverse effect upon the general
traffic pattern of the surrounding neighborhood.
(e) The architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting, and
general site development will result in an attractive and
harmonious service area compatible with and not adversely
§ 420-137 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-137
344:1236
affecting the property values of the surrounding neighborhood
or area.
(f) Provision has been made for the installation of adequate public
facilities and the continuing maintenance and operation of
such facilities.
(g) Provision has been made for adequate, continuing fire and
police protection.
(h) Adequate guarantee is provided for permanent preservation of
open space areas as shown on the approved site plan either by
private reservation and maintenance or by dedication to the
public.
(i) Other requirements as set forth by the Village.
(11) In the case of a proposed agricultural planned unit development
overlay district: [Added 3-20-2006 by Ord. No. 06-13]
(a) Such development shall create an attractive agricultural
environment of sustained desirability and economic stability
and coordinates with the overall Village plans.
(b) The proposed development shall be adequately provided with
and does not impose any undue burden on public services and
facilities, such as fire and police protection, street
maintenance, and maintenance of public areas.
(c) Provisions have been made for the installation of adequate
public facilities and the continuing maintenance and operation
of such facilities.
(d) Provisions have been made for adequate fire and rescue and
police protection.
(e) Adequate guarantees shall be provided for any permanent
preservation of open space areas as shown on the approved
site plan either by private conservation easements for the
preservation, protection and maintenance of the open space or
by dedication of such open space areas to the public.
(f) Other requirements as set forth by the Village.
K. Determination. The Village Board, after due consideration, may deny
the application, approve the application as submitted, or approve the
application subject to additional conditions and restrictions. The
approval of a planned unit development overlay district shall be based
upon and include as a condition thereto adherence to the building, site,
and operational plans for the development as approved by the Village
Board.
§ 420-137 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-137
344:1237
§ 420-138. Airport overlay requirements.
Properties within the Village that are located within three miles of the
Kenosha Regional Airport boundaries shall comply with the City of
Kenosha's Airport Overlay District regulations.
L. Changes and additions. Any subsequent change or addition to the plans
or uses shall first be submitted for approval to the Zoning
Administrator, and if in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator such
change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration of the original
plan, a public hearing before the Plan Commission shall be required
and notice thereof shall be given pursuant to the provisions of § 420-13
of this chapter, and said proposed alterations shall be submitted to the
Village Board for approval.
M. Subsequent land division. The division of any land or lands within a
planned unit development overlay district for the purpose of change or
conveyance of ownership shall be accomplished pursuant to Chapter
395, Land Division and Development Control, of the Village Code.
N. Failure to begin development. If no substantial construction has
commenced as defined in § 420-22J(3) of this chapter or no use is
established in the planned unit development district within the time
schedule submitted to the Village, the Plan Commission shall petition
the Village Board for the purpose of rescinding the planned unit
development overlay designation so as to allow the land in question to
revert to its underlying zone. The procedures set forth in § 420-13 of
this chapter relating to the amendment of this chapter shall be adhered
to. In its discretion and for good cause, the Village Board may extend
for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed one year, the period for
the beginning of construction or the establishment of a use. If the
planned unit development overlay district is rescinded, the Zoning
Administrator shall remove said district from the Official Zoning Map.
Those zoning regulations applicable before the creation of said district
shall then be in effect, and no vested rights in the planned unit
development overlay district shall be deemed to have accrued.
O. See Appendix C for specific PUD ordinances.
§ 420-137 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-138
344:1238
ARTICLE XVII
Exceptions and Accommodations
§ 420-139. Modifications and exceptions.
A. Height exceptions. The following structures or parts thereof are
allowed to exceed the height limitations set forth in the several districts
of this chapter as set forth in this section, unless restrictions are
provided pursuant to the issuance of a conditional use permit under
Article XVIII of this chapter.
(1) Architectural projections. Spires, belfries, steeples, cupolas,
domes, parapet walls, chimneys and flues shall not exceed the
height required by the district by more than the distance from the
nearest lot line, provided that such projection is firmly anchored or
affixed to the structure and provided that all required yards are
increased by at least one foot for each foot the structure exceeds
the district's maximum height requirements, as measured from the
outermost edge of said architectural projection.
(2) Essential services. Utility poles, standpipes, and electric power and
communication transmission lines, excluding commercial
communication structures, residential communication structures
and utility substations, are exempt from the height limitations of
this chapter.
(3) Special structures. Elevator penthouses, gas tanks, grain elevators,
observation towers, scenery lofts, manufacturing equipment and
necessary mechanical appurtenances, power and heating
generating plants and necessary appurtenances, cooling towers,
fire towers, substations, water towers and emission stacks may be
exempted from the height limitations of this chapter, provided that
all required yards are increased by at least one foot for each foot
the structure exceeds the district's maximum height requirements,
as measured from the outermost edge of said special structure.
(4) All structures. Any structure located within an area surrounding
the Kenosha Regional Airport and which is subject to additional
height regulations shall not exceed the heights therein established.
(5) If any single-family dwelling is proposed to be higher than 35 feet,
then the following shall be required:
(a) The maximum height shall not exceed 40 feet;
(b) The lot shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet;
(c) The dwelling shall have a minimum first floor living area of
2,000 square feet and a minimum total living area of 3,500
square feet ("living area" excludes unfinished basements,
garages, decks, porches and patios);
§ 420-139 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-139
344:1239
(d) The required minimum side setbacks in the underlying zoning
district shall be increased by five feet; and
(e) The required minimum rear setback in the underlying zoning
district shall be increased by 10 feet.
B. Yards.
(1) The following structures or parts thereof shall be allowed to project
into or to be constructed in a required yard, unless restrictions are
provided pursuant to the issuance of a conditional use permit under
Article XVIII of this chapter.
(a) Awnings and canopies shall not encroach more than three feet
into any yard.
(b) Balconies shall not encroach more than six feet into any yard
and not closer than three feet to any lot line.
(c) Bay windows shall not encroach more than four feet into any
yard; however, in no case shall the bay window be less than six
feet from a side property line.
(d) One boathouse accessory to permitted uses, used strictly for
the storage of boats and water-related recreational accessories
to be used by the owner or occupant of any given parcel, may
be located within a shore yard but shall not be closer than the
ordinary high-water mark of any lake, stream or pond and shall
not exceed the height of 12 feet above the existing shoreline
grade, except that when bluff and/or steep slope conditions
exist, then a davit or davits shall be constructed on the
property. The boathouse shall not exceed 576 square feet in
horizontal area covered and shall not be closer than five feet to
any side lot line, and the boathouse should be constructed in
such manner as to orient the main opening of the boathouse
toward the lake. A boathouse is allowed only after the principal
use is constructed on said property.
(e) Bus shelters may be located on private property, provided that
said shelter shall be located five feet from any street property
line and not closer than five feet to a side property line
adjacent to a residential district and shall not exceed 50 square
feet and provided that said structure is not located within the
vision triangle.178 The location of said bus shelter is subject to
the approval from the Village Zoning Administrator.
(f) Chimneys or flues shall not encroach more than two feet into
any yard.
(g) Clothesline posts shall be allowed in the rear or side yard only.
178. Editor's Note: See § 420-44, Vision triangle.
§ 420-139 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-139
344:1240
(h) Davits, accessory to permitted uses, used strictly for the
removal of boats or other watercraft to be used by the owner or
occupant of any given parcel, may be located within a shore
yard but shall not be closer than the ordinary high-water mark
of any lake, stream or pond, shall not exceed 12 feet in height
and shall not be closer than five feet to any side lot line. Said
davits shall not be used to permanently store a boat or other
water-related recreational vehicles.
(i) Eaves, overhanging roofs, gutters, cornices, or other
architectural features, including the cantilever of a building,
shall not encroach more than three feet into any yard.
(j) Essential services shall be exempt from the yard requirements
of this chapter.
(k) Fire escapes shall not project more than six feet into the
required rear or side yard; however, fire escapes shall not be
closer than three feet to any lot line.
(l) Garbage containers, recycling containers and nonpermanent
rubbish containers shall be permitted to be stored
inconspicuously in the side or rear yard only.
(m) Guardhouses or gate houses shall be allowed to be located five
feet from any street property line and not closer than five feet
to a side property line within a proposed development;
however, guardhouses or gate houses shall be 20 feet from
property lines of adjacent residential properties not within the
district, and provided that said structure is not located within
the vision triangle.179
(n) Handicapped access structures may encroach into any yard,
provided that said structure is a minimum of two feet from any
property line.
(o) Landscape features, such as sundials, terraces, ornamental
lights, birdbaths, pergolas, etc., shall be allowed in any yard,
provided that said structure is not located within the vision
triangle and shall be set back a minimum of two feet from any
property line.180
(p) Mailboxes may be located in the road right-of-way.
(q) Planting boxes shall be allowed in any yard.
(r) Recreational equipment, such as playground equipment, shall
be allowed in the rear yard and side yard only in any single-
179. Editor's Note: See § 420-44, Vision triangle.
180. Editor's Note: See § 420-44, Vision triangle.
§ 420-139 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-139
344:1241
family or two-family zoning district only after the permitted
principal use is constructed on said property.
(s) Sidewalks or patios are allowed in any yard, provided that they
are three feet from any property line and 10 feet from any
wetland and may be located within any shore yard, provided
that it is not located on the water side of the ordinary highwater
mark of said navigable waterway and further provided
that said structure does not block, redirect or impede the flow
of water or drainage within the area. [Amended 7-17-2017
by Ord. No. 17-32]
(t) Trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants shall be allowed in any
yard, provided that they are not located within the vision
triangle.181
(u) Yard and service lighting fixtures and poles are allowed in any
yard, provided that such lights are directed downward and
shielded so as not to shine or cause a glare onto adjacent
properties and/or roadways.
(v) In cases where right-of-way was obtained by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation (WI DOT) for the purposes of
widening or improving the abutting state highway, existing
detached accessory buildings less than 1,000 square feet
within any single-family residential zoning district and located
within a street yard or side street yard may be relocated or
reconstructed within the street yard of the state trunk highway
(STH) or side street yard of the STH only if the building and
zoning permit applications to relocate or reconstruct said
buildings are submitted to the Village within two years from
the date that the additional right-of-way was obtained by the
WI DOT. The relocated or reconstructed detached accessory
buildings shall meet all requirements specified in § 420-86 of
this chapter, except that the detached accessory buildings may
be relocated or reconstructed within the street yard or side
street yard of said STH, provided that said buildings are
located a minimum of 30 feet from the street lot line or side
street lot line. [Added 12-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-67]
(2) Street setbacks and shore setback exceptions. The following street
and shore setback distances may be modified as specified below
unless restrictions are provided pursuant to the issuance of a
conditional use permit under Article XVIII of this chapter or unless
the property abuts a more restrictive district as set forth under
§ 420-35 of this chapter. [Amended 2-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-10; 11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 14-33; 7-17-2017 by Ord. No.
17-31]
181. Editor's Note: See § 420-44, Vision triangle.
§ 420-139 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-139
344:1242
(a) The required street setback distance of principal structures
located within a single-family residential district may be
decreased to the average of the existing street setback
distance of the abutting principal structures on each side, but
in no case shall the setback distances be reduced to less than
15 feet from a Village right-of-way or private roadway or less
than 50 feet from a federal, state or county trunk highway
right-of-way. If one of the abutting lots to be used in averaging
the setback is vacant, then to calculate the average street
setback, the street setback on the vacant lot shall be the
minimum setback as required in the underlying zoning district.
Furthermore, the required street setback distance may be
reduced to 25 feet for principal structures in any subdivision
platted prior to April 5, 1989 (Village incorporation date),
wherein said plat had a previously recorded deed restriction
indicating a twenty-five-foot street setback, then said principal
structure or addition thereto may be set back a minimum of 25
feet from the property line adjacent to the street.
(b) The required street setback distance of principal structures for
all manufactured/mobile homes located within a licensed park
as of January 1, 1998, may be decreased to the average of the
existing street setback distance of the abutting structures on
each side, but in no case shall the setback distances be
reduced to less than 10 feet from a Village right-of-way or to
less than five feet from a private roadway (as measured from
the back of curb or edge of road pavement). The required
street setback distance for the deck or a porch (including steps
or stairs) used for the minimum required ingress or egress into
any manufactured/mobile home located within a licensed park
may encroach up to four feet into the required street setback
but in no case shall the setback distance be reduced to less
than 10 feet from a Village right-of-way or less than five feet
from a private roadway (as measured from the back of curb or
edge of road pavement). [Amended 11-17-2014 by Ord. No.
14-33]
(c) The required street setback distance of fences may be
decreased to the average of the existing street setback
distance of the abutting fences on each side, but in no case
shall the setback distance be reduced to less than two feet
from a street right-of-way. This provision would not apply
where the fence setback distance reduction would involve
vision triangles.
(d) (Reserved)182
182. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2)(d), concerning reduction of required setback due
to abutting principal structures, was repealed 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32.
§ 420-139 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-139
344:1243
(e) The required rear street yard setback distance of a principal
structure located in a single-family residential district and
located on a double or triple frontage lot which abuts a federal,
state or county trunk highway may be decreased to 50 feet
where there is no direct access permitted to a federal, state or
county trunk highway.
(f) (Reserved)183
(3) Noise. Sirens, whistles, and bells which are maintained and utilized
solely to serve a public purpose are exempt from the sound level
standards of this chapter.
(4) Corner lots (double frontage lots). All double frontage corner lots
shall have two street yards, one side yard, and one rear yard.
(5) Corner lots (triple frontage lots). All triple frontage corner lots shall
have three street yards and one side yard.
(6) Setback distances restrictions. Permitted principal structure
setback distances appropriate to the location and type of
development contemplated which are more restrictive than the
regulations of the applicable zoning district may be required by the
Village. Examples of this may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(a) Greater street setback distances may be required on cul-de-sac
lots to achieve the necessary lot width at the building setback
line.
(b) Minimum or maximum street setback distances may be
required for new principal structures to provide aesthetically
consistent building site lines and conformance with existing
adjacent development.
(c) Special setback distances may be required to protect natural
resource elements such as trees.
(7) Manufactured home/mobile home park (R-12 District) side
setbacks. The required side setback distance of principal
structures for manufactured/mobile homes located in
manufactured/mobile home parks (R-12 District) created prior to
January 1, 1999, may be decreased to a zero lot line setback,
provided that in no instance shall adjacent manufactured/mobile
home principal structures and accessory structures be closer than
10 feet apart as measured from side to side or side to end.
However, in no case shall the side setback distance be reduced if
the side yard abuts the exterior property line of said manufactured/
mobile home park.
183. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (2)(f), Shore setbacks for accessory structures, was
repealed 7-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32.
§ 420-139 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-139
344:1244
(8) Single-family dwellings not constructed in accordance with the
valid zoning permit. Any principal single-family structure and its
accessory garage located within an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, A-2,
A-3, AGO or C-2 District containing a legally conforming use and
constructed with a valid zoning permit issued by Kenosha County
prior to April 1, 1983, but which was not constructed in accordance
with the zoning permit as it pertains to street, side and rear
setbacks for said principal structure or accessory garage shall be
considered a legal nonconforming structure and shall be subject to
§ 420-140 of this chapter insofar as the placement of the structure,
as determined by the Village, does not present a threat to the
public's health, safety or welfare. [Amended 4-7-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-06]
C. Zero side setback. In any B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5, M-1 or M-2 District, for
an existing building or a building to be constructed on a lot which, as a
result of a subdivision of such lot into two contiguous lots, will share a
common division or party wall and parking areas and will be developed
under an approved common development plan, the required side
setback and related parking lot setback shall not apply to such common
division or party wall created thereby on the subdivided lot.
D. Accommodations and exceptions for tax increment districts.
(1) For any land division effective after January 1, 2000, that is located
between or adjacent to any tax increment district (TID) within the
Village that cannot be combined, according to the Wisconsin
Department of Revenue, into one tax parcel number because the
parcels are located within different tax increment districts, or
because one of the parcels is located within a TID and the other
parcel is not located within a TID, the parcels may be developed as
one single development. However, if one parcel does not meet the
basic underlying zoning district lot area and/or lot frontage
requirements, then the lots shall be developed as a single
development and at the time the parcel is created or modified shall
be exempt from meeting the lot area and lot frontage requirements
until the termination of the TID as stated in Subsection D(2)(b)
below.
(2) If the parcels cannot be combined for reasons described above and
the parcels are developed as a single development, then the
following shall be required:
(a) At the time an application is filed with the Village for a site and
operational plan approval and/or a conditional use permit, the
owner(s) shall indicate on the application that the parcels are
to be developed as one single development.
(b) The parcels shall remain under the same ownership, and upon
the termination of the tax increment district for all affected
§ 420-139 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-139
344:1245
§ 420-140. Nonconforming lots, structures and uses.
units of government, the owner(s), at the owner's expense,
shall combine the parcels into one tax parcel number.
(c) The inner property boundaries shall only exist for tax
distribution purposes, and for zoning purposes the parcels
shall be considered as one property defined by its outer
property boundaries as it relates to zoning regulations, such as
but not limited to the number of principal structures and/or
accessory structures allowed, setbacks, signs, and traffic and
parking requirements for the basic underlying zoning district.
(See Illustration 7 184).
A. Intent. Within the districts established by this chapter, or amendment
thereof, there may exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures
which were lawful before this chapter was enacted or amended but
which would be prohibited in the future under the terms of this chapter
or amendment.
(1) It is the intent of the Village Board to permit these nonconforming
lots, structures and uses existing as of the effective date of this
chapter or amendment thereof to remain and continue in
accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth until they are
removed by economic forces or otherwise. It is not the intent of this
section to encourage the survival of nonconformities, since it has
been determined that they are incompatible with the character of
the districts involved, or to permit nonconformities to be enlarged
upon, expanded, or extended except as provided for herein.
Existing nonconformities shall not be used to justify adding
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(2) It is the further intention of the Village Board that the guidelines be
set for the purpose of determining:
(a) That the nonconforming lot, structure or use existed prior to
the effective date of this chapter or amendment thereto;
(b) The ways in which the right of the nonconforming lot or
structure to remain can be served and the ways in which the
right to continue nonconforming uses can be lost;
(c) The extent of permissible variation in the nonconforming lot,
structure and use; and
(d) The devices available for eliminating such nonconforming lots,
structures and uses.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meaning indicated:
184. Editor's Note: Illustration 7 is included in Appendix A at the end of this chapter.
§ 420-139 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-140
344:1246
ASSESSED VALUE — The full market value placed upon the structure
or lot by the Village Assessor as of the date that the nonconformity
came into being, that is, the effective date of this chapter or amendment
thereto. Such valuation by the Village Assessor shall be prima facie
evidence of the assessed value of the structure or lot.
LEGALLY EXISTING — A lot, structure or use existing on the effective
date of this chapter or amendment thereto which was created, built or
established in accordance with zoning and land use regulations in effect
in the Village immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter or
amendment thereto, or a lot, structure or use for which a zoning permit
was issued prior to the effective date of this chapter or amendment
thereto in accordance with the provision of § 420-6 of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A parcel of land legally created prior to
the effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendments thereto
having frontage on a public street, occupied or intended to be occupied
by a principal building or structure, together with accessory buildings
and uses, and having insufficient size to meet the lot width, lot area,
setback, off-street parking area, or other open space provisions of this
chapter.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — One which was legally
constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter or subsequent
amendment thereto but which would not be permitted as a new
structure under the terms of this chapter or amendment thereto
because the structure is not in conformance with the setback, height,
coverage, or floor area ratio requirements of the district in which it
is located. A structure located on a nonconforming lot shall not be
classified as a nonconforming structure solely because of insufficient lot
area or width.
NONCONFORMING USE — An activity utilizing land or structures, or
both, legally established prior to the effective date of this chapter or
subsequent amendment thereto which would not be permitted as a new
use in the district in which it is located under the terms of this chapter.
C. Burden of proof. Any property owner asserting as a defense to a charge
of violating this chapter that his property was a valid nonconforming
use has the burden of demonstrating to a reasonable certainty by the
greater weight of credible evidence that:
(1) The nonconforming use was legally in existence at the time this
chapter was passed or amended.
(2) The use of the property prior to this chapter was so active and
actual that it can be said the property owner acquired a vested
interest in its continuance. For purposes of this chapter, a property
owner shall be deemed to have a vested right in the use of his
property where that use at the time of the effective date of this
chapter or amendment thereto is both active and actual (not
contemplated) and a substantial degree of activity or expense had
§ 420-140 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-140
344:1247
been undertaken prior to the effective date of this chapter or
amendment thereto. Permits issued prior to the existence of this
chapter shall be deemed to have created a vested right in the
property owner to the extent provided in § 420-6 of this chapter.
(3) The use is substantially the same use that existed prior to the
enactment of this chapter or amendment thereto.
D. Existing vacant nonconforming (substandard) lots. In any residential,
upland conservancy or agricultural district, a one-family detached
dwelling and its accessory structures may be erected on any vacant
legal lot or parcel of record in the County Register of Deeds office
recorded before the effective date or amendment of this chapter,
provided that such lot or parcel meets all the following minimum
requirements and further provided that all requirements of the County
Sanitary Ordinance are met.
(1) Lot.
(a) Width: minimum 50 feet (public sewerage); 65 feet (private
sewage system).
(b) Area: minimum 5,000 square feet (public sewerage); 10,000
square feet (private sewage system).
(2) Setbacks.
(a) Street: the minimum required in the district except as provided
in § 420-139 of this chapter.
(b) Rear: minimum 25 feet from lot line.
(c) Side: minimum 16% of the lot width on each side, but not less
than eight feet from lot line.
E. Use of existing nonconforming lots in the business districts. [Amended
12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 07-51]
(1) In any B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or B-5 Business District, any
nonconforming lot having no principal structure located on it (or on
which the sole principal structure will be removed before or in
conjunction with the proposed development and use of the lot) may
be developed and used for an allowed use subject to compliance
with all applicable requirements of this chapter (other than the
minimum lot size or minimum public street frontage requirements
that cause the lot to be nonconforming) and of all other Village
ordinances and codes; provided, however, that in the event
applicable requirements of this chapter cannot be complied with as
a result of the lot's failure to satisfy the minimum lot size and/or
minimum public street frontage requirements, certain other
specified requirements of this chapter shall be modified in
accordance with this subsection to allow productive development
and use of the nonconforming lot if certain specified conditions are
§ 420-140 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-140
344:1248
met. The following items shall be evaluated sequentially and
cumulatively to determine the minimum amount of such
modification necessary to allow productive development and use
of the nonconforming lot, as well as the maximum amount of such
modification permitted by this section, and the extent and priority
of such modifications shall be as provided below:
(a) First, any existing or proposed accessory structure on the lot
shall be reduced in size or eliminated, as necessary to achieve
compliance.
(b) If any necessary reduction or elimination of any accessory
structure does not allow the lot to be developed in compliance
with the remaining applicable requirements, the proposed
principal building size shall be reduced, as necessary to
achieve compliance, to an absolute minimum of 1,500 square
feet of gross floor area in the B-1 District or to an absolute
minimum of 2,000 square feet of gross floor area in the B-2,
B-3, B-4 or B-5 District.
(c) If any necessary reduction of the principal building size does
not allow the lot to be developed in compliance with the
remaining applicable requirements, the required landscape
islands within the parking lot shall be reduced in size or
number or eliminated, as necessary to achieve compliance.
(d) If any necessary reduction or elimination of the landscape
islands does not allow the lot to be developed in compliance
with the remaining applicable requirements, the required side
setbacks for principal structures shall be reduced, as
necessary to achieve compliance, as follows:
[1] Side setbacks for principal structures in the B-1 and B-2
Districts shall be reduced, as necessary, to an absolute
minimum of 10 feet.
[2] Side setbacks for principal structures in the B-3, B-4 and
B-5 Districts shall be reduced, as necessary, to an absolute
minimum of 25 feet.
(e) If any necessary reduction of the side setbacks for principal
structures does not allow the lot to be developed in compliance
with the remaining applicable requirements, the street
setback(s) for principal structures shall be reduced, as
necessary to achieve compliance, to an absolute minimum of
50 feet from arterial streets or highways and to an absolute
minimum of 30 feet from nonarterial streets or private roads.
(f) If any necessary reduction of the street setback(s) for principal
structures does not allow the lot to be developed in compliance
with the remaining current requirements, the setback for
parking area(s) from the property line(s) of the lot shall be
§ 420-140 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-140
344:1249
reduced, as necessary to achieve compliance, to an absolute
minimum of 10 feet.
(g) If any necessary reduction of the setback for parking area(s)
from the property line(s) does not allow the lot to be developed
in compliance with the remaining applicable requirements, the
minimum width of internal site circulation ways, access roads
and private roads shall be reduced, as necessary to achieve
compliance, to an absolute minimum of 24 feet, provided that
fire-fighting equipment can be safely maneuvered through the
lot.
(h) If any necessary reduction of the minimum width or internal
site circulation ways does not allow the lot to be developed in
compliance with the remaining current requirements, the
required garbage/recycling enclosure may be detached from
the building, provided the required enclosure is located in the
side or rear yard and is a minimum of three feet from the side
and rear property lines; however, the Village Zoning
Administrator may allow for the three-foot setback to be
reduced if proper screening is provided to the adjacent
property.
(i) The open space requirements may be reduced to the extent
required by the other modifications provided for in this
Subsection E(1).
(j) If the modifications provided for in this Subsection E(1) are not
sufficient to allow the lot to be developed and used in
compliance with the remaining applicable requirements of this
chapter, such lot may only be developed and used for a less
intense use (e.g., a use requiring fewer parking spaces) or with
a variance.
(2) In any B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or B-5 Business District, any
nonconforming lot on which one or more principal structures are
located [which will not be removed so as to make applicable
Subsection E(1) above] may continue to be used and further
developed for an allowed use subject to compliance with all
applicable requirements of this chapter (other than the minimum
lot size and/or minimum public street frontage requirements that
cause the lot to be nonconforming) and of all other Village
ordinances and codes; provided, however, that in the event
applicable requirements of this chapter cannot be complied with as
a result of the lot's failure to satisfy the minimum lot size and/or
minimum public street frontage requirements, then certain other
specified requirements of this chapter shall be modified in
accordance with this subsection to allow continued productive use
and/or development of the lot if certain specified conditions are
met. The following items shall be evaluated sequentially and
cumulatively to determine the minimum degree of such
§ 420-140 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-140
344:1250
modification necessary to allow productive continued use and/or
development of the nonconforming lot, as well as the maximum
amount of such modification permitted by this section, and the
extent and priority of such required modifications shall be as
provided below:
(a) First, any existing or proposed accessory structure or
proposed addition to an accessory structure on the lot shall be
reduced in size or eliminated, as necessary to achieve
compliance.
(b) If any necessary reduction or elimination of any proposed
accessory structure or any proposed addition to such a
structure does not allow compliance with the remaining
applicable requirements, any extra principal structure or any
proposed addition to any principal structure shall be reduced
in size or eliminated, as necessary to achieve compliance.
(c) If any necessary reduction or elimination of any extra principal
structure or of any proposed addition to any principal structure
does not allow compliance with the remaining applicable
requirements, the required landscape islands within the
parking area(s) shall be reduced in size or number or
eliminated, as necessary to achieve compliance.
(d) If any necessary reduction or elimination of the landscape
islands in the parking area(s) does not allow compliance with
the remaining applicable requirements, the setback for
parking area(s) from the property line(s) of the lot shall be
reduced, as necessary to achieve compliance, to an absolute
minimum of 10 feet.
(e) If any necessary reduction of the setback for parking areas(s)
from the property line(s) of the lot does not allow compliance
with the remaining applicable requirements, the minimum
width of internal site circulation ways, access roads and
private roads shall be reduced, as necessary to achieve
compliance, to an absolute minimum of 24 feet, provided that
fire-fighting equipment can be safely maneuvered through the
lot.
(f) If any necessary reduction of the minimum width or internal
site circulation ways does not allow the lot to be developed in
compliance with the remaining current requirements, the
required garbage/recycling enclosure may be detached from
the building, provided the required enclosure is located in the
side or rear yard and is a minimum of three feet from the side
and rear property lines; however, the Village Zoning
Administrator may allow for the three-foot setback to be
reduced if proper screening is provided to the adjacent
property.
§ 420-140 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-140
344:1251
(g) The open space requirements may be reduced to the extent
required by the other modifications provided for in this
Subsection E(2).
(h) If the modifications provided for in this Subsection E(2) are not
sufficient to allow the proposed use and/or development
activities on the lot in compliance with the remaining
applicable requirements of this chapter, such lot may only
continue to be used and/or further developed for a less intense
use (e.g., a use requiring fewer parking spaces) or with a
variance.
F. Common ownership of abutting nonconforming lots. Nonconforming
lots of record owned by the same individual or individuals shall be
combined prior to the issuance of a zoning permit.
G. Existing nonconforming structures. The use of a structure existing at
the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter may be
continued although the structure's size or location does not conform to
the established lot area and width, setback, height, parking, loading, or
access provisions of this chapter. A nonconforming structure can be
moved, altered or reconstructed as follows:
(1) A nonconforming structure may be structurally altered within the
limits of the existing building envelope.
(2) An addition to a nonconforming structure is allowed provided that
the addition complies with the current requirements of this
chapter.
(3) A nonconforming structure can be moved provided that the
structure complies with the current requirements of this chapter.
(4) The only portion of a nonconforming structure that can be
reconstructed, whether or not it is damaged or destroyed by
natural calamity, is that portion used for the required ingress or
egress into said building and further provided that there is no
greater degree of encroachment into the setback or a greater
degree of enclosure.
H. Existing nonconforming uses. The lawful use of a building or premises
existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance
may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions
of the ordinance. Such nonconforming use may not be extended. The
total structural repairs or alterations in such a nonconforming building
shall not during its life exceed 50% of the assessed value of the building
unless permanently changed to a conforming use. If such
nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 12 months, any
future use of the building and premises shall conform to the ordinance.
I. Changes and substitutions. Once a nonconforming use or structure has
been changed or altered so as to comply with the provisions of this
§ 420-140 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-140
344:1252
§ 420-140.1. Temporary uses. [Added 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-47;
amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-39]
chapter, it shall not revert back to a nonconforming use or structure.
Once the Zoning Board of Appeals has permitted the substitution of
a more or equally restrictive nonconforming use for an existing
nonconforming use pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18, Article
V of the Village Code, the existing use shall lose its status as a legal
nonconforming use and become subject to all the conditions required
by the Board.
J. Floodplain nonconforming uses. Pursuant to § 420-131.
K. Nonconforming signs. Pursuant to § 420-78T.
L. Nonconforming performance standards. The use of any lot or parcel
failing to comply with the performance standards set forth in this
chapter at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall not be expanded
unless such expansion conforms to the performance standards set forth
in § 420-38 of this chapter.
A. Purpose and intent. A temporary use, as defined by this chapter, is
designed to provide the Zoning Administrator with flexibility to allow
uses that are short-term in nature. A temporary use shall not be
inherently inconsistent with the uses allowed in a particular zoning
district. The nature, character or circumstances of temporary uses are
unique and dependent upon specific conditions. Therefore, specifying
all temporary uses and associated standards, regulations or conditions
necessary or appropriate for a temporary use permit to be granted is
not practical. Applicants that obtain approval of a temporary use permit
pursuant to this section are not required to obtain a business license
pursuant to Article VII of this chapter.
B. The Village Board has authorized the Zoning Administrator, at his/her
discretion, the authority to approve, impose reasonable conditions and
issue a temporary use permit, provided that such temporary use
complies with the provisions of this chapter, its purpose and intent and
all other applicable federal, state, county and local requirements.
C. Permits and procedures for the issuance of a temporary use permit
shall be pursuant to Article IV of this chapter.
D. The issuance of a temporary use permit does not waive any other
requirements which are imposed by the Village's Zoning or Land
Division Ordinances or Building or Municipal Code.
E. Any violations of the terms and conditions of a temporary use permit is
a violation of the Village Zoning Ordinance and is subject to Article XIX
of this chapter.
§ 420-140 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-140.1
344:1253
F. Specified temporary uses. It is recognized that it is neither possible nor
practicable to list all of the temporary uses that are acceptable;
however, the following temporary uses are specifically allowed:
(1) Two principal dwellings on one property. No person shall begin
construction on a second principal structure wherein they intend to
live in the existing structure while the second structure is being
constructed without first obtaining approval of temporary use
permit by completing the required application and submitting
details including a site plan at a specified location and in
compliance with the following requirements:
(a) A new single-family dwelling is allowed to be constructed on an
existing lot, provided that the underlying zoning district allows
for a single-family dwelling and further provided that the
existing old dwelling is razed upon completion of the new
single-family dwelling.
(b) The occupant(s) of the existing dwelling is allowed to live in the
existing dwelling while the new single-family dwelling is being
constructed on the property. However, only one dwelling shall
be occupied at any given time.
(c) The new single-family dwelling shall comply with all setback
requirements of the underlying district. In addition, the new
single-family dwelling shall be located a minimum of 10 feet
from the existing dwelling, including decks and porches.
(d) The new single-family dwelling shall comply with all Village,
county and state regulations and ordinances.
(e) Within 60 days of obtaining a verbal to occupy the new singlefamily
dwelling, the following shall be completed, unless a time
extension is granted pursuant to § 420-22J(2)(f) of the Village
Zoning Ordinance:
[1] The property owner shall completely remove the old
dwelling. Prior to razing the existing old dwelling, the
property owner shall submit and obtain the required
razing permits from the Village.
[2] The property owner shall completely remove or relocate
any other accessory structures on the property that are or
would be classified as nonconforming structures after the
old dwelling is removed. Prior to razing or relocating any
existing accessory structure, the property owner shall
submit and obtain the required permits from the Village.
[3] The property owner is responsible to remove all debris,
restore and stabilize the area occupied by the old dwelling
and comply with any other requirements or conditions of
the razing or relocation permits.
§ 420-140.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-140.1
344:1254
(f) In no case shall any structures located on the property be
classified as a nonconforming structure once the new singlefamily
dwelling is constructed.
(g) The temporary use permit does not waive any other
requirements which are imposed by the Village's Zoning or
Land Division Ordinances or Building or Municipal Code.
(h) A written occupancy shall not be issued by the Village until all
the conditions of the temporary use permit, the new singlefamily
dwelling permit, the razing permit and any other
permits associated with the application are satisfied.
(i) Additional conditions may be imposed to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, its purpose and intent and
all other applicable federal, state, county and local
requirements.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) On-site residential construction trailer. No person shall place an onsite
construction trailer on a property to be used during the
construction of one single-family or one two-family house without
first obtaining approval of a temporary use permit by completing
the required application and submitting details, including a site
plan at a specified location and in compliance with the following
requirements.
(a) Allowed on any lot zoned A-2, A-3, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5,
R-6, R-8, or C-2, District. (Note: A construction trailer on a
commercial development site does not require approval of a
temporary use.)
(b) A construction trailer shall be located on the property to which
it relates and shall not be used as a temporary dwelling unit.
(c) The site on which the construction trailer is proposed to be
located shall have an active building, zoning or erosion control
permit issued by the Village.
(d) The construction trailer shall meet the following setbacks:
[1] Street setback: a minimum of 30 feet from arterial streets
or highways and a minimum of 15 feet from nonarterial
streets or private roads.
[2] Shore setback: 75 feet minimum.
[3] Wetland setback: 25 feet minimum from the wetlands on
the same property and 10 feet minimum from the wetlands
on adjacent properties.
[4] Side setback: 15 feet minimum.
§ 420-140.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-140.1
344:1255
[5] Rear setback: 15 feet minimum.
[6] Separation between structures: 10 feet minimum.
(e) The construction trailer shall be located in an area which is
accessible for emergency vehicles to the construction trailer
and the building under construction.
(f) The construction trailers shall comply with all OSHA
requirements.
(g) The construction trailer shall be removed from the property
prior to issuance of occupancy for the house or a maximum of
two years from the date the permit was issued for construction
of the house, whichever comes first.
(h) Additional conditions may be imposed to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, its purpose and intent and
all other applicable federal, state, county and local
requirements.
(4) Truck, trailer or tent product sale (excluding sale of Christmas
trees and roadside stands). No person shall conduct a truck, trailer
or tent product sale on any property without first obtaining
approval of a temporary use permit by completing the required
application and submitting details including a site plan at a
specified location and in compliance with the following
requirements. Note: Roadside stands within agricultural district
are allowed pursuant to § 420-88.1 of this chapter.
(a) Allowed only in a business or manufacturing district.
(b) No more than two separate sales are allowed on the property
per calendar year, provided that the length of the sale(s),
collectively, does not exceed a maximum six days per calendar
year.
(c) The truck, trailer or tent and associated parking for the
product sale shall be located within a paved parking lot, unless
otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(d) The truck, trailer or tent shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet
from all property lines, shall not be located within any
designated fire lanes and shall not block or obstruct traffic
visibility on any public street.
(e) The product sale shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m.
Monday through Saturday and 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. on
Sunday.
(f) Adequate on-site parking shall be provided.
§ 420-140.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-140.1
344:1256
(g) The applicant is responsible for the security of the
merchandice during the event and during any overnight hours.
The Village is not responsible for security during this same
event.
(h) The truck, trailer or tent, signage and all trash/recycling
receptacles shall be removed for the site within 24 hours of
completion of the sale.
(i) The applicant is required to obtain a tent permit from the
Village Fire & Rescue Department, and proper Fire & Rescue
Department inspections shall be obtained prior to use of the
tent by the general public.
(j) Additional conditions may be imposed to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, its purpose and intent and
all other applicable federal, state, county and local
requirements.
(5) Christmas tree sales. No person shall open, maintain, operate or
conduct any place for the purpose of storing, selling or displaying
for sale any Christmas trees without first securing approval of a
temporary use permit, by completing the required application and
submitting details including a site plan for the specified location
and in compliance with the following requirements:
(a) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, words and phrases
shall mean as follows:
CHRISTMAS TREES — Real or artificial trees of the varieties
and kinds used for decorative purposes and related items, such
as wreaths, tree stands, tree bags, etc., for use during the
holiday season.
PUBLIC STREET — All that property set aside for street
purposes or street rights-of-way, including sidewalks, curbs
and gutters, shoulders, parking strips and parkways.
(b) Allowed in any zoning district except within a C-1 Lowland
Resource Conservancy District, C-3 Natural and Scientific
Resource Conservancy District or FPO Floodplain Overlay
District.
(c) Sales shall not occur before November 15 of any given year,
and the temporary use permit shall automatically expire on
January 10 following the issuance of the temporary use permit.
(d) No Christmas trees shall be displayed, stored or sold on any
public street or in the vision triangle of two intersecting
streets, as defined in this chapter, or within a designated fire
lane.
§ 420-140.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-140.1
344:1257
(e) All sales areas shall be maintained in such manner as to
eliminate, insofar as possible, any fire hazard.
(f) No trees which have become dried out, so as to become a fire
hazard, shall be kept on the property.
(g) At the expiration of the permit or whenever the premises shall
cease to be used further for the storage, display or sale of
Christmas trees, the applicant shall cause all signage,
trimmings, cuttings, trees and debris to be removed from the
premises and disposed of in a lawful manner.
(h) No flashing lights or spotlights are allowed, any outside lights
shall not shine or glare onto adjacent properties or onto any
public street.
(i) Signage shall be limited to two on-site signs no larger than
nine square feet. All signs shall be placed a minimum of 15 feet
from the right-of-way and shall not be placed in the vision
triangle, as defined by this chapter.185 No off-site signs are
allowed, and all signs shall be removed no later than the 10th
day of January following the issuance of the temporary use
permit. No portable flashing signs shall be permitted.
(j) Order for compliance. If the applicant fails to properly clean
the premises or fails to maintain the premises in a manner
eliminating any fire hazard as necessary, as determined by the
Fire & Rescue Chief, the Fire & Rescue Chief may order the
property owner to remove such hazard within 24 hours, or less
depending on the hazard created. The Fire & Rescue
Department is authorized to enter upon the premises and
remove or destroy or cause to be removed or destroyed such
Christmas trees or parts thereof, and all costs related to such
action may be assessed as a special charge of tax assessment
against the real estate.
(k) Additional conditions may be imposed to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, its purpose and intent and
all other applicable federal, state, county and local
requirements.
(6) Extended hours. No commercial business may remain open past
the specified hours of operation pursuant to the underlying zoning
district except as expressly allowed by an approved conditional use
permit or planned unit development for the purpose of conducting
the commercial business activities. In addition, said business shall
first obtain approval of a temporary use permit and enter into a
minor written agreement with the Village for the specified location
for extended hours and shall comply with the following
requirements:
185. Editor's Note: See § 420-44, Vision triangle.
§ 420-140.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-140.1
344:1258
(a) Allowed in any business, manufacturing, or institutional
district with an active and permitted business activity being
carried out within a building.
(b) No more than two separate extended-hour events are allowed
on the property per calendar year, provided that the length of
the event(s), collectively, does not exceed a maximum 14 days
per calendar year.
(c) Adequate on-site parking shall be provided. The Zoning
Administrator may allow off-site parking, provided that the
location is acceptable to the Village and proper shuttles or
crossing areas are provided.
(d) The applicant is responsible for site security during the event
and during any extended hours. The Village is not responsible
for security during this event, unless a separate written
agreement is entered into between the parties.
(e) The applicant is required to obtain a tent permit from the
Village Fire & Rescue Department for any tents associated
with the extended hours, and Fire & Rescue Department
inspections shall be requested and obtained prior to use of the
tent by the general public.
(f) Additional conditions may be imposed to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, its purpose and intent and
all other applicable federal, state, county and local
requirements.
(7) Special events. No property owner may hold a special event, such
as but not limited to a carnival, farmers market, fair, circus or other
community-wide event (excluding Village-hosted or -sponsored
events, or neighborhood parades, or block parties or religious
affiliated gatherings) without first obtaining approval of a
temporary use permit by completing the required application and
submitting details including a site plan for the specified event and
in compliance with the following requirements:
(a) Requirements.
[1] The maximum number of people that may attend the
special event may be limited by the Village upon review of
the application and the site and facilities to be used for the
special event.
[2] A fence shall be installed which completely encloses the
proposed location and of sufficient height and strength to
prevent people in excess of the maximum permissible
number from gaining access to the assembly grounds. The
fence shall have at least four gates, at least one at or near
four opposite points of the compass.
§ 420-140.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-140.1
344:1259
[3] Potable water meeting all federal and state requirements
for purity and sufficient to provide drinking water for the
maximum number of people to be assembled at a rate of at
least one gallon per person per day and water for bathing
at the rate of at least 10 gallons per person per day.
[4] Separate, enclosed toilets for males and females meeting
all state and local specifications, conveniently located
throughout the grounds, and sufficient to provide facilities
for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the
rate of at least one toilet for every 200 females and at least
one toilet for every 300 males, together with an efficient,
sanitary means of disposing of waste matter deposited
which is in compliance with all state and local laws and
regulations. A lavatory with running water under pressure
and a continuous supply of soap and paper towels shall be
provided with each toilet.
[5] A sanitary method of disposing of solid waste in
compliance with state and local laws and regulations,
sufficient to dispose of the solid waste production of the
maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of
at least 2.5 pounds of solid waste per person per day,
together with a plan for holding and collecting all such
waste at least once each day of the assembly and sufficient
trash cans with tight-fitting lids and personnel to perform
the task.
[6] Physicians and nurses licensed to practice in the state
sufficient to provide the average medical care enjoyed by
state residents for the maximum number of people to be
assembled at the rate of at least one physician for every
1,000 people and at least one nurse for every 1,500 people,
together with an enclosed, covered structure where
treatment may be rendered, containing separately
enclosed treatment rooms for each physician, and at least
one emergency ambulance available for use at all times.
[7] If the assembly is to continue during hours of darkness,
illumination sufficient to light the entire area of the
assembly at the rate of at least five footcandles, but not to
shine unreasonably beyond the boundaries of the enclosed
location of the assembly.
[8] A parking area inside the assembly grounds sufficient to
provide parking spaces for the maximum number of people
to be assembled at the rate of at least one parking space
for every four persons.
[9] Telephones connected to outside lines sufficient to provide
service for the maximum number of people to be
§ 420-140.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-140.1
344:1260
assembled at the rate of at least one separate line and
receiver for each 1,000 persons.
[10] If the assembly is to continue overnight, camping facilities
in compliance with all state and local requirements as
prescribed by the Wisconsin Administrative Code and
Village ordinances, sufficient to provide camping
accommodations for the maximum number of people to be
assembled.
[11] Security guards, either regularly employed, duly sworn,
off-duty state peace officers or private guards, licensed in
the state, sufficient to provide adequate security for the
maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of
at least one security guard for every 750 persons.
[12] Fire protection, including alarms, extinguishing devices
and fire lanes and escapes, sufficient to meet all state and
local standards for the location of the assembly as
prescribed in the Wisconsin Administrative Code and
Village ordinances, and sufficient emergency personnel to
efficiently operate the required equipment.
[13] The Village may impose additional conditions and impose
additional fees to ensure that all necessary precautions to
ensure that the sound of the assembly will not carry
unreasonably beyond the enclosed boundaries of the
location of the assembly.
[14] Additional conditions may be imposed to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, its purpose
and intent and all other applicable federal, state, county
and local requirements.
(b) An application shall be filed that contains, at a minimum, the
following information:
[1] Explanation of the event.
[2] Dates and hours of the event.
[3] Estimate of the number of persons which can reasonably
assemble at the location or the maximum number of
persons allowed to sleep within the boundaries of the
location of the event if the event is to continue overnight.
[4] Maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any.
[5] Explanation of how the applicant plans to limit the
maximum number of people permitted at the event.
§ 420-140.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-140.1
344:1261
[6] Explanation of how the applicant will supply potable water,
including the source, amount available and location of the
outlets.
[7] Number of toilet and lavatory facilities, including the
source, number, location and type and the means of
disposing of waste deposited.
[8] Explanation of how the applicant will be holding,
collecting and disposing of solid waste material.
[9] Explanation of how the applicant will provide medical
facilities, including the names, addresses and hours of
availability of physicians and nurses and provision for
emergency ambulance service.
[10] Explanation of how the applicant will provide telephone
service, including the source, number and location of
telephones.
[11] Explanation if the applicant intends to allow any camping
or housing facilities during the event and number of
people intending to stay overnight.
[12] Explanation of how the applicant will provide for security,
including the number of guards, their deployment and
their names, addresses, credentials and hours of
availability.
[13] Explanation of how the applicant will provide for fire
protection, including the number, type and location of all
protective devices, including alarms and extinguishers,
and the number of emergency fire personnel available to
operate any such equipment.
[14] Explanation of how the applicant will provide for food
concessions and concessionaires, who will be allowed to
operate on the grounds, including the names and
addresses of all concessionaires and their license or
permit numbers.
[15] Additional information which may be required to explain
the application.
(c) A detailed plan, drawn to a recognizable scale, shall be
included that shows the following information:
[1] The area of the event shall be fenced with specified
entrance and exit gates.
[2] Location of event activities within the fenced event
activity.
§ 420-140.1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-140.1
344:1262
[3] Location of toilet and handwashing facilities.
[4] Locations for holding, collecting and disposing of solid
waste material.
[5] Location of on-site medical facilities.
[6] Location of any proposed on-site lighting, including the
source and amount of power and the location of lamps.
[7] Location of parking for vehicles, including the size and
location of lots, the points of road access and the interior
routes between road access and parking lots.
[8] If overnight camping or housing facilities are proposed,
show the location.
§ 420-140.1 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-140.1
344:1263

ARTICLE XVIII
Conditional Uses
§ 420-141. Purpose and findings.
A conditional use, as defined by this chapter, is designed to be a flexibility
device designed to cope with situations where a particular use, although not
permitted as a matter of right, is not inherently inconsistent with the use
classification of a particular district but could create special problems and
hazards if allowed to develop and locate as a matter of right in a particular
district and therefore is in need of special consideration. Often the effects
of these uses on the surrounding environment cannot be foreseen until a
specific site has been proposed. The nature, character or circumstances
of these uses are so unique or so dependent upon specific contemporary
conditions that predetermination of permissibility by right or the detailing
in this chapter of all of the specific standards, regulations or conditions
necessary or appropriate to such permissibility is not practical, it being
recognized that the Village is faced with practical difficulties in defining
with precision in advance the conditions under which a conditional use
permit may be granted. Those conditional uses hereinafter designated in
this chapter as such are deemed to have one or more of the following
characteristics when located within certain districts:
§ 420-142. Intent.
It is the intent of the Village Board that the hereinafter designated
conditional uses may be allowed at the Plan Commission's discretion within
the areas designated by this chapter in accordance with § 420-145G of
this chapter and only when the conditions imposed thereon are met. Any
conditions so imposed as a basis for granting the conditional use permit
shall be binding on all grantees, assignees, heirs, legatees, donees,
transferees and trustees of the petition.
§ 420-143. Conditional use permits.
The Plan Commission may authorize the Zoning Administrator to issue
a conditional use permit for conditional uses as specified in each of the
aforementioned districts set forth in Article XVI after review and a public
hearing, as provided herein, provided that such conditional uses and
structures are in accord with the provisions of this chapter, its purpose and
intent and all other applicable federal, state, county and local requirements.
A. Hazardous, dangerous or harmful to adjoining or nearby parcels,
waters, air or the environment;
B. Noxious, offensive, a nuisance or otherwise adverse to the adjoining or
nearby parcels, waters, air or the environment; or
C. Inconsistent with or otherwise adverse to the adjoining or nearby land
or water uses in the absence of certain conditions.
§ 420-141 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-144
344:1265
§ 420-144. Application for permit.
Application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator on forms furnished by the Community Development
Department and shall include, at a minimum, the following:
A. Name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner of the site,
architect, professional engineer, contractor, and authorized agent.
B. Legal description of the subject property, address of the subject
property, type of structure proposed, proposed operation or use of the
structure or property, and the zoning district within which the subject
property is located.
C. Plat of survey and/or a site plan layout consisting of a survey prepared
by a Wisconsin registered land surveyor or other map drawn to scale
and approved by the Zoning Administrator showing all of the
information required under § 420-22 for a zoning permit. In addition,
the plat of survey or site plan layout or map shall show at a minimum
the location, elevation and use of any abutting lands and the location
and foundation elevations of structures within 50 feet of the subject
property, soil mapping unit lines, ordinary high-water mark as located
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, one-hundred-year
floodplain on or within 50 feet of the subject properties, and existing
and proposed landscaping.
D. For shoreland and floodland conditional uses, such description shall
also include information that is necessary for the Plan Commission to
determine whether the proposed development will hamper flood flows,
impair floodplain storage capacity, or cause danger to human, animal or
aquatic life. This additional information may include, but is not limited
to, plans certified by a registered professional engineer or land
surveyor showing existing and proposed elevations or contours of the
ground; fill or storage elevation; basement and first floor elevations of
structures; size, location, and spatial arrangement of all existing and
proposed structures on the site; location and elevation of streets; water
supply and sanitary facilities; aerial photographs and photographs
showing existing surrounding land uses and vegetation upstream and
downstream; soil types; and any other pertinent information required
by § 420-131 of this chapter, the Plan Commission or the Zoning
Administrator.
E. Additional information relative to the elimination or alleviation or
control of the danger, hazard or nuisance sought to be averted as may
be required by the Plan Commission or the Zoning Administrator, such
as, without limitation due to enumeration, ground surface elevations,
basement and first floor elevations, utility elevations, detailed
landscape plans, plans of operation, hours, parking plans as defined in
this chapter, historic and probable future floodwater elevations, areas
subject to inundation by floodwaters, depths of inundation,
floodproofing measures, soil type, slope and boundaries, and plans for
§ 420-144 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-144
344:1266
§ 420-145. Review of application; public hearing; grant or denial of
permit.
proposed structures, giving dimensions and elevations pertinent to the
determination of the hydraulic capacity of the structure or its affects on
flood flows.
F. The fee as required by Article V of this chapter.
A. After receipt of a petition for a conditional use permit, the information
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator, who shall transmit all
applications and their accompanying plans and materials to various
Village departments for review. Upon completion of the departments'
review, the petitioner will be notified to review their recommendations
and comments. The Zoning Administrator shall place the matter on the
agenda for a public hearing before the Plan Commission.
B. Notice of the public hearing referred to in Subsection A above shall be
published as a Class 2 notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
accordance with Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. Notice of such public hearing shall
also be given in accordance with the Wisconsin Open Meeting Law,
§§ 19.81 to 19.98, Wis. Stats. Further, notice of such public hearing
shall be mailed by first class mail, not less than 10 days prior to the
public hearing, to the last known address of the applicant, the owners
of the subject lot or site, the owners of all real property located within
300 feet of the subject lot or site and to all other parties of interest as
defined in this chapter. In the event the subject lot or site lies within the
shoreland jurisdictional boundary or within the Floodplain Overlay
District, a copy of the notice of public hearing and a copy of the
application shall be mailed to the Southeast District Office of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in accordance with Ch. NR
116 or NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, respectively, not less than 10 days
prior to the hearing. Failure of any person to receive actual notice of the
public hearing shall not invalidate any action taken by the Plan
Commission. In the event that the Plan Commission postpones or
adjourns a public hearing for a period of time not to exceed one month
after the publication and mailing of the public hearing notice in
accordance with this subsection, no additional Class 2 notice or mailed
notice to property owners shall be required, provided that notice of the
date, time and place of the postponed or adjourned hearing is publicly
announced by the Plan Commission at the time and place of the hearing
for which notice was published and mailed and appears in the record of
the proceeding.
C. In hearing a petition for a conditional use permit, the Plan Commission
shall call the petition at the public hearing. Upon the call of the petition,
the petition shall be read by the Chairman of the Plan Commission, and
at the conclusion thereof the Chairman shall hear and receive any
evidence or sworn testimony presented by the petitioner or his
authorized agent. At the conclusion of the petitioner's presentation, the
Chairman shall ask for any public comments related to the petition. Any
§ 420-144 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-145
344:1267
relevant and material evidence or sworn testimony presented by
individuals shall be received by the Chairman; provided, however, that
said evidence or sworn testimony is properly identifiable for the record.
Lastly, the Chairman shall ask for a recommendation from the Zoning
Administrator.
D. Upon receiving the recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, the
Plan Commission may table the petition for a period of up to three
months from the date of public hearing, or longer if agreed by the
petitioner, so as to allow the petitioner an opportunity to provide any
further information deemed pertinent by the Commission or so as to
allow the Commissioners an opportunity to view the site in accordance
with the guidelines set forth in Chapter 18, § 18-41, of the Village Code
or consider the conditions for issuing a conditional use permit or to
view similar uses already in existence in accordance with the guidelines
set forth in § 18-41 if a comparison is warranted. All deliberations and
decisions of the Commission relating to the conditional use permit shall
be made at a meeting held in conformance with the Wisconsin Open
Meeting Law.
E. Upon having received all evidence and hearing all sworn testimony
relating to the petition, the Plan Commission shall review the site plan,
existing and proposed structures, architectural plans, neighboring land
and water uses, parking areas, driveway locations, highway access,
traffic generation and circulation, drainage, sewage and water systems,
the proposed operation, the effects of the proposed use, structure,
operation and improvement upon flood damage protection, water
quality, air quality, shoreland cover, natural beauty and wildlife habitat,
and any other pertinent requirements deemed necessary by the
Commission so as to eliminate, alleviate, or control any hazard, danger,
harm, nuisance, adversity or inconsistency that exists or could develop.
Upon completion of said review, the Chairman shall entertain a motion
that the Plan Commission either grant or deny the conditional use
permit petition based upon specific findings and conclusions.
F. The Plan Commission shall not approve a conditional use permit unless
they find after viewing the application that the structure, site or use, as
planned, will not violate the intent and purpose of all Village
ordinances. The Plan Commission shall review and consider the
approval of said conditional use permit only after determining that:
(1) The proposed structure(s), site or use will not impair an adequate
supply of light and air to adjacent properties or increase danger of
fire, cause traffic congestion or traffic circulation problems, create
stormwater flooding or drainage, create obnoxious odors or
problems or otherwise endanger the public health, safety or
welfare.
(2) The effect of the proposed conditional use will not hinder, harm or
distract the provision of public services.
§ 420-145 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-145
344:1268
§ 420-146. Existing uses.
(3) The existing and proposed methods of eliminating, alleviating or
controlling the identified hazard, danger, harm, noxiousness,
offensiveness, nuisance or other adversity or inconsistency do not
endanger the public's health, safety or welfare.
(4) Regardless of any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary
allowing for a conditional use permit for a particular structure, site
or use on a particular parcel, the proposed and applied for use on a
particular parcel is not inherently inconsistent with either the
district in which it is located or adjoining districts or
neighborhoods.
G. Unless specifically altered by § 420-148, Standards for conditional uses,
compliance with all of the minimum provisions of this chapter dealing
with such matters as, without limitation due to enumeration, lot area
and width, building height and area, yards, setbacks, sanitary systems,
signs, parking, loading, traffic and highway access and performance
standards shall be required of all conditional uses. Variances shall only
be granted as provided in Chapter 18, Article V of the Village Code.
H. Notice of conditional uses granted in the FPO Floodplain Overlay
District or in any other area where the shoreland jurisdictional
boundary is applicable shall be given to the Southeast District Office of
the State Department of Natural Resources within 10 days following
the decision. [Amended 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06]
I. Any decision of the Plan Commission related to the granting or denial of
a conditional use permit may be appealed as provided for in Chapter 18,
Article V of the Village Code. Such appeal shall be filed with the Village
Zoning Administrator within 30 days after final action taken by the Plan
Commission.
J. Any conditional use permit granted by the Plan Commission shall not be
valid unless recorded at the Kenosha County Register of Deeds office
within six months after approval of said permit or prior to issuance of
any building or zoning permits, which ever comes first. Any recording
fees shall be paid by the applicant. In addition, the Zoning
Administrator shall keep a record of all such conditional use permits,
with such records available to the public.
A. All uses existing at the effective date of this chapter which would be
classified as conditional uses in the particular zoning district concerned
if they were to be established after the effective date of this chapter are
hereby declared to be conforming conditional uses to the extent of the
existing operation only. Any addition, alteration, extension, expansion,
repair or other proposed change in the existing operation shall be
subject to the conditional use procedures as if such use were being
established anew.
§ 420-145 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-146
344:1269
§ 420-147. Suspension or revocation of permit.
Upon a complaint filed with the Zoning Administrator alleging
noncompliance with the terms of the conditional use permit by any
interested party, or upon the motion of the Zoning Administrator, the Plan
Commission shall schedule an open hearing within 45 days of the filing
of the complaint and shall conduct a hearing pursuant to the general
outline set forth in § 420-145. Upon a finding that the standards, regulations
and conditions set forth in granting the conditional use permit have been
violated, the Plan Commission may suspend the conditional use permit
until such time as there is compliance with the standards, regulations and
conditions imposed with said permit, or the Plan Commission may revoke
the conditional use permit. Any continued operation after a suspension
or revocation of such permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter
and subject to the fines set forth in § 420-150 of this chapter. This action
of the Commission may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 18, Article V
of the Village Code. Such appeal shall be filed with the Village Zoning
Administrator within 30 days after final action taken by the Plan
Commission. Any failure to revoke a conditional use permit for past
violations shall not operate as a waiver of the right to suppress future
violations.
§ 420-148. Standards for conditional uses.
B. Any other use not mentioned above which was a conforming conditional
use before adoption or amendment of this chapter but is not a
conditional use in the district in which it is now located shall be
considered a legal nonconforming use and shall be subject to the
requirements of § 420-140 of this chapter.
A. In addition to the specific conditions required herein, additional
reasonable conditions or requirements which bear a direct relationship
to the hazard, danger, harm, noxiousness, offensiveness, nuisance or
other adversity or inconsistency sought to be eliminated, alleviated or
controlled, such as, without limitation due to enumeration,
environmental, economic or social impact statements, storm drainage
plans, landscaping, architectural design, type of construction, ground
cover, anchoring of structures, construction commencement and
completion dates in accordance with § 420-22J of this chapter, sureties,
letters of credit, performance bonds, waivers, lighting, fencing,
location, size and number of signs, planting screens, operational
control, hours of operation, improved traffic circulation, deed
restrictions, highway access restrictions, increased yards or parking
requirements, plat of survey maps, certified survey maps, easement or
street dedications, increased building areas, increased water supply,
essential services and utilities, sanitary and sewage requirements,
installation of pollution abatement, security and/or safety systems,
higher performance standards, stages for development of the
conditional use, future review of the conditional use operation,
conditions surrounding termination of the conditional use permit, and
§ 420-146 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1270
the period of time for which the conditional use will be permitted, may
be required by the Plan Commission upon its finding that these are
necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter and so as to
eliminate, alleviate or control the hazard, danger, harm, noxiousness,
offensiveness, nuisance, adversity or inconsistency sought to be
averted. Where studies, environmental assessments or environmental
impact statements are required, the Commission can address problems
called to its attention by the imposition of certain conditions aimed at
eliminating, alleviating or controlling the problems.
B. The following uses are deemed by the Village Board to be hazardous,
dangerous, harmful, noxious, offensive, a nuisance or otherwise
adverse to adjoining or nearby parcels, water, air or the environment or
inconsistent with or otherwise adverse to adjoining or nearby land or
water uses and therefore should be required to meet certain additional
regulations, standards, and conditions hereinafter set forth and/or
additional standards and conditions imposed by the Plan Commission in
accordance with this chapter so as to eliminate, alleviate or control the
hazard, danger, harm, noxiousness, offensiveness, nuisance, adversity
or inconsistency prior to being permitted in the particular district
wherein said use is listed as a conditional use.
(1) (Reserved)186
(2) Airstrips, landing fields and hangars for personal or agriculturalrelated
uses in the A-2 District and airports, heliport pads, aircraft
hangars for storage and equipment maintenance and aircraft sales
and maintenance in the I-1 District. [Amended 3-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-23; 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06]
(a) The area shall be sufficient and the site otherwise adequate to
meet the standards of the Federal Aviation Administration and
the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and any other
federal or state agency retaining jurisdiction over such
airstrips and landing fields in accordance with their proposed
rules and regulations. In no case shall the parcel be less than
35 acres in size.
(b) Any building, hangar or other structure shall be at least 100
feet from any street or boundary line.
(c) Any proposed runway or landing strips shall be situated so that
the approach zones are free of any flight obstructions, such as
towers, chimneys, other tall structures or natural obstructions
outside the airport site.
(d) There shall be sufficient distance between the end of each
usable landing strip to satisfy the requirements of the
aforementioned agencies, and no landing strip shall be within
186. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), concerning abrasives and asbestos in the M-2
District, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1271
200 feet of any property line. If air rights or easements have
been acquired from the owners of abutting properties in which
approach zones fall, satisfactory evidence thereof shall be
submitted with the application.
(e) Storage of any combustible fuels shall be in accordance with
any state and federal regulations, and due consideration shall
be given so as to ensure safe storage of such fuels.
(f) Special consideration shall be given to the installation of
equipment normally associated with the use of airplanes, such
as proper ground markings and lighting, wind direction
signals, fire-fighting extinguishers, radio communications
equipment, and tie-down spaces.
(g) No more than two planes shall be housed on the property.
(h) Copies of all necessary federal and state permits shall be
provided.
(3) (Reserved)187
(4) (Reserved)188
(5) (Reserved)189
(6) Archery ranges (outdoors) in the PR-2 District. [Amended
5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24]
(a) All shooting shall be in the direction of targets, and all targets
shall be at least 500 feet from any property line.
(b) Berms shall be five feet in height above the highest point of the
target and shall be a minimum of 10 feet in depth so as to
absorb stray shot.
(c) In granting a conditional use permit for archery and firearm
ranges, the Plan Commission shall further evaluate the
potential hazards to adjacent uses, the topography and ground
cover, and noise to be generated by such activity and establish
reasonable and necessary standards for eliminating or
minimizing the potential hazards and noise.
(d) Firing shall not be permitted directly toward or over any
navigable waters or public or private roads or drives or toward
187. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), concerning airstrips and landing fields in the A-1,
A-2, and A-4 Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23. See now Subsection
B(2).
188. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), concerning amusement parks, carnivals, and the
like in the PR-1 District, was repealed 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24.
189. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), Animal reduction in the M-2 District, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1272
any buildings or structures or toward any population
concentration within 2,000 feet of the range site.
(e) There shall be a defined firing line and firing direction and
adequate target backstops in addition to the berms
aforementioned and a defined target area.
(f) Ranges shall be clearly identified by signs not less than four
square feet in gross area located at intervals not less than 25
yards around the perimeter. Furthermore, ranges shall be
securely fenced off from adjacent lands and waters.
(g) Provisions for first aid may be required.
(7) (Reserved)190
(8) (Reserved)191
(9) (Reserved)192
(10) (Reserved)193
(11) Bridges and approaches in the FPO District.
(a) Conditional use permits for bridges and approaches shall not
be granted unless the applicant shall show that such use or
improvement shall not impede drainage, will not cause
ponding, will not obstruct the floodway, will not increase flood
flow velocities, will not increase the flood stage by more than
0.1 foot unless easements or other appropriate legal measures,
as may be approved by the Wisconsin Administrative Code,
have been taken and approved, and will not retard the
movement of floodwaters. When permitted such structures
shall be floodproofed and shall be constructed so as not to
catch or collect debris or be damaged by floodwaters.
Certification of the structure shall be made to the Community
Development Department and shall consist of a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer that
the structure is consistent with the flood velocities, forces,
depths and other factors associated with the one-hundred-year
recurrence interval flood.
(b) The conditional use permit shall not be granted unless there is
assurance of compliance with the provisions of § 420-131, the
purpose and objective of floodplain management, as
190. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(7), Arenas, stadiums, coliseums, auditoriums and
gymnasiums in the PR-1 District, was repealed 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24.
191. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(8), Assemblies over 5,000 in the A-2 and PR-1
Districts, was repealed 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24.
192. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(9), Auto-truck body and engine repair and painting in
the M-1 and M-2 Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
193. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(10), Beaches and swimming pools in the PR-1 District,
was repealed 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1273
enumerated in § NR 116.01, Wis. Adm. Code, and local
comprehensive plans in other land use controls.
(12) Bus terminals in the I-1 District and bus terminals and related
equipment storage. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
(a) All maintenance and repair work shall be done within an
enclosed structure.
(b) Storage of fuels and other combustible materials and products
shall be adequately safeguarded and located in such a fashion
as to minimize hazards inherent in the storage of such
materials.
(12.1) Cabaret in the B-2, B-3, B-4 and PR-2 Districts. [Added
5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-30]
(a) Shall not be permitted outside a principal building between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., if located within 300 feet of
a property zoned residential as measured from the property
lines.
(13) Campgrounds in the PR-2 or PR-3 Districts. [Amended 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 09-24]
(a) Each campsite shall be plainly marked.
(b) The maximum number of campsites shall be 12 per gross acre.
(c) The minimum size of a recreational vehicle rental park or
campground shall be five acres.
(d) The minimum dimensions of a campsite shall be 30 feet wide
by 50 feet long.
(e) Each campsite shall be separated from other campsites by a
yard not less than 15 feet wide.
(f) There shall be two automobile parking spaces for a campsite.
(g) No campsite shall be located closer than 75 feet to a public
highway or road right-of-way or closer than 40 feet to any other
property boundary. All camping units shall be located no closer
than 20 feet to any internal private service road. All service
roads shall be free of parked vehicles.
(h) All campgrounds shall conform to the requirements of Ch. 78,
Wis. Adm. Code,194 which shall apply until amended and then
shall apply as amended.
(i) All campgrounds shall be completely enclosed, except for
permitted entrances and exits, with permanent evergreen
194. Editor's Note: See now Ch. DHS 178, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1274
planting, the individual trees to be of such number and so
arranged that within 10 years they will have formed a dense
screen; such permanent planting shall be grown or maintained
to a height of not less than 10 feet.
(j) Each campground shall have a service building similar to that
required by Ch. 77, Wis. Adm. Code.195
(k) Any campground may have one commercial facility per
development, such as a small convenience store, restaurant or
snack bar, etc., located within the complex for use by the
occupants only. Under no circumstances may this facility be
located on a public road and used for general street trade, and
no advertising of the facility shall cater to the general public.
(l) No trailer or camping unit shall be located on one site for a
period of more than six weeks. No trailer shall be stored in the
campground.
(14) Cemeteries in the I-1 District.
(a) The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the
development of a system of collector and arterial streets in the
vicinity. In addition, the site shall have direct access to a public
roadway.
(b) Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing at least
20 acres.
(c) All burial buildings and crematoriums shall meet the yard
requirements of the district. A burial building is any building
used for the interment of bodies or other remains of persons
who have died, including mausoleums, vaults or columbaria.
(d) All graves or burial lots shall be set back at least 30 feet from
any street bounding the cemetery, and there shall be two side
yards and a rear yard of at least 25 feet each.
(e) Existing cemeteries may continue to operate in a manner
consistent with the existing development in the area presently
covered by a conditional use permit. Any expansion to land not
covered by an existing conditional use permit must comply
with the requirements of this section.
(f) Adequate parking shall be provided on the site, and no
cemetery parking shall be permitted on any public street.
(g) Nothing in these provisions, however, shall prohibit the
issuance of a conditional use permit for a pet cemetery.
(15) (Reserved)196
195. Editor's Note: See now Ch. DHS 178, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1275
(16) (Reserved)197
(17) (Reserved)198
(17.1) (Reserved)199
(18) (Reserved)200
(19) (Reserved)201
(20) Community living arrangements in the A-2, A-3, C-2, R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4, R-4.5, R-5 and R-6 Districts. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-23; 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06]
(a) A minimum of nine but not more than 15 persons shall be
allowed in said permitted principal dwelling as allowed in the
underlying zoning district.
(b) The facility shall be in conformance with all state statutory
requirements.
(c) The petitioner shall submit as part of the application for the
conditional use permit the type of community living
arrangement proposed, the purpose for the community living
arrangement, the type of individuals that will reside on the
property and the plan for supervising and administering the
needs of the residents.
(d) If applicable, a report and license from the Department of
Health and Family Services relating to the suitability of the
property for use as a community living arrangement shall be
submitted as part of the application for a conditional use
permit. The loss of any license shall operate as an automatic
revocation of the conditional use permit. Permits shall not be
transferable to another location or holder without approval of
another conditional use permit.
(e) The property and the structure shall be serviced by municipal
sanitary sewer.
(f) The lot shall be a minimum of one acre or the minimum lot size
in the underlying zoning district, whichever is greater.
196. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(15), Chemicals in the M-2 District, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
197. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(16), Coal and bone distillation in the M-2 District, was
repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
198. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(17), concerning commercial communication antennas
and like devices, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
199. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(17.1), listing commercial communications structures,
was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-08.
200. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(18), Commercial egg production in the A-3 District,
was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
201. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(19), Commercial feed lot in the A-3 District, was
repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1276
(21) Community living arrangements in the R-7, R-8, R-9 and R-10
Districts.
(a) The number of units shall not exceed the number of units
allowed in the permitted principal structure in the underlying
zoning district.
(b) The facility shall be in conformance with all state statutory
requirements.
(c) The petitioner shall submit as part of the application for the
conditional use permit the type of community living
arrangement proposed, the purpose for the community living
arrangement, the type of individuals that will reside on the
property and the plan for supervising and administering the
needs of the residents.
(d) If applicable, a report and license from the Department of
Health and Family Services relating to the suitability of the
property for use as a community living arrangement shall be
submitted as part of the application for a conditional use
permit. The loss of any license shall operate as an automatic
revocation of the conditional use permit. Permits shall not be
transferable to another location or holder without approval of
another conditional use permit.
(e) The property and the structure shall be serviced by municipal
sanitary sewer and municipal water.
(f) In the R-8 District the lot shall be a minimum of one acre.
(g) In the R-7 and R-9 Districts the lot shall be a minimum of two
acres.
(h) In the R-10 District the lot shall be a minimum of 2.5 acres.
(22) Community living arrangements in the R-11 Districts.
(a) The net density shall not exceed 21 units per acre.
(b) The facility shall be in conformance with all state statutory
requirements.
(c) The petitioner shall submit as part of the application for the
conditional use permit the type of community living
arrangement proposed, the purpose for the community living
arrangement, the type of individuals that will reside on the
property and the plan for supervising and administering the
needs of the residents.
(d) If applicable, a report and license from the Department of
Health and Family Services relating to the suitability of the
property for use as a community living arrangement shall be
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1277
submitted as part of the application for a conditional use
permit. The loss of any license shall operate as an automatic
revocation of the conditional use permit. Permits shall not be
transferable to another location or holder without approval of
another conditional use permit.
(e) The property and the structure shall be serviced by municipal
sanitary sewer and municipal water.
(f) The lot shall be a minimum of three acres.
(23) Concrete and asphalt batch plants in the M-3 District. [Amended
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
(a) Federal and state air quality standards shall be complied with.
(b) Conditions may be set with respect to hours of operation and
ingress and egress to the premises.
(c) The premises shall be properly secured.
(24) (Reserved)202
(25) (Reserved)203
(25.1) Convenient cash business in the B-2 District. [Added 1-15-2007
by Ord. No. 07-01]
(a) A convenient cash business in the B-2 District that is proposed
to be commenced or expanded shall be not less than 300 feet in
a direct line from any lot on which any school, church or daycare
center for children is located or has a vested right to
locate, or from any lot (or from any portion of a lot) zoned
residential, or at the time the application for site and
operational plan approval for the commencement or expansion
of such proposed convenient cash business use is decided by
the Village Plan Commission.
(b) No convenient cash business shall be located within 2,640 feet
of another convenient cash business regardless of whether
such other convenient cash business is located in the Village or
an adjacent municipality.
(c) Hours of operation. A convenient cash business shall not be
open between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday
through Friday; shall not be open on Saturdays except between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.; and shall not be open on
Sunday. However, the Plan Commission may, on a case-by-case
202. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(24), Concrete and asphalt batch plants temporarily
located on a parcel in the A-1, A-2, A-3, and A-4 Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-23.
203. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(25), Contractor storage yards in the M-2 District, was
repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1278
basis, expressly approve extended hours. [Amended
3-18-2013 by Ord. No. 13-09]
(d) Security. Any new or expanded convenient cash businesses
shall comply with all requirements set forth in Chapter 410 of
the Village Municipal Code entitled "Security Ordinance."
[Added 3-18-2013 by Ord. No. 13-09]
(26) (Reserved)204
(27) Dry cabaret in the B-2, B-3, B-4 and PR-2 Districts.205 [Added
5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-30]
(a) Shall not be permitted outside a principal building between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., if located within 300 feet of
a property zoned residential as measured from property lines.
(28) Earth movements in shoreland areas. See Article XV of this
chapter.
(29) Electric, gas and steam generating plants in the M-4 District.
[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
(a) An environmental impact statement shall be submitted.
(b) All necessary state and federal permits shall be filed with the
Village.
(c) The plan for the transportation, storage and disposal of
chemicals, fuels and waste shall be submitted for review and
approval by the Plan Commission.
(d) All security measures for the proposed electric, gas and steam
generating plants shall be submitted for review and approval
by the Plan Commission to ensure proper and complete
security measures.
(e) All federal and state pollution guidelines and the performance
standards set forth in this chapter shall be complied with.
(f) In the event that said generating plant makes use of nuclear
fuels, the generating plant shall be located not closer than 10
miles to the boundaries of any city or village; furthermore, no
conditional use permit for the construction of a nuclear
generating plant shall be issued without the presentation of an
evacuation plan for county residents.
204. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(27), Dye in the M-2 District, was repealed 3-15-2010
by Ord. No. 10-23.
205. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(26), Creosote in the M-2 District, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1279
(30) Electric power substation or gas metering substation (only as a
principal use on its own parcel) in the M-1, M-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4
or B-5 District. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
(a) The substation shall be fenced with a secure chain link fence
having a minimum height of six feet with barbed wire or razor
wire on top.
(b) The minimum lot size shall be a lot large enough to
accommodate the applicable principal building setback
requirements in such district.
(c) The minimum lot frontage on a public street requirement shall
not be applicable.
(d) The minimum gross floor area requirement shall not be
applicable.
(31) (Reserved)206
(32) Filling as authorized by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources and United States Army Corps of Engineers to permit
the establishment of approved bulkhead lines in the FPO District.
Those requirements set forth for the granting of a conditional use
permit for bridges and approaches shall be complied with.
(33) (Reserved)207
(34) (Reserved)208
(35) Freestanding commercial communication structure (only as a
principal use on its own parcel) in the M-1, M-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4
or B-5 District. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
(a) Shall comply with the applicable requirements of § 420-89 of
this chapter.
(b) The minimum lot size shall be a lot large enough to
accommodate the applicable principal building setback
requirements in such district.
(c) The minimum lot frontage on a public street requirement shall
not be applicable.
(36) (Reserved)209
206. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(31), concerning fertilizer production, sales, and
storage in the A-3 and M-2 Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
207. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(33), Forges in the M-2 District, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
208. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(34), Foundries in M-2 District, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
209. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(36), Freight terminals, yards and transshipment
depots and related equipment storage and maintenance facilities in the M-2 District, was
repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1280
(37) (Reserved)210
(38) (Reserved)211
(39) Garbage incinerators in the M-3 District. [Amended 3-15-2010
by Ord. No. 10-23]
(a) (Reserved)
(b) (Reserved)
(c) A performance bond guaranteeing compliance with all federal
and state pollution guidelines and the performance standards
set forth in this chapter shall be required.
(d) The site shall contain a minimum of five acres.
(e) There shall be no outside storage of refuse.
(f) Scrap yard operations shall not be permitted on the premises.
(g) (Reserved)
(h) A security plan shall be presented for approval.
(40) (Reserved)212
(41) (Reserved)213
(42) Golf courses in the PR-2 and PR-3 Districts. [Amended 5-4-2009
by Ord. No. 09-24]
(a) The site shall be a minimum of 80 acres.
(b) No structure shall be located within the floodplain.
(c) Fairways shall be located to avoid golf balls being driven
outside of the property boundary lines.
(d) Courses located in primary environmental corridors shall
provide a conservation plan for review and approval.
(43) Golf driving ranges in the R-2 and PR-3 Districts. [Amended
5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24]
(a) The site shall contain at least 10 acres and shall be of such a
configuration as to permit a minimum driving distance of 300
210. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(36), Freight terminals in the M-1 and M-2 Districts,
was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
211. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(38), Fuel in the M-2 District, was repealed 3-15-2010
by Ord. No. 10-23.
212. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(40), concerning gas and utility uses in the A-1
District, as amended, was repealed 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-29.
213. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(41), Gasohol and fuel-related alcohol plants in the A-3
and M-2 Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1281
yards from each proposed tee, exclusive of the required
buffered area.
(b) The golf driving range shall maintain a seventy-five-foot front
and a one-hundred-fifty-foot side setback. The site shall be
buffered by indigenous materials and fencing to minimize the
impact upon adjoining properties.
(c) The driving range shall be situated in such a fashion that the
safety of adjoining residences and nearby traffic is safeguarded
against stray balls.
(43.1) A principal or accessory use classified as a High-Hazard Group H
use pursuant to Section 307 of the 2006 IBC214 that involve the
manufacturing, processing, generation or storage of materials that
constitute a physical or health hazard in quantities in excess of
those allowed in control areas constructed and located as required
in Section 414 of the 2006 IBC allowed in the M-2 District. [Added
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
(a) Performance bonds may be required to insure compliance with
the terms of the conditional use permit.
(44) Household stables in the R-1 District. No household stable shall be
located closer than 100 feet to any off-premises neighboring
residential buildings. Manure piles shall be disbursed or removed
in accordance with accepted sanitary practice.
(45) (Reserved)215
(46) (Reserved)216
(47) (Reserved)217
(48)Kennels in the A-2 District. [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-23]
(a) All animals shall be kept within an enclosed structure, and no
structure or animal enclosure shall be located closer than 100
feet to a property boundary.
(b) Adequate provisions shall be made for the proper disposal of
animal waste.
(c) Buildings to house animals shall be designed and constructed
with materials to deaden noise.
214. The International Building Code.
215. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(45), Housing for farm laborers in the A-1 District, as
amended, was repealed 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-29.
216. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(46), Housing for seasonal or migratory farm workers
in the A-1 District, as amended, was repealed 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-29.
217. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(47), Insulating materials in the M-2 District, was
repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1282
(d) The property shall be a minimum of 10 acres.
(49) (Reserved)218
(50) (Reserved)219
(51) (Reserved)220
(52) (Reserved)221
(53) (Reserved)222
(54) (Reserved)223
(55) (Reserved)224
(56) Manufacturing of lime, gypsum or plaster of paris in the M-3
District. Those requirements set forth for the granting of a
conditional use permit for the manufacturing of cement or concrete
products in the M-3 District shall be complied with.
(57) (Reserved)225
(58) Marinas in the FPO District.
(a) Those requirements set forth for the granting of a conditional
use permit for bridges and approaches in the FPO District shall
be complied with.
(b) A detailed site plan, plan of operation and environmental
protection plan shall be submitted.
(c) Increased performance standards may be required by the
Village along with performance bonds to insure compliance
with the conditions.
(59) (Reserved)226
218. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(49), Laboratories in the M-2 District, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
219. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(50), concerning lacquer, paint and like products in
the M-2 District, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
220. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(51), Livestock sales facilities in the A-3 and M-2
Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
221. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(52), Living quarters for watchmen and caretakers in
the M-2 District, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
222. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(53), lubricating oils and greases in the M-2 District,
was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
223. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(54), Malt production in the A-3, M-1 and M-2
Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
224. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(55), Manufacturing of cement or concrete products in
the M-3 District, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
225. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(57), concerning the manufacturing, processing and
storage of various materials in the M-2 District, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-23.
226. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(59), Marinas and marine sales and service in the PR-1
District, was repealed 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1283
(60) (Reserved)227
(61) (Reserved)228
(62) (Reserved)229
(63) Mining or extraction of rock, slate, gravel, sand, topsoil and other
minerals in the M-3 District.
(a) An application for extractive operations shall be accompanied
by a map, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, showing
the following:
[1] Existing topography at two-foot contour intervals.
[2] Locations of watercourses and drainage systems.
[3] An outline of the area to be excavated at two-foot contour
intervals.
(b) An additional map shown at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet
shall show a general plan for proposed operations and
rehabilitation of the site, including the following:
[1] The locations of proposed watercourses and drainage
systems, including lakes, ponds, and retention areas.
[2] The sequence of operations and the schedule of
rehabilitation measures.
[3] The proposed locations of sorting, grading, crushing, and
similar equipment necessary to the operation and initial
distribution of the excavated products.
[4] The proposed locations of any buildings, scale house,
equipment storage areas, and equipment repair sheds or
areas.
(c) The operation and rehabilitation of extractive products areas
shall be in accordance with the following conditions:
[1] Excavation shall not take place within 200 feet of any
street or property line.
[2] Buildings, structures and storage and repair areas,
parking areas and stockpiles shall be at least 100 feet from
any street or property line.
227. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(60), concerning meatpacking, slaughterhouses, and
production of meat products in the A-3 and M-2 Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-23.
228. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(61), Millwork, lumberyards, sawmills and planing
mills in the M-1 and M-2 Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
229. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(62), Minibike trails in the PR-1 District, was repealed
5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1284
[3] Accessways and roads shall be maintained in a dust-free
condition either by oiling or by spraying with calcium
chloride.
[4] All operations shall be conducted in a safe manner,
especially with respect to hazards to persons, damage to
adjacent lands or improvements, and damage to any street
by slides, sinking, or collapse of supporting soil adjacent to
an excavation. No extractive operation shall be conducted
in a manner so as to lower the water table of surrounding
properties.
(d) No excavation, removal or fill shall be permitted if the finished
conditions would contain the following:
[1] Deep pits having side slopes of greater than 30°.
[2] Serious on-site erosion problems or erosion problems
which could extend to neighboring properties.
[3] Undrained depressions other than artificial lakes, or
drainage problems which adversely affect neighboring
properties.
(e) After completion of operations, and in accordance with the
approved rehabilitation map, the premises shall be cleared of
debris and a layer of soil capable of supporting vegetation shall
be spread over the premises to a depth of at least six inches
(except for areas under water) and shall be seeded with grass
or other ground cover to prevent erosion.
(f) A corporate surety bond shall be furnished to the Village to
assure compliance with the approved rehabilitation map and
plan. The bond shall be in an amount to be determined by the
Plan Commission sufficient to cover twice the projected
expenses of such rehabilitation at the time that the
rehabilitation is to occur according to the plan of the applicant.
A termination date for the completion of operations and the
rehabilitation of the tract shall be imposed at the time of
approval based upon the estimated length of time the
operation will be necessary.
(g) An additional bond shall be furnished to the Village to insure
against possible road damage to nearby roads due to heavy
trafficking of materials.
(h) The application for a conditional use permit for extractive
industries in the M-3 District shall be made by the property
owner or long-term lessee, either of whom shall be directly
responsible for the operation of the quarry or related activity.
The application shall include a plat survey of the proposed site
and an adequate description of the operational methods,
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1285
including hours of operation; a list of equipment, machinery,
and structures to be used; the source, quantity and disposition
of water to be used, a topographic map of the site showing
existing contours with a minimum vertical of five feet; trees;
proposed and existing access roads; the depth of all existing
and proposed excavations; and a restoration plan.
(i) The restoration plan provided by the applicant shall contain
proposed contours after filling or restoration, depth of the
restored topsoil, type of fill, planting or reforestation, and
restoration commencement and completion dates. The
applicant shall furnish the necessary fees to provide for the
Village's inspection and administration costs. The applicant
and/or owner of the land from which the mineral, gravel, sand,
rocks, slate, or topsoil is being removed or extracted shall
furnish the necessary sureties which will enable the Village to
perform the planned restoration of the site in the event of
default by the applicant. The amount of sureties shall be based
upon cost estimates prepared by the Village or its agents, and
the form and type of such sureties shall be approved by the
Village.
(j) A list of all equipment used in the operation shall be submitted
to the Village, and the applicant for the conditional use permit
shall be responsible for updating that list when changes are
made in the equipment located on the site.
(k) The conditional use permit shall be in effect for a period not to
exceed two years and may be renewed upon an application for
a period of an additional two years by the Village Plan
Commission upon review of the performance of the operations.
Modifications or additional conditions may be imposed upon
application for renewal, including an increase in the amount of
any surety bond.
(l) All applicable provisions set forth in the Federal Mining and
Safety Act shall be complied with.
(64) Manufactured/mobile home parks in the R-12 District.
(a) Compliance with the requirements set forth in Ch. HFS 177,
Wis. Adm. Code, and amendments thereto.
(b) The minimum park size shall be 10 acres.
(c) Minimum park width shall be 450 feet.
(d) The maximum number of manufactured/mobile home sites
shall be five per gross acre, and they shall be supplied by
municipal sewer and municipal water.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1286
(e) The minimum open space provided shall be 20% of the
development area, exclusive of public and/or private roads.
(f) Each manufactured/mobile home park shall be completely
enclosed, except for permitted entrances and exits, with a
forty-foot landscaped buffer area between manufacture/mobile
home lots and adjacent properties with a permanent evergreen
planting, the individual trees to be of such number and so
arranged that within 10 years they will have formed a dense
screen. Such permanent planting shall be grown or maintained
to a height of not less than 10 feet.
(g) Each manufactured/mobile home lot shall adjoin on an
approved public or private road.
(h) Parking spaces are required per Article VIII of this chapter.
(i) Subject to requirements of Chapter 221, Manufactured/Mobile
Homes, of the Village Code.
(j) Subject to the requirements of Article IX of this chapter related
to site and operational plan approval.
(k) Laundries, washrooms, recreation rooms, maintenance
equipment storage, and one office are permitted as long as
they are related to the general operations of the park. No other
business or commercial use shall be located within the
manufactured/mobile home park.
(l) Subject to Manufactured/Mobile Home Manufacturing
Association and any other requirements set forth by the
Wisconsin Statutes or Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(m) No manufactured/mobile home site shall be rented for a period
of less than 30 days.
(n) The manufactured/mobile home park shall meet the
requirements of all local ordinances and state administrative
rules regarding manufactured/mobile homes and
manufactured/mobile home parks, and in the event of a conflict
between said ordinances, statutes or rules compliance with the
more restrictive requirements shall be required.
(o) All manufactured/mobile home subdivisions created after
January 1, 1998, shall provide lot markers at the corners of
each manufactured/mobile home lot. All lot markers shall be
clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stakes,
markers or other suitable permanent means.
(p) Copies of all licenses required by § 66.0435, Wis. Stats., shall
be obtained and presented for review.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1287
(65) Model structure or unit and related temporary real estate sales
offices or marketing center located within the model unit or as a
separate structure in the R-7, R-8, R-9, R-10 and R-11 Districts.
(a) The Plan Commission may set a specific time frame for such
use to be allowed.
(b) Said facilities shall not be used until a final certificate of
occupancy has been issued.
(c) Said facilities shall not be open past 9:00 p.m.
(d) Proper exterior maintenance of the property shall be provided,
such as but not limited to lawn and yard maintenance and snow
removal.
(e) Said facilities shall be completely landscaped prior to
occupancy.
(f) Said facilities shall be handicapped accessible and meet all
ADA requirements.
(g) The off-street parking area shall be completed with either a
gravel base or a paved surface prior to occupancy.
(h) If said model unit and related sales office or marketing center
are to be converted back to a living unit, proper permits and
certificates of occupancy shall be obtained from the Village.
(66) Model manufactured/mobile homes and related temporary real
estate sales offices located within the model unit in the R-12
District. Those requirements set forth for granting a conditional
use permit for model apartments and model condominiums and
related temporary real estate sales office located within the model
unit in the R-7, R-8, R-9, R-10 and R-11 Districts shall be complied
with.
(67) Model single-family homes and related temporary real estate sales
offices or marketing centers located within the model unit or as a
separate structure in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5 and R-6
Districts.
(a) Said facilities may be located in a new development for a
period not to exceed two years from the date of occupancy.
(b) Said facilities shall not be used until a final certificate of
occupancy has been issued.
(c) Said facilities shall not be open past 9:00 p.m.
(d) Proper exterior maintenance of the property shall be provided,
such as but not limited to lawn and yard maintenance and snow
removal.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1288
(e) Said facilities shall be completely landscaped prior to
occupancy.
(f) Said facilities shall be handicapped accessible and meet all
ADA requirements.
(g) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided; however, a
parking lot shall not be created that would not normally be
found in a single-family development.
(h) The off-street parking area shall be completed with either a
gravel base or a paved surface prior to occupancy.
(i) Upon expiration of said conditional use permit, the model
home and/or related sales office or marketing center shall be
converted back to a living unit, and proper permits and
certificates of occupancy shall be obtained from the Village, or
if the facility is located in a separate structure, said structure
shall be removed and the site graded and stabilized.
(68) (Reserved)230
(69) One multiple-family structure not to exceed 36 units per structure,
which shall include private garages attached to the structure.
(a) The net density shall not exceed 11 units per acre.
(b) All enclosed parking spaces required shall be located within
the permitted principal structure.
(c) The lot shall be a minimum of 3.25 acres.
(d) All lots shall have a minimum frontage of 250 feet in width
unless located on a cul-de-sac or curve, in which case the lot
frontage may be reduced to 150 feet of frontage, provided that
there is at least 250 feet of width at the required building
setback line.
(e) Side setback shall not be less than 50 feet as measured from
the structure to the side property line.
(f) Rear setback shall not be less than 75 feet as measured from
the structure to the rear property line.
(70) Municipal water supply and sanitary sewage systems in the FPO
District.
(a) Those requirements set forth for granting a conditional use
permit for bridges and approaches in the FPO District shall be
complied with.
230. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(68), Motor freight in the M-2 District, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1289
(b) The system must be floodproofed to an elevation at least two
feet above the elevation of the one-hundred-year recurrence
interval flood and be designed to eliminate or minimize
infiltration of floodwaters into the system. Certification of
floodproofing shall be made to the Community Development
Department and shall consist of a plan or document certified by
a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing
measures are consistent with the flood velocities, forces,
depths, and other factors associated with the one-hundredyear
recurrence interval flood level for the particular stream
reach.
(71) Navigational structures in the FPO District. Those requirements
set forth for granting a conditional use permit for bridges and
approaches in the FPO District shall be complied with.
(72) Nonresidential buildings may be constructed and maintained in the
C-1 and C-3 District, provided that:
(a) The building is essential for and used solely in conjunction with
the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic
animals or some other use permitted in the shoreland-wetland
district;
(b) The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside
the wetland;
(c) Such building is not designed for human habitation and does
not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and
(d) Only limited filling or excavating necessary to provide
structural support for the building is authorized.
(73) (Reserved)231
(74) Outside storage in the M-1 and M-2 Districts. [Amended
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
(a) All outside storage areas a minimum of 300 feet from
residential, institutional or park districts shall be enclosed by a
solid fence with a minimum height of six feet. Screen plantings
may be required around the perimeter of the district where
such perimeter abuts residential districts or where such a
screen planting is deemed necessary or advisable depending
on surrounding land uses.
(b) A detailed site and security plan shall be required indicating
the location of storage areas, the type of material to be stored
and a list of all hazardous materials stored on the property
231. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(73), Offal in the M-2 District, was repealed 3-15-2010
by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1290
along with precautions necessitated by the storage of such
hazardous material.
(c) Lighting shall be required for the storage areas; provided,
however, that the glare from said lighting does not shine on
adjoining properties.
(75) (Reserved)232
(76) Park and recreational areas not including structures in the FPO
District. Those requirements set forth for granting a conditional
use permit for bridges and approaches in the FPO District shall be
complied with.
(77) Penal, reform, disciplinary and mental institutions in the I-1
District.
(a) A statement of intent shall be filed with the Village indicating
the type of facility that is being proposed, the type of
individuals to be housed in the facility along with a listing of
their needs and the problems they have encountered, whether
the facility is to be a maximum security facility or a minimum
security facility or other such designation, the maximum
number of inmates or patient that will be residing at the
facility, and the number of personnel to be employed by the
facility and the type of employment that each will be engaged
in.
(b) A site plan shall be presented in detail and include therein all
internal road systems and the location of all buildings and
security devices.
(c) A plan of operation shall be submitted setting forth the security
system to be employed on the site, the number of personnel
employed on each shift, fire and police protection that will be
relied upon in the event of an emergency, alternate security
systems and backup systems, especially where electronic
security devices are used, the type of supervision to be
employed in the facility, including the job descriptions and
requirements for all employees, and what medical facilities will
be relied upon in the event of an emergency.
(d) All appropriate licenses to be issued by federal, state and/or
local governing bodies or agencies shall be submitted.
(e) An impact statement shall be required so as to better enable
the Village to determine the effect of such a facility on the
community with such statement addressing itself to the social,
economic and environmental impact on the Village and
232. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(75), Packing and crating services in the M-1 and M-2
Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1291
addressing itself to, without limitation due to enumeration, the
effect of such a facility on local and county law enforcement
agencies, local fire protection requirements, the county court
system, property values in surrounding areas, sanitation
requirements, increased highway and transportation needs,
employment, housing, schools, the surrounding environment,
and the cost of the increase in services to Village taxpayers.
(f) The aforementioned impact statement is to be prepared by a
consultant chosen by the Village and paid for by the applicant.
Such impact statement shall list problems incurred by other
facilities of a similar nature, be they inside or outside of the
State of Wisconsin.
(g) Any problems, hazards, nuisances, danger, harm, noxiousness
or offensiveness brought out by such impact statement may be
addressed by the Village and may form the basis for additional
conditions being imposed upon the applicant.
(h) Mindful of the dangers and hazards imposed by both fire and
nuclear radiation and the proximity of Pleasant Prairie to the
Zion nuclear plant, an evacuation plan setting forth in detail
the method and manner for mass evacuation in the event of an
emergency shall be required. In lieu thereof, a shelter facility
shall be provided on the facility to adequately service the
needs of employees and residents in the event of emergency.
(i) The site shall contain a minimum of 300 acres.
(j) Structures shall be at least 1,500 feet from any boundary line,
and all structures shall be at least 2,500 feet from any
residential, commercial, manufacturing or other institutional
district.
(k) Structures shall contain living areas of not less than 90 square
feet per occupant.
(l) A solid reinforced concrete wall, at least 24 inches wide and 25
feet in height, shall completely encircle all prison and penal
institutions and no building may be located closer than 75 feet
to said wall.
(m) Three chain link fences at least 30 feet apart shall be located
outside the prison wall. Within the inner fence there shall be an
electronic surveillance system between the fence and the
prison wall, and between all chain link fences there shall be
spread out on the ground three-foot-diameter coils of barbed
steel tape for maximum security institutions.
(n) The grounds and all areas within the aforementioned chain link
fences shall be adequately lit at night, and an emergency
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1292
electrical generation station shall be provided for in the event
of an emergency.
(o) The facility shall be on public sewer and water.
(p) The street frontage shall be landscaped in such a manner as to
achieve a height of 10 feet or more by way of a temporary
planting of fast-growing material and shall also provide for a
permanent evergreen planting, the individual trees to be of
such number and so arranged that within 10 years they will
have formed a dense screen, with such permanent planting
growing or being maintained to a height of not less than 10
feet. Details as to plant materials, size and design of planting
as well as time tables must be submitted with the application
for a conditional use permit.
(q) In the case of mental institutions, or in the case of juvenile
detention facilities, minimum security penal institutions, and
reformatories, the aforementioned conditions may be modified
as deemed appropriate by the Village Board.
(78) Pet kennels. See kennels.
(79) (Reserved)233
(80) (Reserved)234
(81) (Reserved)235
(82) Power, gas and heat generating plants in the M-4 District.
[Amended 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-12; 3-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-23]
(a) An impact statement may be required by the Village setting
forth the economic, social and environmental impact of such a
project on the community.
(83) (Reserved)236
(84) (Reserved)237
(85) Public water measuring and control facilities done in accordance
with the provisions of § NR 116.17 of the Wisconsin Administrative
233. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(79), Petroleum bulk stations and terminals in the M-1
and M-2 Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
234. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(80), concerning plastic materials and synthetic
products in the M-2 District, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
235. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(81), Poison in the M-2 District, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
236. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(83), Processing of hardwood dimension, flooring,
veneer and plywood in the M-1 and M-2 Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-23.
237. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(84), Production of animal and marine fats and oils in
the A-3 and M-2 Districts, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1293
Code in the FPO District. Those requirements set forth for the
granting of a conditional use permit for bridges and approaches in
the FPO District shall be complied with.
(86)Railroad depots in the I-1 District.
(a) A detailed site plan shall be presented to the Plan Commission
and shall include the location of storage of any hazardous fuels
and materials.
(b) A detailed plan of operation shall be presented to the Plan
Commission and shall include a plan for the security, fencing,
lighting, and safety of individuals in the area.
(c) The depot shall be located in such a manner as to preclude
trains at a stop from interfering with any motor vehicle traffic.
(87)Railroad line construction and maintenance in the C-1 and C-3
District, provided that:
(a) The railroad lines cannot as a practical matter be located
outside of a wetland; and
(b) Any filling, excavating, ditching, or draining that is to be done
must be necessary for such construction or maintenance and
must be done in a manner designed to minimize flooding and
other adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the
wetlands.
(88) (Reserved)238
(89) (Reserved)239
(90) Recycling facilities (indoors) in the M-2 District. Those
requirements set forth for the granting of a conditional use permit
for garbage incinerators in the M-3 District shall be complied with.
[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
(91) (Reserved)240
(92) (Reserved)241
(93) Restaurants or gasoline stations open to the public between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. in the B-4 District.
238. Editor's Note: Subsection B(88), Railroad terminals and freight yards in the M-2 District,
was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
239. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(89), Recreational vehicle (RV) campgrounds or
subdivisions in the PR-1 District, was repealed 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24.
240. Editor's Note: Subsection B(91), Refineries in the M-2 District, was repealed 3-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-23.
241. Editor's Note: Subsection B(92), Rendering plants in the M-2 District, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1294
(a) The parking lot shall be adequately illuminated to provide
reasonable security for customers and employees.
(b) A clear and unobstructed view of the cash registers and
transaction area shall be maintained from a public roadway or
from an internal thirty-foot-wide internal site circulation
roadway.
(c) The building shall be equipped with one or more security
cameras, which shall be inaccessible to employees. The
proposed location and number of cameras shall be reviewed
and approved by the Village Police Department as adequate to
constitute a reasonable crime deterrent and a reasonable aid
in the apprehension of perpetrators of crime on site, in the
interests of safeguarding the building, its occupants,
customers and the surrounding properties. A conspicuous sign
shall be posted at the entrance stating that security cameras
with an inaccessible recording device are in place on the
premises.
(d) The building shall be equipped with an inaccessible drop safe,
and a conspicuous sign shall be posted at the entrance stating
that an inaccessible drop safe is on the premises.
(e) On-site security personnel may be required between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. The required use of on-site
security personnel shall be considered if the Village Police
Department believes that the presence of such personnel is
reasonably necessary to ensure the safety of the building, its
occupants, customers and surrounding properties.
(f) During the hours between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. at
least two employees shall be working on site unless the
business has taken measures to protect a lone employee (e.g.,
the installation of bullet-resistant glass or other equipment
making a lone employee inaccessible, etc.) as reviewed and
approved as adequate by Village Police Department.
(g) A holdup alarm, which is monitored by a UL-listed central
station with functioning telephone service, shall be installed in
the building.
(h) Additional reasonable requirements that the Plan Commission
determines to be beneficial to ensure the safety of the building,
its occupants, customers and the surrounding properties.
(94) Residential quarters in the PR-2 District. [Amended 5-4-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-24]
(a) The maximum number of residents occupying the dwelling
shall be limited to six related family members. Under no
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1295
circumstances shall the dwelling be used for an employee
boardinghouse.
(b) One single-family dwelling is allowed.
(c) There shall be a minimum of two automobile spaces provided
for the residential quarters.
(d) The conditional use shall be permitted only so long as the
occupants of said dwelling are the owners, proprietors,
employees or caretakers for the use.
(e) The dwelling shall be a minimum 1,200 square feet in total
living area and shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
(f) Mobile homes shall not be permitted in the PR-2 District.
(g) Accessory uses shall be limited to one garage and/or carport
structure pursuant to § 420-86B(1) of this chapter.
(95) (Reserved)242
(96) Retail or wholesale sales of manufactured products on premises in
the M-1 and M-2 Districts. All sales shall be in an enclosed
structure separate from those structures wherein the products
being sold are manufactured.
(97) (Reserved)243
(98) Road construction and maintenance in the C-1 and C-3 Districts,
provided that:
(a) The road is necessary to the conduct of agricultural cultivation
or to a silvicultural activity.
(b) The road cannot as a practical matter be located outside the
wetland.
(c) The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse
impact upon the natural functions of the wetland.
(d) The road is designed and constructed with the minimum crosssectional
area practical to serve the intended use.
(e) Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate
area of the roadbed only.
(99) Road and driveway construction and maintenance in the C-3
District, provided that:
242. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(95), Resorts in the PR-1 District, was repealed
5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24.
243. Editor's Note: Subsection B(97), Road test facilities in the M-2 District, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1296
(a) The road or driveway is necessary to the continuity of a
planned urban street system.
(b) The road or driveway cannot as a practical matter be located
outside the wetland.
(c) The road or driveway is designed and constructed to minimize
adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland and
on wetland values. (See Article XV.)
(d) The hydrologic continuity of a wetland traversed by a road or
driveway shall be maintained through use of an appropriate
culvert.
(e) The road or driveway is designed and constructed with the
minimum cross-sectional area practical to serve the intended
use. Driveways should not be wider than 12 feet, and, where
practical, adjacent properties should share a single access.
(f) Road and driveway construction activities are carried out in
the immediate area of the roadbed only. Roads and driveways
should be protected by a stable side slope of 1:2.
(g) The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) may
exercise preemptive procedures as set forth in Article XV
where roads or driveways may have an adverse impact upon
the criteria listed in Article XV.
(100) Sanitary landfill operations in the M-3 District.
(a) A statement of intent shall be presented to the Village Board
indicating the type of material that will be placed on the site
and whether or not said material is deemed hazardous and the
manner in which the material is to be buried.
(b) An impact statement shall be required addressing itself to the
impact of the sanitary landfill operation on the surrounding
environment, community, and economy.
(c) A stormwater drainage and tile plan prepared by a certified
engineer shall be submitted to Village.
(d) A detailed restoration plan and time table shall be submitted to
the Village.
(e) All state and/or federal licenses and permits shall be submitted
to the Village and all federal and state laws and regulations
shall be complied with.
(f) The requirements set forth in Ch. NR 151 (NR 180), Wis. Adm.
Code, as amended from time to time, shall be complied with
and the issuance of a conditional use permit shall be
conditioned on such compliance.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1297
(g) A detailed site and sanitary plan shall be presented to the
Village as well as a method of maintaining records of the
source and type of waste deposited on the site and its location
and date of deposit.
(h) Sanitary landfills shall not be permitted within 2,000 feet of
residential, commercial, institutional, conservancy, or
floodplain districts nor shall any such landfill be permitted
within 2,000 feet of any shoreland area. In addition, sanitary
landfills shall not be permitted within 2,000 feet of any private
or public water supply.
(i) A performance bond shall be required by the Village to insure
compliance with the conditions set forth by the Board and
which conditions form the basis for the granting of a
conditional use permit.
(j) A corporate surety bond shall be furnished to the Village to
assure compliance with the approved rehabilitation map and
plan. The bond shall be in an amount to be determined by the
Plan Commission sufficient to cover twice the projected
expenses of such rehabilitation at the time that the
rehabilitation is to occur according to the plan of the applicant.
A termination date for the completion of operations and the
rehabilitation of the tract shall be imposed at the time of
approval based upon the estimated length of time the
operation will be necessary.
(k) An additional bond shall be furnished to the Village to insure
against possible road damage to nearby roads due to heavy
trafficking of materials.
(l) Periodic inspections shall be made from time to time by the
Community Development Department.
(m) The sanitary landfill shall be completely enclosed, except for
permanent entrances and exits, by:
[1] A temporary planting of fast-growing material capable of
reaching a height of 10 feet or more; and
[2] A permanent evergreen planting, the individual trees to be
of such number and so arranged that within 10 years they
will have formed a dense screen. Such permanent planting
shall be grown or maintained to a height of not less than
10 feet.
(n) The conditional use permit shall be in effect for a period not to
exceed two years and may be renewed upon an application for
a period of an additional two years by the Village Board upon
review of the performance of the operations. Modifications or
additional conditions may be imposed upon application for
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1298
renewal, including an increase in the amount of any surety
bond.
(o) In addition, any of the applicable requirements for granting a
conditional use permit for mining or extraction of rock, etc., in
the M-3 District may be required.
(p) All Environmental Protection Agency regulations shall be
complied with, with respect to, but not limited to:
[1] Contamination of ground and underground water.
[2] Limitation of explosive gases within landfill structures.
[3] Monitoring.
[4] Obtaining water pollution discharge permits.
[5] Collection and treatment of leachate before discharge.
[6] Control of rats, flies, and mosquitoes.
[7] Daily covering of waste material.
[8] Air quality and open burning of waste except for special
wastes, as for example brush or emergencies.
[9] Security.
[10] Availability of water or dirt to control accidental or
permitted fires.
[11] Restriction of floodwaters or reduction of water storage
capacity of floodplains.
[12] Bird hazards in the vicinity of airports.
[13] Modifications of species habitat or interference with
migration.
[14] Hazardous waste regulations.
(101) (Reserved)244
(102) (Reserved)245
(103) (Reserved)246
(104) (Reserved)247
244. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(101), concerning conditional use standards for school
auditoriums, gymnasiums and stadiums in the I-1 District, was repealed 3-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-12.
245. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(102), Second single-family, farm-related residential
dwelling in the A-1 District, as amended, was repealed 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-29.
246. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(103), Sewage treatment plants in the M-2 District,
was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1299
(105) (Reserved)248
(106) (Reserved)249
(107) (Reserved)250
(108) (Reserved)251
(109) Sportsmen's clubs in the PR-2 District. [Amended 5-4-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-24]
(a) The site shall be posted at least every 100 feet as a sportsmen's
club.
(b) Impact statements as deemed appropriate by the Village may
be required.
(110) (Reserved)252
(111) Storage of mineral products or machinery in the M-3 District.
(a) The site shall be securely fenced as deemed appropriate by the
Village.
(b) A stormwater drainage plan prepared by a certified engineer
shall be submitted.
(112) (Reserved)253
(113) Summer theaters and amphitheaters or band shells in the PR-2
District. [Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24]
(a) Increased performance standards with respect to noise may be
required as deemed necessary.
(114) (Reserved)254
(115) Temporary classroom structure in the I-1 District.
247. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(104), ship- and boatbuilding and repair in the M-2
District, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
248. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(105), Skeet and trap shooting ranges in the PR-1
District, was repealed 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24.
249. Former Subsection B(106), Ski hills with restaurants and ski shops in the PR-1 District,
was repealed 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24.
250. Former Subsection B(107), concerning smelting and refining in the M-2 District, was
repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
251. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(108), Snowmobile trails in the PR-1 District, was
repealed 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24.
252. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(110), Stockyards in the M-2 District, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
253. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(112), Storage of recreational vehicles, boats or
snowmobiles in the A-1 District, as amended, was repealed 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-29.
254. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(114), Tanneries in the M-2 District, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1300
(a) A temporary classroom structure is a detached, semidetached
or attached nonpermanent building used for a relatively short
period of time for instructional purposes for the students at the
school to be used in an emergency situation as determined by
the Plan Commission.
(b) A conditional use permit shall not be granted unless the Plan
Commission specifically finds that a temporary classroom
structure is a temporary solution to an emergency situation.
(c) The petitioner shall provide evidence that an emergency
situation exists. A situation which the petitioner could
reasonably anticipate, plan for and resolve without a
temporary classroom structure shall not be considered an
emergency.
(d) A temporary classroom structure may be allowed for up to
three years at a time.
(e) A temporary classroom structure shall not exceed 1,800 square
feet in floor area.
(f) A temporary classroom structure shall be physically connected
or located in close proximity to the school, but in no instance
shall the temporary classroom structure be located more than
100 feet from an entrance to the school.
(g) A temporary classroom structure shall be located a minimum
of 50 feet from all property lines.
(h) A temporary classroom structure shall be connected to
municipal sanitary sewer and municipal water systems.
(i) A temporary classroom structure shall be provided with
adequate bathroom facilities within said structure.
(j) Landscaping and screening may be required.
(k) The exterior of said temporary classroom structure shall be
aesthetically and structurally maintained. An inspection shall
be scheduled every six months with the Building Inspector and
the Fire & Rescue Department to ensure that said structure is
adequately maintained.
(l) If the Plan Commission grants approval for a temporary
classroom structure, the petitioner is hereby put on notice that
a feasible plan for implementing a permanent solution to the
emergency situation must be developed during the three-year
conditional use permit.
(m) If the petitioner wishes to seek an extension of the permit, then
the petitioner may request the Plan Commission grant an
extension. Said extension shall not exceed three years.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1301
However, prior to the Plan Commission considering an
extension, the petitioner shall provide a feasible plan to
implement a solution(s) and to remove said structure during
the extension period. Said extension shall require that a new
application be filed and full compliance with the review and
approval procedures as set forth in this Article XVIII.
(116) (Reserved)255
(117) (Reserved)256
(118) Utility facilities (except buildings and substations) such as
underground watertight conduits, telephone and electric poles,
etc., constructed in conformance with § NR 116.17, Wis. Adm.
Code, in the FPO District, provided that those requirements set
forth for the granting of a conditional use permit for bridges and
approaches in the FPO District shall be complied with.
(119) Utility substations or electric power or gas-metering substations
in the M-1, M-2, M-3, M-4, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5 and I-1
Districts.257 [Added 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
(a) All utility substations shall be securely fenced and marked with
appropriate warning signs.
(120) Utility substation building (only as a principal use on its own
parcel) in the M-1, M-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or B-5 District.
[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
(a) The minimum lot size shall be a lot large enough to
accommodate the applicable principal building setback
requirements in such district.
(b) The minimum lot frontage on a public street requirement shall
be 50 feet.
(c) The minimum gross floor area requirement shall not be
applicable.
(120.1) Veterinarian emergency services office in A-2, B-2 and I-1
Districts. [Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-58; amended
3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-12; 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23]
(a) Security requirements, such as but not limited to security
cameras inside/outside of the facility, a secured front door
which requires a staff person to operate the door and locked
255. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(116), concerning utilities and substations in the M-3
District, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
256. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(117), concerning utility construction and
maintenance in the C-1 and C-3 Districts, was repealed 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-17.
257. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(119), concerning utility substations in the A-1, A-2,
A-3, A-4, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-8, R-9, R-10, R-11, R-12, M-1, M-2, I-1 and C-2
Districts, was repealed 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-44.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1302
drug cabinets, as may be required by the Village Police
Department or the Village Plan Commission.
(121) (Reserved)258
(122)Water withdrawal and diversion uses in shoreland areas. (See
Article XV of this chapter.)
(123)Wind energy conversion systems, commonly called "windmills," in
the A-2, R-1, I-1, PR-2, PR-3 and C-2 Districts. [Amended
5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24; 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23;
4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-06]
(a) The site area shall be a minimum of five acres.
(b) Applications for the erection of a wind energy conversion
system shall be accompanied by a plat of survey for the
property to be served showing the location of the generating
facility and the means by which the facility will provide power
to structures. If the system is intended to provide power to
more than one premises, the plat of survey shall show all
properties to be served and the means of connection to the
wind energy conversion system. A copy of all agreements with
system users off the premises shall accompany the application.
The application shall further indicate the level of noise to be
generated by the system and provide assurances as to the
safety features of the system.
(c) Wind energy conversion systems shall be constructed and
anchored in such a manner to withstand wind pressure of not
less than 40 pounds per square foot in area.
(d) The maximum level of noise permitted to be generated by a
wind energy conversion system shall be 50 decibels, as
measured on a dB(A) scale, measured at the lot line.
(e) Wind energy conversion system generators and alternators
shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission
of radio-frequency energy that would cause any harmful
interference with radio and/or television broadcasting or
reception. In the event that harmful interference is caused
subsequent to the granting of a conditional use permit, the
operator of the wind energy conversion system shall promptly
take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance
with Federal Communications Commission regulations.
(f) Wind energy conversion systems shall be located in the rear
yard only and shall meet all setback and yard requirements for
the district in which they are located and, in addition, shall be
258. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(121), Water storage tanks and towers and radio and
television, transmitting and receiving towers and microwave relay stations in the I-1
District, was repealed 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 08-12.
§ 420-148 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-148
344:1303
located not closer to a property boundary than a distance equal
to their height. Wind energy conversion systems are exempt
from the height requirements of this chapter; however, all
such systems over 75 feet in height shall submit plans to the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to determine whether
the system is to be considered an object affecting navigable
air space and subject to FAA restrictions. A copy of any FAA
restrictions imposed shall be included as a part of the wind
energy conversion system conditional use permit application.
(g) All wind energy conversion systems shall be surrounded by a
security fence not less than six feet in height. A sign shall be
posted on the fence warning of high voltages.
(h) The appropriate electric power company shall be notified, in
writing, of any proposed interface with that company's grid
prior to installing said interface. Copies of comments by the
appropriate utility company shall accompany and be part of the
application for a conditional use permit.
(124) (Reserved)259
(125) Zoological and botanical gardens in the PR-2 or PR-3 District.
[Amended 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-24]
(a) (Reserved)
(b) (Reserved)
(c) (Reserved)
(d) (Reserved)
(e) In the case of zoological facilities, the site shall be securely
enclosed and the Village Board shall review the security
system to be used on the premises for the containment of
animals, reptiles, etc.
(126) (Reserved)260
259. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(124), Wrecking, junk, demolition and scrap yards in
the M-2 District, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
260. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(126), concerning height of a principal structure in the
M-2 District, was repealed 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-23.
§ 420-148 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-148
344:1304
ARTICLE XIX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 420-149. Enforcement.
In cases where any building or structure is or is intended to be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved or converted or any building,
structure or premises is or is intended to be used in violation of or contrary
to the provisions of this chapter, the Community Development Director
shall, in addition to other remedies set forth in § 62.23, Wis. Stats., and
in this chapter, institute action(s) to enjoin or take any other appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent such erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or use.
§ 420-150. Penalties.
Any person, partnership, firm, or corporation who or which violates any
of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 for each offence, plus
the cost of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the violator may be
imprisoned in the Kenosha County Jail for a term not to exceed 90 days or
until such forfeiture and costs have been paid. Each day that a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In any such action,
the fact that a permit shall have been issued by any officer or department
of the Village shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight,
or dereliction of duty on the part of any officer or department of the Village
constitute a defense. In cases where the above penalty conflicts with any
other penalty established by this chapter, the most severe penalty shall
apply.
§ 420-149 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-150
344:1305

ARTICLE XX
Appeals
§ 420-151. Administrative appeals.
Chapter 68, Wis. Stats., Municipal Administrative Procedure, is hereinafter
modified pursuant to the authority granted in § 68.16, Wis. Stats.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to afford a constitutionally
sufficient, fair and orderly administrative procedure and review in
connection with determinations by Village authorities which involve
constitutionally protected rights of specific persons which are entitled
to due process protection under the 14th Amendment to the United
States Constitution.
B. Review of administrative determinations. Any person having a
substantial interest which is adversely affected by an administrative
determination of a governing body, board, commission, committee,
agency, officer or employee of a Village or agent acting on behalf of the
Village as set forth in Subsection C below may have such determination
reviewed as provided in this section. The remedies under this section
shall not be exclusive. A department, board, commission, agency, officer
or employee of the Village who or which is aggrieved may not initiate
review under this section of a determination of any other department,
board, commission, agency, officer or employee of the Village but may
respond or intervene in a review proceeding under this section initiated
by another.
C. Determinations reviewable. The following determinations are
reviewable under this section:
(1) The grant or denial in whole or in part after application of an initial
permit, right, privilege, or authority, with the exception, however,
of the granting or denial of a variance or any other decision of the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2) The suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an existing permit,
right, privilege, or authority
D. Determinations not subject to review. Except as provided in Subsection
C above, the following determinations are not reviewable under this
section:
(1) A legislative enactment. A legislative enactment is an ordinance,
resolution or adopted motion of the Village Board.
(2) Any action subject to administrative or judicial review procedures
under other statutes.
(3) The denial of a tort or contract claim for money, required to be filed
with the Village pursuant to statutory procedures for the filing of
such claims.
§ 420-151 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-151
344:1307
(4) Judgments and orders of a court.
(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any action or
determination of the Village which does not involve the
constitutionally protected right of a specific person or persons to
due process in connection with the action or determination.
E. Persons aggrieved. A person aggrieved includes any individual,
partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association, public
or private organization, officer, department, board, commission or
agency of the Village whose rights, duties or privileges are adversely
affected by a determination made pursuant to this section. No
department, board, commission, agency, officer, or employee of the
Village who or which is aggrieved by an administrative decision may
initiate a review under this section of a determination of any other
department, board, commission, agency, officer or employee of the
Village. However, said department, board, commission, agency, officer
or employee may respond to or intervene in a review proceeding under
this section initiated by another.
F. Written determinations. If a determination subject to this section is
made orally or, if in writing, does not state the reasons therefor, the
Village making such determination shall, upon written request of any
person aggrieved by such determination made within 10 days of notice
of such determination, reduce the determination and the reasons
therefor to writing and mail or deliver such determination and reasons
to the person making the request. The determination shall be dated and
shall advise such person of the right to have such determination
reviewed, the time within which such review may be obtained, and the
office or person to whom a request for review shall be addressed. For
purposes of this section, a Village authority making a determination is
defined to include the Village Board, Village Plan Commission, the
Village Community Development Director and his/her employees or
deputies.
G. Request for review of determination. Any person aggrieved may have a
written or oral determination reviewed by written request mailed or
delivered to the Village authority which made such determination
within 30 days of notice to such person of such determination. The
request for review shall state the basis or grounds upon which the
person aggrieved contends that the decision should be modified or
reversed. A request for review shall be made to the officer, employee,
agent, agency, committee, board, commission or body who or which
made the determination, but failure to make such request to the proper
party shall not preclude the person aggrieved from review unless such
failure has caused prejudice to the Village authority.
H. Review of determination.
§ 420-151 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-151
344:1308
(1) Initial determination. If a request for review is made under
Subsection G above, the determination to be reviewed shall be
termed an "initial determination."
(2) Who shall make review. A review under this section may be made
by the officer, employee, agent, agency, committee, board,
commission or body who or which made the initial determination.
However, an independent review of such initial determination by
another person, committee or agency of the Village may be
provided by the Village.
(3) When to make review. The Village shall review the initial
determination within 15 days of receipt of a request for review. The
time for review may be extended by agreement with the person
aggrieved.
(4) Right to present evidence and argument. The person aggrieved
may file with the request for review or within the time agreed with
the Village authority written evidence and argument in support of
the person's position with respect to the initial determination.
(5) Decision on review. The Village may affirm, reverse or modify the
initial determination and shall mail or deliver to the person
aggrieved a copy of the Village's decision on review, which shall
state the reasons for such decision. The decision shall advise the
person aggrieved of the right to appeal the decision, the time
within which appeal shall be taken and the office or person with
whom notice of appeal shall be filed.
(6) Appeal of decision. Appeals from a decision shall be taken within 30
days of notice of such decision by filing with or mailing to the
authority making the decision and to the Zoning Board of Appeals
written notice of the appeal. The appeal shall be allowed by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, however, only where the person
aggrieved did not have a hearing substantially in compliance with
§ 68.11, Wis. Stats., when the initial determination was made.
I. Hearing on administrative appeal.
(1) Time of hearing. The Village shall provide the appellant a hearing
on an appeal under Subsection H(6) above within 45 days of receipt
of the notice of appeal filed or mailed under Subsection H(6) above
and shall serve the appellant with notice of such hearing by mail or
personal service at least 10 days before such hearing.
(2) Conduct of hearing. At the hearing, the appellant and the Village
may be represented by an attorney and may present evidence and
call and examine witnesses and cross-examine witnesses of the
other party. Such witnesses shall be sworn by the person
conducting the hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals which
shall make the decision on the administrative appeal. The decision
maker may issue subpoenas. An appellant's attorney of record may
§ 420-151 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-151
344:1309
issue a subpoena to compel the attendance of a witness or the
production of evidence. A subpoena issued by an attorney must
be in substantially the same form as provided in § 805.07(4), Wis.
Stats., and must be served in the manner provided in § 805.07(5),
Wis. Stats. The attorney shall, at the time of issuance, send a copy
of the subpoena to the decision maker. The hearing may employ
such other procedures as deemed applicable and appropriate and
as set forth in Chapter 18, Article V of the Village Code.
(3) Record of hearing. The person conducting the hearing or a person
employed for that purpose shall take notes of the testimony and
shall mark and preserve all exhibits. The person conducting the
hearing may, and upon request of the appellant shall, cause the
proceedings to be taken by a stenographer or by a recording
device, the expense thereof to be paid by the Village.
J. Final determination.
(1) Within 20 days of completion of the hearing conducted under
Subsection I above and the filing of briefs, if any, the decision
maker shall mail or deliver to the appellant its written
determination stating the reasons therefor. Such determination
shall be a final determination.
(2) A determination following a hearing substantially meeting the
requirements or a decision on review under this section following
such hearing shall also be a final determination.
K. Judicial review.
(1) Any party to a proceeding resulting in a final determination may
seek review thereof by certiorari within 30 days of receipt of the
final determination. The court may affirm or reverse the final
determination or remand to the decision maker for further
proceedings consistent with the court's decision.
(2) If review is sought of a final determination, the record of the
proceedings shall be transcribed at the expense of the person
seeking review. A transcript shall be supplied to anyone requesting
the same at the requester's expense. If the person seeking review
establishes impecuniousness to the satisfaction of the reviewing
court, the court may order the proceedings transcribed at the
expense of the Village, and the person seeking review shall be
furnished a free copy of the transcript. By stipulation, the court
may order a synopsis of the proceedings in lieu of a transcript. The
court may otherwise limit the requirement for a transcript.
L. Legislative review.
(1) The seeking of a review pursuant to the section does not preclude a
person aggrieved from seeking relief from the governing Village
authority.
§ 420-151 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-151
344:1310
(2) If in the course of legislative review under this subsection a
determination is modified, such modification and any evidence
adduced before the governing Village authority shall be made part
of the record on review before any court of law.
(3) The governing Village authority conducting a legislative review
under this subsection need not conduct the type of hearing
required under Subsection I above.
M. Availability of methods of resolving disputes. This section does not
preclude the Village and any person aggrieved from employing
arbitration, mediation or other methods of resolving disputes and does
not supersede contractual provisions for that purpose.
§ 420-151 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-151
344:1311

ARTICLE XXI
Definitions
§ 420-152. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated. Definitions related to signs, flags, festoons and lights are located
in Article X, and definitions related to floodplains are located in
§ 420-131BB.
ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS — Property owners having a common
boundary or property owners on either side of a public thoroughfare.
ABUTTING STRUCTURES — A building or structure on each lot directly
adjacent to said lot. The averaging principal is being used, and if an
abutting lot is vacant, the average setback shall be determined by the lot
with the building or the structure.
ACCESS — A way of approaching or entering a property. Access also
includes ingress, the right to enter, and egress, the right to leave.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building occupied by or used for one or more
accessory uses but not occupied by or used for any principal use.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure occupied by or used for one or
more accessory uses, which is not occupied by or used for any principal use,
or a structure which constitutes an accessory use.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of real property that is related, subordinate
and customarily incidental to a particular principal use, or a use that is
specifically recognized by this chapter as an accessory use in relation to a
particular principal use, and which is located on the same lot or on the same
approved site as such principal use.
ADDITION — Any increase in the size of a building or other structure in
terms of site coverage, height, length, width or gross floor area.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment that sells at retail adult-oriented
printed or graphic materials, provided that 40% or more of the store's
inventory of printed or graphic materials that is displayed and offered for
sale in the store (either in terms of the number of items or in terms of the
aggregate retail value of such items) consists of adult-oriented printed or
graphic materials, or that 40% or more of the display space or floor area
devoted to printed or graphic materials for sale in the store is devoted to
adult-oriented printed or graphic materials, or that 40% or more of the
store's gross receipts from the sale of printed or graphic materials during
any calendar month is attributable to the sale of adult-oriented printed or
graphic materials, or that the store holds itself out or identifies itself to the
public by its name, its signs and/or its advertising as an adult bookstore
or as a source of adult-oriented materials, including, without limitation,
by verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by
references to "adult books," "adult entertainment" or similar terms.
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1313
ADULT CABARET — An establishment, open to the public, that serves or
sells alcoholic beverages and which typically or on a frequently recurring
basis provides or allows the provision of adult live entertainment to its
customers, or which holds itself out or identifies itself to the public by
its name, its signs and/or its advertising as an establishment where adult
live entertainment is typically or on a frequently recurring basis available,
including, without limitation, by verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual
stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult entertainment,"
"strippers," "showgirls," "exotic dancers," "gentlemen's club" or similar
terms.
ADULT CLUB — An establishment that would be classified as an adult
cabaret, adult dry cabaret or adult viewing facility except that it is open only
to members and their guests.
ADULT DRY CABARET — An establishment, open to the public, that does
not serve or sell alcoholic beverages and which typically or on a frequently
recurring basis provides or allows the provision of adult live entertainment
to its customers, or which holds itself out or identifies itself to the public
by its name, its signs and/or its advertising as an adult dry cabaret or an
establishment where adult live entertainment is typically or on a frequently
recurring basis available, including, without limitation, by verbal or
pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references
to "adult entertainment," "strippers," "showgirls," "exotic dancers,"
"gentlemen's club" or similar terms.
ADULT FAMILY HOME — A facility as defined in § 50.01(1), Wis. Stats.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT — Seminude dancing or any other form of
live entertainment performed by seminude entertainers.
ADULT MOVIE THEATER — An establishment, open to the public, that
typically or on a frequently recurring basis shows movies which have as
their dominant subject or theme, or which are distinguished or
characterized by their primary emphasis on, the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment
that holds itself out or identifies itself to the public by its name, its signs
and/or its advertising as an adult movie theater or a movie theater where
adult-oriented motion-picture materials are typically or on a frequently
recurring basis shown, including, without limitation, by allusions to sexual
stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult entertainment" or
similar terms.
ADULT-ORIENTED MATERIALS — Adult-oriented printed or graphic
materials and/or adult-oriented motion-picture materials.
ADULT-ORIENTED MOTION-PICTURE MATERIALS — Motion-picture
materials which have as their dominant subject or theme, or which are
distinguished or characterized by their primary emphasis on, the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT-ORIENTED PRINTED OR GRAPHIC MATERIALS — Printed or
graphic materials that have as their dominant subject or theme, or that are
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1314
distinguished or characterized by their primary emphasis on, the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT-ORIENTED USE — An adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult club,
adult movie theater, adult dry cabaret, adult video store, adult video rental
store or adult viewing facility.
ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment that sells at retail adult-oriented
motion-picture materials, provided that 40% or more of the store's
inventory of motion-picture materials that is displayed and offered for sale
in the store (either in terms of the number of items or in terms of the
aggregate retail value of such items) consists of adult-oriented motionpicture
materials, or that 40% or more of the display space or floor area
devoted to motion-picture materials for sale in the store is devoted to
adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more of the store's
gross receipts from the sale of motion-picture materials during any calendar
month is attributable to the sale of adult-oriented motion-picture materials,
or that the store holds itself out or identifies itself to the public by its name,
its signs and/or its advertising as an adult video store or as a source of
adult-oriented materials, including, without limitation, by verbal or pictorial
allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult
videos," "adult entertainment" or similar terms.
ADULT VIDEO RENTAL STORE — An establishment that rents motionpicture
materials, provided that 40% or more of the store's inventory of
motion-picture materials that is displayed and offered for rent in the store
(either in terms of the number of items or in terms of the aggregate rental
value of such items) consists of adult-oriented motion-picture materials or
that 40% or more of the display space or floor area devoted to motionpicture
materials for rent in the store is devoted to adult-oriented motionpicture
materials, or that 40% or more of the store's gross receipts from the
rental of motion-picture materials during any calendar month is attributable
to the rental of adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that the
establishment holds itself out to the public by its name, its signs and/or its
advertising as an adult video rental store or as a source of adult-oriented
materials, including, without limitation, by verbal or pictorial allusions to
sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult videos," "adult
entertainment" or similar terms.
ADULT VIEWING FACILITY — An establishment, open to the public, that
allows individuals to view adult-oriented motion-picture materials on site,
provided that 40% or more of the motion-picture materials available for
such on-site viewing consists of adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or
that 40% or more of the display space or floor area devoted to motionpicture
materials that can be viewed in the establishment is devoted to
adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more of the motionpicture
materials actually viewed in the establishment in any calendar
month is adult-oriented motion-picture materials, or that 40% or more of
the establishment's gross receipts from on-site viewing of motion-picture
materials during any calendar month is attributable to the viewing of adultoriented
motion-picture materials, or that the establishment holds itself out
or identifies itself to the public by its name, its signs and/or its advertising
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1315
as an adult viewing facility or as a source of adult-oriented materials,
including, without limitation, by verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual
stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult videos," "adult
entertainment" or similar terms.
AIRPORT, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE — Any airport which complies with the
definition contained in § 114.002(7), Wis. Stats., or any airport which serves
or offers to serve common carriers engaged in air transport.
AIR RIGHTS — The ownership or control of all land, property, and that area
of space at and above a horizontal plane over the ground surface of the land.
AIRSTRIP or LANDING FIELD — Any land intended for the landing or
takeoff of aircraft.
ALLEY — A public highway which is a narrow way, less in size than a street,
and which is not designed for general travel, which is used primarily as a
means of access to the rear of residences and business establishments and
which, generally, affords only a secondary means of access to the property
abutting along its length.
ALLOWED USE — Any use of real property that is allowed by and subject to
the provisions of this chapter in a particular zoning district or at a particular
location, including, without limitation, any of the following types of uses:
a permitted use, an auxiliary permitted use, a conditional use, a special
licensed use, a nonconforming use or an accessory use.
ALTERATION — A physical change in a building or an addition to it. As
applied to a building or structure, "alteration" means a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or
the moving from one location or position to another.
AMATEUR (HAM) RADIO — A radio antenna and associated equipment
operated for noncommercial purposes as a hobby.
AMBIENT AMPLIFIED MUSIC — Amplified music which cannot be heard
beyond the property boundaries wherein the amplified music
originated.[Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-30]
AMENITY — Aesthetic or other characteristics of a development that
increase its desirability to a community or its marketability to the public. It
may include such things as a unified building design, recreational facilities,
such as swimming pools or tennis courts, security systems, views,
landscaping or tree preservation, or attractive site design.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, aerials or
similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic
waves external to or attached to the exterior of any permitted principal use
or structure.
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms in a multiple dwelling intended to
be designed for use as a residence by a single family.
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1316
APARTMENT, EFFICIENCY — A dwelling unit of not more than one room in
addition to a kitchen and bath and intended primarily as a residence for a
single person.
APPLICANT — The owner or user of the property on which a structure is
proposed to be located or modified who/which is seeking a permit.
ARTERIAL STREET OR HIGHWAY — A public street or highway that is
designated as an arterial street or arterial highway in the Village
Comprehensive Plan.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A facility, however named, which is
designed, staffed and equipped for the care of individuals who are not in
need of hospital or nursing care but who are in need of assistance with
everyday activities of living, due to age or other illness.
AUXILIARY PERMITTED USE — A principal use that is a permitted use only
when it is auxiliary (secondary) to one or more permitted uses located in a
principal building, in that it is located in the same principal building as the
permitted use(s), and for any retail or service auxiliary uses it is designed to
serve the needs of the occupants of the principal building, has no dedicated
outside entrance to such building, and has no signage visible from the
exterior of such building.[Amended 7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 13-29]
AWNING — A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the
purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements.
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor below ground
level on at least three sides.
BIG BOX RETAIL STORE — A single retail store (not a shopping center)
having a gross floor area of at least 50,000 square feet.
BOATHOUSE, PRIVATE — Any accessory building designed for the purpose
of storing boats and other water-related recreational materials.
BUILDING — Any roofed structure that provides or is designed to provide
housing, shelter, enclosure, protection or support for persons, animals or
property. Whenever any portion of a building is completely separated from
every other portion of the building by a fire division wall without pedestrian
openings, it shall be deemed to be a separate attached building.
CABARET — An establishment that provides or allows for the provision of
indoor or outdoor live entertainment or amplified music for the benefit of
the public, wherein alcoholic beverages are served or sold. Establishments
that provide amplified ambient music are excluded from this
definition.[Amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-30]
CAMPGROUND — Any area or tract of land used to accommodate two
or more camping parties, including cabins, tents, house trailers, or other
camping outfits.
CAREER ACADEMIES — A cooperative effort between educators and the
business community wherein they are committed to helping to educate
high school students by providing them with an innovative place to develop
marketable skills, work-based learning experiences, and focused pathways
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1317
to productive employment. Said academies are focused on a career theme,
such as, but not limited to, health care, finance, electronics, or technology,
which would be determined by local employment opportunities and the
evidence of a growing demand for such experiences. Those persons
attending academies shall be limited to high school students in grades
nine through 12 who shall be taught the primary educational classes at a
home-based local high school, area employers or businesses, and/or area
colleges to provide customized training for employers in area businesses
and industrial development. The academy should concentrate on the
occupational-related classes that focus on the particular career area. Local
employers from that occupational field should help plan and guide the
program in cooperation with local teachers and administrators and should
act as mentors and job supervisors for the students.
CARPORT — A structure having a roof, with or without supporting walls,
posts or columns, used, designed or intended to be used for the protection
or shelter of private motor vehicles.
CAR WASH — Any facility used for the washing of vehicles requiring the
installation of special equipment or machinery and plumbing affixed to or
affixed separate from a structure.
CEMETERY — Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for
cemetery purposes, including columbaria, crematories, mausoleums, and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of
such cemetery.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A post-construction certificate provided
by the Village stating that there are no violations of the applicable zoning
requirements.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document provided by the Village
which states that there are no violations of the applicable codes which could
reasonably be expected to affect the health and safety of the occupant. It
is unlawful to occupy these premises without a certificate of occupancy or
in violation of the zoning district. If use of the structure is to be changed, a
new certificate must be obtained.
CHANGE IN OCCUPANCY — The commencement of occupancy or use of
a principal building or a principal structure, or of a unit thereof (e.g.,
an individual store space in a shopping center), by a new, different or
additional occupant or user, including, without limitation, either a new
business, company, firm or organization or a new owner or operator of an
existing business, company, firm or organization.
CHANGE IN USE — The commencement of a new, different or additional
principal use on a lot or site, or in or on a building or structure located
thereon, including, without limitation, the recommencement of any
principal use which has not been conducted there for 12 consecutive
months or more, or the commencement of any principal use on a lot or site
or in or on a building or structure located thereon which has been vacant
or not used for an allowed principal use for 12 or more consecutive months.
(Note: an existing use can be transferred to and continued by a new owner
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1318
or operator, with or without a name change, without a change in use, so
long as the nature of the use does not change (e.g., a restaurant owned and
operated by ABC, which serves only seated customers, is transferred to and
continued by XYZ with an appropriate name change: there is no change in
use, so long as there is no cessation of the restaurant use for 12 or more
consecutive months, but if XYZ begins to serve customers from a drivethrough
facility at the restaurant, there is a change in use).
CHURCH — A building in which persons regularly assemble for public
religious worship which is maintained and controlled by a religious body
organized to sustain public worship.
CLINIC — A facility for the examination, diagnosis and treatment of
outpatients.
CLOSED-CUP FLASH POINT — The lowest temperature at which a
combustible liquid under prescribed conditions will give off a flammable
vapor which will propagate a flame. The Tag closed-cup tester shall be
authoritative for liquids having a flash point below 175° F. The Pensky-
Martens tester shall be authoritative for liquids having flash points between
175° F. and 350° F.
CLUB or LODGE — Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a
corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational, or
recreational purpose, to which membership is required for participation,
and not operated primarily for profit nor to render a service which is
customarily carried on as a business.
COFFEEHOUSE — An establishment that sells coffee and may sell baked
goods, other snacks or other nonalcoholic beverages, for consumption on or
off the premises, and in which there is no live entertainment.261
COMMERCIAL USE — A use involving commerce, without regard to the
type of zoning district in which the use is located.
COMMUNITY-BASED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY (CBRF) — Any facility falling
within the definition of § 46.03(22), Wis. Stats.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building principally used for recreational,
cultural and/or other community activities.
COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A living facility such as an adult
family home (AFH), a community-based residential facility (CBRF), a
residential care apartment complex (RCAC), a group home, an assisted
living facility, or a senior housing facility. A community living arrangement
is not a nursing home or a hospital.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Village of Pleasant Prairie Comprehensive
Plan as adopted pursuant to Chapter 390 of the Village Code of
Ordinances.[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21]
261. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “commercial communication structures,” as
amended, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-7-2014 by Ord. No.
14-08.
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1319
CONCEPTUAL PLAN — A plan for a proposed development of real property
which explains, describes and depicts the concept of a development
proposal, including but not limited to proposed use(s), density, lot layout
(including outlots), street layout, public improvements, dedications,
building locations, floor plans and artist renderings of buildings, locations
of environmental features, stormwater management, and landscaping.
Conceptual plan approval typically informs the petitioner that the concept
of the proposed development is generally acceptable under then-current
standards and that the next step of the development review and approval
process may proceed. Conceptual plan approval does not grant or result in
any vested right to proceed with the proposed development.
CONCERT FACILITY — A facility principally used for the presentation of
concerts or other musical performances.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that has been legislatively approved in this
chapter for a particular zoning district, subject to required administrative
approval by the Village Plan Commission of a particular proposed use of
that type at a particular proposed location (in the form of a conditional
use permit), in light of potential problems or potential adverse impacts
associated with that type of use. A conditional use may require other Village
permits, licenses or approvals in addition to the conditional use permit.
CONDOMINIUM — The ownership of single units in a multiunit structure
with common areas and facilities.
CONSERVATION STANDARDS — Guidelines and specifications for soil and
water conservation practices and management enumerated in the technical
guide prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service for Kenosha County, adopted by the County Soil and
Water Conservation District Supervisors, and containing suitable
alternatives for the use and treatment of land based upon its capabilities
from which the landowner selects that alternative which best meets his
needs in developing his soil and water conservation plan.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail store selling groceries and household or
convenience products which has less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
CONVENIENT CASH BUSINESS — Also referred to as a payday loan
business, title for cash business, check cashing business, deferred
presentment service provider or similar enterprise licensed pursuant to
§ 218.05, Wis. Stats., or a person licensed pursuant to § 138.09, Wis. Stats.,
who accepts a check or title, holds the check or title for a period of time
before negotiating or presenting the check or title for payment, and pays
to the issuer an agreed-upon cash, or who refinances or consolidates such
a transaction, or a secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer
pursuant to § 246-3 of the Village Municipal Code, except an establishment
which meets all of the following requirements is exempted from the
definition of "convenient cash business," even if the establishment
purchases, receives or exchanges any secondhand article or secondhand
jewelry pursuant to Chapter 246 of the Village Municipal Code:[Added
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1320
1-15-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01; amended 5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 10-31;
10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-32]
CORD — A pile of wood or other course material, eight feet long, four feet
high and four feet broad.
CORNER LOT — A lot located at the corner formed by the intersection of
two streets.
DAVIT — A crane that projects over the side of an embankment for raising
or lowering boats or other watercraft into and out of the water.
DAY-CARE CENTER — An establishment which provides shelter, care,
activity and supervision (with or without academic instruction) for children
who are not the children, foster children or legal wards of the attendant
adult(s), or for adults who are not the parents or legal wards of the
attendant adult(s), during all or part of the time between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m.
DECIBEL — A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound.
Sound-level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound
are calibrated in decibels.
DEDICATED BREWING FACILITY — A beer brewing facility located in a
restaurant or tavern, which restaurant or tavern is the exclusive sales outlet
for the beer made on site.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to construction of or additions or
substantial improvements to buildings or other structures, or dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling, or the disposition of materials,
or installing streets, sewers, water mains, stormwater management
improvements or other similar improvements.
The primary business of the establishment is the retail sale of new
merchandise;
A.
Forty percent or less of the establishment's inventory that is displayed
and offered for sale in the store, determined by number of items, is
secondhand articles and secondhand jewelry as defined in Chapter 246;
B.
Forty percent or less of the establishment's inventory that is displayed
and offered for sale in the store, determined by the aggregate retail
value of such items, is secondhand articles and secondhand jewelry as
defined in Chapter 246;
C.
Forty percent or less of the establishment's floor space devoted to retail
sales and display space is devoted to the display for sale of secondhand
articles and secondhand jewelry as defined in Chapter 246; and
D.
Forty percent or less of the establishment's gross receipts each
calendar month is attributable to the sale of secondhand articles and
secondhand jewelry as defined in Chapter 246.
E.
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1321
DINNER THEATER — A restaurant in which a play or other dramatic
performance is presented during or after the meal.
DISTRICT — A part or parts of the Village for which the regulations of this
chapter governing the use and location of land and buildings are uniform.
DISTRICT, BASIC — A part or parts of the Village for which the regulations
of this chapter governing the use and location of land and buildings are
uniform (such as the residential, commercial, and industrial district
classifications).
DISTRICT, OVERLAY — Overlay districts allow for superimposing certain
additional requirements or uses upon a basic zoning district which are
compatible with the basic district. If there are conflicting requirements,
those which are stricter shall apply.
DITCHING —
DORMITORY — A building or portion thereof used for sleeping purposes in
connection with a school, college or other institution.
DRAIN — A surface ditch or underground tile line constructed for the
purpose of lowering the water table so that land may be farmed or used for
other purposes.
DRAINAGE BASIN —
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, including but not
limited to streams, rivers, creeks, ditches, channels, canals, conduits,
culverts, streams, waterways, gullies, ravines or washes, in which waters
flow in a definite direction or force, either continuously or intermittently,
and including any area adjacent thereto which is subject to inundation by
reason of overflow or floodwater.
DREDGING — The process of which bottom materials are removed from
bodies of water for the purposes of deepening the body of water.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A restaurant designed and operated so that
customers can order a meal from their automobile, which meal is served to
the customers and eaten by the customers in their automobile while on site.
DRY CABARET — An establishment that provides or allows the provision
of indoor or outdoor live entertainment or amplified music for the benefit
of the public, wherein alcoholic beverages are not served or sold, and is
exclusive of indoor theaters, indoor dinner theaters, indoor concert facilities
and any organized sporting events. Establishments that provide amplified
The process of excavation for purposes of surface water drainage and
removal.
A.
B. A shallow channel, not navigable, used for the conductance of waters.
The geographic area the general configuration of which causes surface
waters to flow in a specified direction.
A.
The area, contained by a naturally defined watershed, draining all
surface waters.
B.
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1322
ambient music are excluded from this definition.[Amended 5-17-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-30]
DUMP — A lot or land or part thereof used primarily for the disposal,
by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning, or any other means and for
whatever purpose, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded
machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste material of any kind.
DUPLEX — See "two-family structure."
DUST FALL — The rate that particulate matter collects in an open jar for a
thirty-day period, expressed as tons per square mile per month. Procedures
and equipment for the measurement of such shall be as standardized by the
American Society for Testing and Materials.
DWELLING — See "dwelling unit."
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A dwelling with two or more party walls, or
one party wall in the case of a dwelling at the end of a group of attached
dwellings.
DWELLING, GROUP — A single-family dwelling and one or more other
single-family or duplex dwellings located on a lot.
DWELLING, ROW HOUSE OR TOWNHOUSE — One of a series of three
or more attached dwelling units separated from one another by continuous
vertical party walls without openings from basement floor to roof.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY (or MODULAR HOME) — A residential
building not containing more than one dwelling unit, used for one family,
constructed on site or brought to the site in modular or panelized sections
and constructed; however, a single-family dwelling is not by this chapter a
manufactured home or a mobile home as defined in this chapter.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof used exclusively for
residential purposes, including one-family, two-family and multiple-family
dwellings, but not including hotels and boarding and lodging houses. Each
dwelling unit shall have lockable entrances and exits that allow for
uninhibited movement throughout the entire dwelling unit, one complete
kitchen facility, and, at a minimum, a bathroom and a living/sleeping area.262
EARTH-BORNE VIBRATIONS — Describes a cyclic movement of the earth
due to energy propagation.
EARTHMOVING — Any process which physically alters the existing
topography by means of mechanical or hydraulic equipment.
EARTH REMOVAL — The removal or extraction of any stone, sand, gravel,
loam, topsoil, or other earth or earth product from a lot or parcel of land,
except where such removal is for the purpose of grading a lot upon which a
building is to be erected, a roadway is to be built, or a platting thereof is to
be made.
262. Editor's Note: The former definition of "earns a substantial part of his or her livelihood
from the farm operation," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21.
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1323
EASEMENT — A right given by the owner of land to another party for a
specific limited use of that land.
EGG PRODUCTION, COMMERCIAL — An animal confinement facility used
or designed for the raising of poultry for egg production having a capacity
of 200 or more animal units.
ELECTRIC POWER SUBSTATION OR GAS-METERING SUBSTATION — See
the definition for "utility substation."[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-21]
EMERGENCY SHELTER — Public or private enclosures designed to protect
people from aerial, radiological, biological, or chemical warfare, fire, flood,
windstorm, riots, and invasions.
ENLARGEMENT or TO ENLARGE — An enlargement is an addition to the
floor area of an existing building, an increase in the size of any other
structure, or an increase in that portion of a tract of land occupied by an
existing use. To enlarge is to make an enlargement.
EROSION — The process by which the ground surface is worn away by
action of wind or water.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services provided by public and private utilities
necessary for the exercise of the principal, accessory or conditional use or
service of the principal, accessory or conditional structure. These services
include underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water,
sanitary sewage, stormwater drainage, and communication systems and
accessories thereto, such as poles, wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts,
laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, and hydrants, but not including
buildings. This does not include residential or commercial communication
structures.
EXCAVATION — The act by which soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXTEND — Implies increase or amplification as distinguished from
inception.
EXTENSION or TO EXTEND — An extension is an increase in the amount
of existing floor area used for an existing use within an existing building. To
extend is to make an extension.
EXTERIOR WALL SURFACE — The most exterior part of a wall, sun screen
or any screening or material covering a building.
FAMILY — An individual or any number of individuals related by blood or
marriage, and including servants, living together as a single housekeeping
unit. This definition also includes children placed in foster homes pursuant
to the provisions of Ch. 48, Wis. Stats., as being treated as if they were
related by blood or marriage to other members of the family unit.
FARM — A zoned area which is used for the growing of the usual farm
products, such as vegetables, fruit trees, and grain, etc., and their storage
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1324
on the area, as well as for raising livestock as defined in this
chapter.[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21]
FARMING —
FEEDLOT, COMMERCIAL — [Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21]
FILL — Any act by which soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any similar
material is deposited, placed, pushed, pulled or transported and shall
include the condition resulting therefrom.
FLOOR AREA — For the purpose of determining off-street parking and offstreet
loading requirements, the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all of
the floors of a building, or of a portion thereof, devoted to a use requiring
off-street parking or loading, including accessory storage areas located
within selling or working space, such as counters, racks or closets, and
any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the production or
processing of goods, or to business or professional offices, but not including
floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes except as otherwise noted
herein.
FOOTPRINT — The area of the ground surface outlined by the intersection
with the ground of the outer edge of the foundation of an existing or
proposed building or other structure, as seen from directly above, and
typically depicted on a survey, plat, site plan or other scale map.
FOSTER HOME — Any home licensed as such by the State Department of
Health and Family Services.
FREEWAY CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail store selling groceries and
household, pharmaceutical, and convenience products generally to the
freeway traveling public and which has a gross floor area of 5,000 square
feet or more but less than 15,000 square feet.
FREQUENCY — Signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound
wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound.
The business of cultivating land or employing it for the purposes of
husbandry.
A.
The cultivation and fertilization of the soil as well as caring for and
harvesting the crops.
B.
The following facilities shall be considered feedlots: any tract of land or
structure wherein any type of fowl or poultry or the by-products thereof
are raised for sale at wholesale or retail; any structure, pen, or corral
wherein any livestock is maintained in close quarters for the purpose of
fattening such livestock for final shipment to market; and the raising of
swine under any conditions.
A.
An animal confinement facility used or designed for the feeding or
holding of 500 or more livestock animal units for a period of 30 days or
more.
B.
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1325
FREQUENTLY RECURRING — Occurring on six or more occasions within
a period of six calendar months, provided that such six or more occasions
occur within at least three separate calendar weeks (i.e., the period of seven
consecutive days beginning with Sunday and ending with Saturday).
FRONTAGE — The distance of actual contiguity between a lot and a single
street, measured along the lateral street right-of-way line, including,
without limitation, the lateral street right-of-way line of a cul-de-sac. (Note:
The portion of a lot that abuts a transverse street right-of-way line, e.g., the
right-of-way line associated with the stub end of a street or with a street
turnaround that is not a cul-de-sac, is not counted as frontage.)
FRONT FOUNDATION LINE(S) — The line(s), as seen from directly above,
formed by the intersection with the ground of the outer edge of those
portions of the foundation of a principal building that are situated between
the primary front corners of such foundation.
FRONT HALF OF A LOT — From the perspective of the front lot line, that
portion of a lot lying in front of a line that is parallel to the straight line
connecting the two points of intersection between the front lot line of such
lot and the side lot lines of such lot (the "connecting line") and that also
passes through the midpoint of the longest possible straight line across such
lot which intersects the connecting line at a right angle.
FRONT LOT LINE — Typically, that portion of the public street right-ofway
line on which a lot abuts. (In the situation of a lot having two or more
sides that abut public streets, the front lot line is determined by reference
to the right-of-way line of the public street on which the principal building
will or does front or which will or does control the address of the principal
building. In the situation of a lot having a side that only partially abuts a
public street on which the principal building will or does front or which will
or does control the address of the principal building, the front lot line will
be that portion of the public street right-of-way line on which the lot directly
abuts together with the property line of the nonabutting portion of such
partially abutting side of the lot.)
FUR FARM — Any property comprising land or buildings, or both, used for
the purpose of raising or harboring fur-bearing animals, including those
defined in § 29.001(30), Wis. Stats., and also including chinchillas and other
fur-bearing animals, if any, whether the animals are kept for breeding or
slaughtering or pelting purposes.
GARAGE — A building for the storing of motor vehicles or other household
items.
GARAGE, ATTACHED — A private garage which has a roof or wall, or a
major portion of a roof or wall, in common with a dwelling. Where the
garage is attached to a dwelling in this manner, it shall be subject to all yard
requirements of the main building.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multiple-family dwelling which shall not exceed
four stories in height.
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1326
GASOLINE STATION — A facility limited to retail sales to the public of
gasoline, motor oil, lubricants, motor fuels, travel aids and minor
automobile accessories and not including vehicular servicing, such as, but
not limited to, oil changes, engine or body repairs or the painting of
vehicles. A gasoline station is not a truck stop and/or truck service facility
as defined in this chapter.[Amended 4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-15]
GOLF COURSE — A comparatively large, unobstructed acreage involving
enough room over which to walk or ride, point to point, over a generally
prescribed course and to strive to send a ball long distances with variable
accuracy, all without unreasonably endangering other players or intruding
upon them.
GRADE — The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the
ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the
property line. In cases where the property line is more than five feet from
the building, the grade shall be determined between the building and a line
five feet from the building.
GRADING — Any man-made change of the land surface, including removing
vegetative cover, excavating, filling and grading, but not including
agricultural land uses, such as planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting
of crops; growing and tending of gardens; harvesting of trees; and
landscaping modifications, including stripping, excavating, filling,
stockpiling, or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated
or filled condition.
GROCERY STORE — A retail store selling groceries and household or
convenience products which has a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or
more but less than 50,000 square feet.
GROSS DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL — The total number of residential units
or lots divided by the area of the lands within a residential development,
excluding public streets and all lands used for business, manufacturing,
institutional and park and recreational uses.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors
of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or
from the center line of walls separating two attached buildings. Without
limitation, the gross floor area of a building shall include elevator shafts and
stairwells at each floor, floor space used for mechanical equipment (except
when located on a roof), penthouses, attic space having a headroom of
seven feet 10 inches or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed
porches, and floor area devoted to accessory uses.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room in a dwelling unit designed to be used for
living, sleeping, or dining, excluding bathrooms, laundries, toilet rooms,
closets, pantries, halls, storage spaces, kitchens and similar spaces.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance from the mean elevation of
the finished lot grade along the front of a building to the highest point of
the roof.
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1327
HELIPORT — An area used or to be used for landing or takeoff of
helicopters or other steep-gradient aircraft capable of hovering, and may
include any or all of the areas or buildings which are appropriate to
accomplish these functions.
HIGHWAY — The area within the right-of-way lines of a public highway, as
distinguished from the paved roadway of a highway.
HOME OCCUPATION (HOME-BASED BUSINESS) — For the purpose of
this chapter, any reference to a home occupation shall mean a home-based
business under Article VII in this chapter.[Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-38]
HOSPITAL — An institution providing health services, primarily for
inpatients, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including
as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories,
outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and
staff offices.
HOTEL — A building in which overnight lodging facilities and services are
provided to the general public for compensation and in which ingress or
egress to the individual guest rooms is through a central lobby and internal
corridors that are heated and air conditioned and not directly through
individual external doors. For purposes of this chapter, "hotel" and "motel"
are mutually exclusive.
HOTEL WITH A DEDICATED BAR — A hotel with a barroom or bar facilities
used in connection with banquet and convention activities, or for hotel
guests, which bar is not advertised to the general public and has no signage
visible from the exterior of the hotel.
HOURS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC — The hours during which the public
is invited onto or permitted to remain on the premises of a business,
manufacturing, institutional or other nonresidential use.
HOUSEHOLD STABLE — A structure not more than 20 feet by 20 feet used
for the sheltering of not more than two horses.
HUSBANDRY — The cultivation or production of plants and animals
(livestock) and/or the by-products thereof.
ILLEGAL USE: — A use that is not an allowed use.
IMPACT NOISE — A short-duration sound which is incapable of being
accurately measured on a sound-level meter.
IMPULSIVE NOISE — A sound which is no longer than two seconds in
duration, followed by no less than a two-second rest.
INTERSECTING STREET — Any street or public way or court, 30 feet or
more in width, which joins another at an angle, whether or not it crosses
the other.
JUNK — Includes, without limitation due to enumeration, scrap metal,
bones, rags, used cloth, used rubber, used rope, used tinfoil, used bottles,
used machinery, used tools, used appliances, used fixtures, used utensils,
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1328
used lumber, used boxes or crates, used pipe or pipe fittings, used
automobiles, used tires, and other manufactured goods that are so worn,
deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing
condition.
JUNKYARD — A place where junk, waste, discarded, or salvaged materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, wrecked
or dismantled, or handled, including automobile wrecking yards, house
wrecking, and structural steel materials and equipment, but not including
the purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment, used
cars in operable condition, or used or salvaged materials as part of
manufacturing operations.
KENNEL — Any lots or premises on which five or more dogs or cats, or both,
at least five months of age are kept, boarded, or trained, whether kept in
special structures or runways.[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21]
KITCHEN — Any room or area used, intended to be used or designed to be
used either wholly or partly for cooking and/or the preparation of food.
LABORATORY — A building or part of a building devoted to the testing and
analysis of any product or animal (including humans) or to the development
of and fabrication of preliminary or pilot models. Also includes a laboratory
which provides bacteriological, biological, medical, x-ray, pathological and
similar analytical or diagnostic services to doctors or dentists. No
fabricating is conducted on the premises, except the custom fabrication
of dentures. No manufacturing is conducted on the premises, except for
experimental or testing purposes.
LANDFILL — See "sanitary landfill."
LAND LINE — Section lines, half-section lines, quarter-section lines, and
other property lines established by metes and bounds outside the
boundaries of reported land subdivision plats.
LANDSCAPED AREA — An area that is permanently devoted and
maintained to the growing of trees, shrubbery, grass and other plant
material.
LANDSCAPING — The improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land with
grass and shrubs and/or trees. Landscaping may include pedestrian walks,
flowerbeds, and ornamental objects such as fountains, statuary, and other
similar natural objects designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically
pleasing effect.
LAUNDROMAT — A business that provides washing, drying and/or ironing
machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
LEAST RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT —
A. Agricultural districts are less restrictive than residential districts
B. Residential districts are less restrictive than business districts
C. Business districts are less restrictive than manufacturing districts
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1329
LIBRARY — A place in which books, manuscripts, musical scores or other
literary and artistic materials are kept for use and only incidentally for sale.
LIVESTOCK — Animals, such as but not limited to cows, llamas, alpaca,
buffalo/bison, horses, camels, deer, donkey/mules, reindeer, sheep, water
buffalo, yak, fowl or poultry, rabbits and pigs, which are raised for sale,
resale, agricultural field production, human consumption or pleasure.
(Note: Goats are not considered livestock and are not allowed to be kept or
raised for sale, resale, agricultural field production, human consumption or
pleasure.)[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21]
LOADING AREAS — A completely off-street space or berth on the same lot
for the loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and
egress to public street or alley.
LOT — Any legally created and described parcel of land. (Note, however,
that when "lot" is used in combination with other words in a defined term,
e.g., "lot of record," it may be used to describe an existing parcel of land
without respect to whether the parcel was legally created. (See separate
definitions for "lot of record," "corner lot," "through lot," "nonconforming
lot," "front lot line," "rear lot line," "side lot line," "front half of a lot" "rear
half of a lot.")
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines or as measured
as the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and rear lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding a lot.
LOT OF RECORD — A parcel of land created and described by an
instrument recorded in the office of the Kenosha County Register of Deeds.
(Note that a lot of record may or may not be a legally created and described
parcel of land.)
MANUFACTURED HOME — A factory-built, single-family structure that
is manufactured under the authority of 42 U.S.C. § 5401, the National
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, is
transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis and
fitted with wheels, is intended to be hauled to a site and is registered and
titled with the Wisconsin Department of Transportation.
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land for the
placement of a single mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or tract of land under
single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement
of mobile homes for dwelling purposes.
D. Manufacturing districts are less restrictive than institutional districts
Conservancy districts shall not be considered less restrictive districts.
If any portion of the property is located within the C-1 or C-3
Conservancy District, the property area within the C-1 or C-3 District
shall conform to the regulations of that C-1 or C-3 District.
E.
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1330
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual
mobile home space which has been planned and improved for the placement
of the mobile home and additions or attachments thereto.
MANUFACTURING — The processing and converting of raw, unfinished, or
finished materials or products, or any of these, into an article or substance
of different character, or for use for a different character, or for use for
a different purpose; also industries furnishing labor in the case of
manufacturing or the refinishing of manufactured articles.
MARINA — A place for docking or storage of pleasure boats or providing
services to pleasure boats and the occupants thereof, including minor
servicing and repair to boats while in the water, sale of fuel and supplies,
or provision of lodging, food, beverages, and entertainment as accessory
uses. A yacht club shall be considered a marina, but a hotel, motel, or
similar use, where docking of boats and provision of services thereto are
incidental to other activities, shall not be considered a marina, nor shall
boat docks accessory to a multiple dwelling where no boat-related services
are rendered.
MICRON — A unit of length, equal to 0.001 millimeter.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, factory-built home designed to be used
as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to the enactment of the
Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, which became effective June 15, 1976.
MODULAR HOME — A factory-fabricated transportable building designed
to be used by itself or to be incorporated with units at a building site into
a modular structure to be used for residential, commercial, educational or
industrial purposes. This is not a manufactured home or a mobile home as
defined in this chapter.
MORGUE — A place where the unidentified and derelict dead are at all
times received and kept and exposed to public view for the purposes of
identification.
MOTEL — A building or buildings in which overnight lodging facilities
and services are provided to the general public for compensation and
in which ingress or egress to all or some of the individual guest rooms
is made directly through individual exterior doors rather than through a
central lobby and internal corridors that are heated and air conditioned. For
purposes of this chapter, "motel" and "hotel" are mutually exclusive.
MOTION-PICTURE MATERIALS — Videotapes, films, discs, slide shows, or
other recordings of visual images from which motion pictures or a series of
still pictures can be projected or reproduced and viewed, with or without
audio accompaniment.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY STRUCTURE — Three or more attached dwelling units.
NAVIGABLE STREAM — See § 281.31(2)(d), Wis. Stats.
NEIGHBORHOOD PLAN — A component plan of the Village's
Comprehensive Plan focusing on a particular neighborhood specified in
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1331
the Comprehensive Plan (or on a portion of such a neighborhood) which
provides guidelines for the development and use of the real property within
such neighborhood, taking into account the compatibility of land uses,
how future land divisions could occur, and how street access to the land
divisions could be provided and examining the practicability of providing
certain lot layouts, street layouts, parkways, open space areas, park areas,
preservation areas, public community facilities, infrastructure
improvements and municipal services to service the particular
neighborhood or portion thereof.
NET DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL — The total number of units or lots divided
by the lands within the neighborhood, excluding floodplains, wetlands,
lands with primary environmental corridors, lands with slope greater than
20%, public roadway rights-of-way and all lands proposed for business,
manufacturing, institutional and public park and recreational
uses.[Amended 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 09-61]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot that was lawfully created in accordance
with then-applicable ordinance requirements but which is not in conformity
with all currently applicable requirements of this chapter (e.g., minimum lot
area, minimum public street frontage, etc.).
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing use that was lawful in its inception
but that has subsequently become either a prohibited use or a use requiring
a conditional use permit (which has not been granted) and that was active
and actual at the time the use became nonconforming (as distinguished
from being merely casual, occasional, incidental or accessory) and that has
been continuous with no gap of 12 or more consecutive months since it
became a nonconforming use and that does not occupy a building or other
structure that has been structurally altered or repaired to the extent of 50%
or more of its assessed value since the use became nonconforming.
NOXIOUS MATTER — Material which is capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects
upon the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
NURSERY — Any land used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers, and other plants
for sale or for transplanting.
NURSING HOME — A fully supervised living facility wherein skilled
professionals provide continuous care or treatment of any person. A nursing
home is not a hospital and is not a community living arrangement.
OCTAVE BAND — A prescribed interval of sound frequencies which permits
classifying sound according to its pitch.
ODOROUS MATTER — Any matter or material that yields an odor which is
offensive in any way or any matter or material that produces a response in
the normal human nose.
ODOR THRESHOLD — The lowest concentration of odorous matter in the
air that will produce a response in the normal human nose.
OFFICIALLY APPROVED MEANS OF ACCESS — Village Board approved
means of ingress or egress to a structure or lot.
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1332
ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL ABSORPTION SYSTEM — Includes a stateapproved
septic or mound system for collection of sanitary waste and
eventual absorption of such waste into the surrounding soils.
OPEN SPACE — The parts of a lot or approved site that are not covered by
buildings or structures or by paved, graveled or artificial surfaces. Water
surfaces of improvements such as ponds, detention basins and retention
basins will be deemed to be open space.
OPPOSITE — Directly across the street or highway from the subject lot or
site, but only to the extent of frontage on such street or highway and real
property contiguous to such frontage which is situated between the side lot
lines of the subject lot or site extended across such street or highway.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — As defined by § NR 115.03(6), Wis. Adm.
Code.
OUTLOT — A parcel of land, other than a buildable lot or a block, which is
designated as such on a plat or certified survey map.263
PARTICULATE MATTER — Dust, smoke, or any other form of airborne
pollution in the form of minute separate particles.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — In the context of a public hearing on an
application for a permit or approval under or contemplated by this chapter,
the applicant(s), the owner(s) of the subject lot or site, the owner(s) of any
real property that abuts the subject lot or site, the owner(s) of any real
property that is opposite the subject lot or site, and the owner(s) of any
other real property located within 300 feet of the subject lot or site.
PATIO — A terrace extending not more than six inches above the average
level of the ground at its margins, provided that no fixed walls or roof shall
be erected on or over any patio or similar structure that is located in a
required yard.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A criterion established for the purposes
of assigning proposed industrial uses to proper districts and making
judgments in the control of noise, odor, smoke, toxic matter, vibration, fire
and explosive hazards, or glare generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or
buildings.
PERMANENT ENCLOSED FOUNDATION — A foundation as constructed
per the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code to include a full basement or
crawl space; if the soil-bearing capacity does not allow for such a basement,
a temporary foundation may be allowed by the Village Zoning Administrator.
PERMANENT OCCUPANCY — See "certificate of occupancy."
PERMITTED USE — A principal use that has been legislatively approved
in this chapter for a particular zoning district, without a conditional use
permit, but which may require other Village permits, licenses or approvals.
263. Editor's Note: The former definition of "park, amusement," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-25.
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1333
PERSON — An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality, state agency or any other legal entity.
PETS, HOUSEHOLD — Animals commonly found in residences as pets, such
as dogs, cats, songbirds, rabbits, and other small animals, providing that
they are not raised or reared for commercial resale or as a source of stable
supplement. Household pets shall not include livestock, except for rabbits.
In addition, household pets shall not include fowl or poultry, goats, pot belly
pigs, exotic snakes, large reptiles and exotic animals not commonly found
in residences as determined by the Village Zoning Administrator.[Amended
3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21; 3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 15-08]
PHYSICALLY SEPARATE DEFINED AREA — That area of a principal
building or of a unit of a principal building occupied by one or more
specified uses, which area is defined in an approved site and operational
plan, conditional use permit or special Village license and is physically
separated from other portions of the building or other portions of a
particular unit of the building by walls, doorways, floor stripes, signs and/
or other approved means which individually or collectively make it readily
apparent that one is entering or leaving the defined area.
PLACE or TO PLACE — The establishment of a building or structure in
a particular location, whether by original construction or erection or by
moving a building or structure to a particular location, provided that the
required setbacks are met.
PORCH — A covered entrance to a building, excluding the steps, supported
by columns or wall sections.
POULTRY — Any fowl, including but not limited to roosters, chickens,
pigeons, ducks, geese, turkeys and pheasants, that are kept or raised
for sale, resale, agricultural field production, human consumption or
pleasure.[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21]
PRIMARY FRONT CORNERS — The two forwardmost outward-facing
corners of the foundation of a principal building, relative to the right-of-way
line of the public street on which the building fronts or which controls the
address of such building, ignoring corners of the foundation that support
minor building protrusions, such as steps, stoops, vestibules, chimneys,
etc. (Note: If the foundation of such a minor building protrusion is located
at what would otherwise be an actual outward-facing front corner of the
building foundation, the primary front corner of the building foundation will
be the hypothetical corner that would result if the minor protrusion were
removed, rather than the actual corner.)
PRIMARY REAR CORNERS — The two rearmost outward-facing corners of
the foundation of a principal building, relative to the right-of-way line of
the public street on which the building fronts or which controls the address
of such building, ignoring corners of the foundation that support minor
building protrusions, such as steps, stoops, vestibules, chimneys, etc. (Note:
If the foundation of such a minor building protrusion is located at what
would otherwise be an actual outward-facing rear corner of the building
foundation, the primary rear corner of the building foundation will be the
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1334
hypothetical corner that would result if the minor protrusion were removed,
rather than the actual corner.)
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building occupied by or used for one or more
principal uses [and, if applicable, occupied by or used for one or more
accessory uses related to such principal use(s)].
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A structure occupied by, used for or
constituting one or more principal uses [and, if applicable, occupied by or
used for one or more accessory uses related to such principal use(s)].
PRINCIPAL USE — A primary use of real property, including any use that
is not an accessory use to a principal use conducted on the same lot or
approved site.
PRINTED OR GRAPHIC MATERIALS — Books, magazines, newspapers,
periodicals, calendars, posters, cards, photographs, pictures, drawings or
other similar printed or graphic materials.
PROHIBITED USE — A use that cannot currently be lawfully commenced in
a particular zoning district or at a particular location.
PROPOSED (use, development, structure, alteration, modification, etc.) —
Any use, development, structure, alteration, modification, etc., for which
a permit or approval is required by this chapter, which has not yet been
issued or granted, regardless of whether or not the permit or approval has
been requested, and regardless of whether or not the use, development,
structure, alteration, modification, etc., has been commenced, constructed,
installed or completed.
QUARRY — A place, cavern, or pit where stone is taken from the rock or
ledge, or dug from the earth, for building or other purposes; a stone pit.
QUARRYING — The digging out of stone or slate from an open excavation.
RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary
facilities for railway track operation, but not including freight depots or
stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive
shops, or car yards.
REAR FOUNDATION LINE(S) — The line(s), as seen from directly above,
formed by the intersection with the ground of the outer edge of those
portions of the foundation of a principal building that are situated between
the primary rear corners of such foundation.
REAR HALF OF A LOT — From the perspective of the front lot line, that
portion of a lot lying behind a line that is parallel to the straight line
connecting the two points of intersection between the front lot line of such
lot and the side lot lines of such lot (the "connecting line") and that also
passes through the midpoint of the longest possible straight line across such
lot which intersects the connecting line at a right angle.
REAR LOT LINE — The property line of one or more sides of a lot that do
not intersect the front lot line. (Note: In the case of a triangular lot having
a side that abuts a public street, the rear lot line consists of a point; in the
case of a lot having five or more sides, the property line of any side situated
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1335
entirely in the rear half of the lot will be deemed to be part of the rear lot
line; in the case of a through lot, the right-of-way line of the public street on
which the rear portion of the lot abuts.)
REAR SETBACK or REAR YARD SETBACK — A required setback from the
rear lot line, except in the situation of a through lot. (Note: In the situation
of a through lot, there is a required street setback from the street right-ofway
line on which the rear portion of the lot abuts.)
REAR STREET YARD — The portion of a through lot bounded by the rear
lot line (the street right-of-way line on which the rear portion of the lot
abuts), the rear foundation line(s) of the principal building on such lot, the
extension of each such rear foundation line forming a part of a primary rear
corner of the foundation of such building (respectively) to the nearest side
lot line, and that portion of each side lot line (respectively) lying between
its point of intersection with the rear lot line and its point of intersection
with a rear foundation line of the building so extended to such side lot line;
provided, however, that in the situation of a through lot that is also a corner
lot, the rear street yard does not include the area included within the side
street yard.
REAR YARD — The portion of a lot bounded by the rear lot line, the rear
foundation line(s) of the principal building on such lot, the extension of each
such rear foundation line forming a part of a primary rear corner of the
foundation of such building (respectively) to the nearest side lot line, and
that portion of each side lot line (respectively) lying between its point of
intersection with the rear lot line and its point of intersection with a rear
foundation line of the building so extended to such side lot line; provided,
however, that in the situation of a corner lot, the rear yard does not include
the area included within the side street yard. (Note: In the case of a through
lot, there is no rear yard, but see the definition of "rear street yard.")
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) — A vehicular-type unit initially designed
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use which
either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another
vehicle. The basic types of recreational vehicles are:
Travel trailer. A vehicular unit, mounted on wheels, of such size or
weight as not to require special highway movement permits when
drawn by a motorized vehicle, initially designed and constructed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel
use, and with a body length of no more than 35 feet and a body width of
no more than eight feet six inches when factory equipped for the road.
A.
Truck camper. A portable unit, designed to be loaded onto or affixed to
the bed or chassis of a truck, constructed to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
B.
Motor home. A vehicular unit built on a self-propelled motor vehicle
chassis and initially designed to provide temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping or travel use.
C.
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1336
REGIONAL RETAIL SHOPPING CENTER — A shopping center located near
an interstate highway interchange and consisting of a minimum of 50,000
square feet of gross floor area.
RENDERING PLANT — A plant for reduction of dead animals, or
slaughtered animals not suitable for human consumption, to by-products,
such as hide, skin, grease, bones, glue and soap for the storage of such byproducts.
RESIDENTIAL CARE APARTMENT COMPLEX (RCAC) — A place where five
or more adults reside that consists of independent apartments, each of
which has an individual lockable entrance and exit, a kitchen, including a
stove, and individual bathroom, sleeping and living areas, and that provides,
to a person who resides in the place, not more than 28 hours per week of
services that are supportive, personal and nursing services. RCAC facilities
do not include a nursing home or a community-based residential facility
(CBRF) but may be physically part of a structure that is a nursing home
or a CBRF. In this subsection, "stove" means a cooking appliance that is a
microwave oven of at least 1,000 watts or that consist of burners and an
oven.
RESIDENTIAL COMMUNICATION STRUCTURES — Residential
transmission, receiving or relay towers, and/or antennas, including without
limitation amateur "ham" radio and satellite and/or digital dishes.
RESTAURANT — An establishment in which providing meals for
compensation is the primary activity and where alcoholic beverages may
be served, but only incidental to the serving of meals for consumption on
the premises and not in an automobile; "restaurant" does not include a
boardinghouse, or a hotel providing room service, or a tavern, cabaret,
adult cabaret, dry cabaret, adult dry cabaret, coffeehouse or similar use
that incidentally sells or serves food. (See "restaurant with a dedicated bar,"
"restaurant with a drive-through facility" and "drive-in restaurant.")
RESTAURANT WITH A DEDICATED BAR — A restaurant with a bar where
customers are served alcoholic beverages only while waiting to be seated
for a meal, which bar is not advertised to the general public and has no
signage visible from the exterior of the restaurant.
RESTAURANT WITH A DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — A restaurant
designed and operated so that customers can order and receive a meal,
Camping trailer. A vehicular unit mounted on wheels and constructed
with collapsible partial side walls which fold for towing by another
vehicle and unfold at the campsite and initially designed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
D.
Vans, buses, and other vehicles, when equipped for camping purposes,
designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping or travel use.264
E.
264. Editor's Note: The former definition of "recreational vehicle (RV) pad," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 5-4-2009 by Ord. No. 09-25.
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1337
typically to be eaten off site, while driving an automobile through the
restaurant site.
RETREAT CENTER — A facility used for professional, business, educational
or religious retreats, meetings, seminars or conferences, where meals,
lodging and recreation may be provided for participants in the retreat or
other program, but where neither meals nor overnight accommodations are
provided to the general public.
RIDING STABLE — A building or premises used for the rental or lease of
horses or other livestock for riding.[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-21]
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The boundary of a public highway or street.
RINGELMANN CHART — One which is described in the United States
Bureau of Mines Information Circular 6888, or its successor, and on which
are illustrated graduated shades of grey for use in estimating the lightobscuring
capacity of smoke.
RINGELMANN NUMBER — The number appearing in the Ringelmann
Chart ascribed by the observer to the density of the smoke emission. Where
the density or light-obstructing capacity of the smoke as observed falls
between two consecutive Ringelmann Numbers, the lowest Ringelmann
Number shall be considered the density of the smoke observed.
SANITARIUM — A health station or retreat; an institution for the
recuperation and treatment of persons suffering from physical or mental
disorders.
SANITARY LANDFILL — A type of land disposal operation involving the
disposal of solid waste on land without creating nuisances or hazards to
public health or safety by utilizing the principals of engineering to confine
the solid waste to the smallest practical area, to reduce it to the smallest
practical volume, and to cover it with a layer of earth at the conclusion
of each day's operation or at such more frequent intervals as may be
necessary.
SCHOOL — A building where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of
educational classes and instruction, together with the playgrounds, athletic
fields, stadiums and other structures or grounds used in conjunction
therewith; provided, however, that the definition of "school" is limited to
public or private schools used for primary or secondary education in which
classes for students in kindergarten and/or all or some of grades one
through 12 are regularly taught, or special education facilities in which
students with physical or learning disabilities regularly receive specialized
education in lieu of attending kindergarten or any of grades one through 12.
SECONDHAND ARTICLE DEALER — As defined in § 246-3 of the Village
Municipal Code. Some secondhand article dealers are considered a cash
convenient business as defined in this chapter.[Added 5-17-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-31; amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-32]
SECONDHAND JEWELRY DEALER — As defined in § 246-3 of the Village
Municipal Code. Some secondhand jewelry dealers are considered a cash
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1338
convenient business as defined in this chapter.[Added 5-17-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-31; amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-32]
SEDIMENT — Soils or other surficial materials transported by winds or
surface waters as a product of erosion.
SEMINUDE — When any portion of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or anus, or any portion of the human female breast below the top of the
areola, is not completely and opaquely covered.
SENIOR HOUSING FACILITY — Housing for persons over 55 years of age.
SETBACK — The minimum distance that must separate a specified building
or structure from a specified property line or site feature. The setback
distance is measured from the foundation of a building or structure, except
to the extent that encroachments into the setback by building elements,
such as chimneys, porches or exterior stairs, may be allowed by this
chapter. (See "setback line," "street setback," "rear setback," "side setback,"
"wetland setback" and "shore setback." Note that dimensional yard
requirements in this chapter shall be interpreted as setback requirements,
and dimensional restrictions on encroachments into yards shall be
interpreted as exceptions to setback requirements.)
SETBACK LINE — The actual or hypothetical line on the surface of a lot,
typically depicted on a survey, plat, site plan or other scale map, that shows
a required setback distance from a particular property line or site feature.
SHORELANDS — As defined in § 59.692(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
SHORE SETBACK or SHORE YARD SETBACK — A required setback from
the ordinary high-water mark of a body of navigable water.
SHORE YARD — The area of a lot between the ordinary high-water mark of
a body of navigable water and the shore setback line.
SIDE FOUNDATION LINE(S) — The line(s), as seen from directly above,
formed by the intersection with the ground of the outer edge of those
portions of the foundation of a principal building that are situated between
the primary front and rear corners on either side of such foundation.
SIDE LOT LINE — A property line of one or more sides of a lot that
intersects both the front lot line and the rear lot line. (Note: In the case of
a lot having five or more sides, with at least one side located entirely within
the rear half of the lot, the property line of a side located both in the front
and rear halves of the lot and not itself intersecting the front lot line will be
deemed to be part of the side lot line; in the case of a corner lot, one side
lot line will be a portion of the abutting public street right-of-way line.)
SIDE SETBACK or SIDE YARD SETBACK — A required setback from the
side lot line of a lot, except that in the case of a corner lot there is no side
setback from the side lot line consisting of a street right-of-way line. (Note:
In the case of a corner lot, there is a required street setback from the side
lot line consisting of a street right-of-way line.)
SIDE STREET YARD — The portion of a corner lot bounded by the side
foundation line(s) of the principal building on such lot that is (are) closest
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1339
to the right-of-way line of a street other than the one on which the principal
building fronts or which controls the address of the principal building, the
front foundation line of such building forming a part of the primary front
corner of the foundation of such building closest to such side street right-ofway
line extended to such right-of-way line, the side foundation line forming
a part of the primary rear corner of such building closest to such side
street right-of-way line extended to the rear lot line, the portion of such
rear lot line between its point of intersection with such side foundation line
extended and its point of intersection with such side street right-of-way line,
and the portion of such side street right-of-way line between its point of
intersection with the rear lot line and its point of intersection with the front
foundation line extended to such side street right-of-way line.
SIDE YARD — The portion(s) of a lot abutting the side foundation line(s) of
the principal building on such lot that is (are) not included within the street
yard, the side street yard, the rear yard or the rear street yard of such lot.
SILT — Soil particles, intermediate in size between sand and clay, which are
readily transported by inflowing streams or surface waters into a body of
water.
SITE — The real property proposed to be developed or rezoned, or which
is the subject of a requested site and operational plan approval, conditional
use permit, special license or other permit or approval pursuant to this
chapter or other applicable Village ordinances, or which has been
developed or rezoned, or with respect to which a permit or approval has
been granted, including any development or improvements thereon. [Note
that a site containing more than a single lot must be unified, integrated and
approved. See § 420-57B(22).]
SMOKE — Small gas-borne particles other than water that form a visible
plume in the air.
SMOKE UNIT — The number obtained when the smoke density in
Ringelmann Number is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For
the purpose of this calculation, a Ringelmann density reading shall be made
at least once a minute during the period of observation; each reading is then
multiplied by the time in minutes during which it was observed. The various
products are then added together to give the total number of smoke units
observed during the entire observation period.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, gravel, rock or any similar material.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and all other discarded or salvageable
solid materials, including solid waste materials resulting from industrial,
commercial, and agricultural operations and from domestic use and public
service activities, but does not include solids or dissolved material and
wastewater effluent or other common water pollutants.
SOUND LEVEL — For an operation or use is the intensity of sound,
measured in decibels, produced by such operation or use.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument standardized by the American
Standards Association for measurement of intensity of sound.
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1340
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — Same as "conditional use."
SPECIAL LICENSED USE — Any use requiring a special Village license,
e.g., an adult-oriented use license, a cabaret license, or a liquor license. A
special licensed use can only be conducted pursuant to and in accordance
with a required Village license, and the granting of such a license is not
assured either by permitted use status or by the granting of a conditional
use permit or of any other permit or approval under this chapter. A special
licensed use may require other Village permits or approvals.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely covered human
genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks and female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Simulated or actual acts of human
sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, sodomy, masturbation,
sadomasochistic abuse, beastiality or necrophilia; or simulated or actual
physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification,
with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, anus or buttocks
or with a female person's breast; or a person's simulated or actual use of an
inanimate object in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
SPORT COURT — A court located on a hard surface where its primary
purpose is to play basketball, tennis, shuffleboard or other such sport or
activity. A residential driveway shall not be considered a sport court.
STEEP SLOPE — A slope over twelve-percent grade, which is characterized
by increased runoff, erosion and sediment hazards.
STORE — A use devoted exclusively to the retail sale or rental of a goods or
products.
STORY — That portion of a building included between a floor and the floor
or roof next above it. A basement is not to be counted as a story unless the
ceiling height exceeds four feet above the grade or unless more than 40%
of the basement is for living purposes.
STREET — The area within the right-of-way lines of a public street, as
distinguished from the paved roadway of a street. "Street" typically includes
"highway."
STREET SETBACK or STREET YARD SETBACK — A required setback from
the nearest right-of-way line of any public street on which the lot abuts.
(Note: In the case of a corner lot or a through lot, there will be required
setbacks from the nearest right-of-way line of two streets; in the case of a lot
which is both a corner lot and a through lot, there will be required setbacks
from the nearest right-of-way line of three streets.)
STREET YARD — The portion of a lot bounded by the front lot line, the front
foundation line(s) of the principal building on such lot, the extension of each
such front foundation line forming a part of a primary front corner of the
foundation of such building (respectively) to the nearest side lot line, and
that portion of each side lot line (respectively) lying between its point of
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1341
intersection with the front lot line and its point of intersection with a front
foundation line of the building so extended to such side lot line.
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes the vegetated surface cover,
including tree removal, clearing, grubbing and storage or removal of
topsoil.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS OR REPAIRS — Any change in or modification
of the supporting members of a structure, such as foundations, bearing
walls, columns, beams or girders, or any work on or improvements to
a structure that would convert an existing structure into a new or
substantially different structure, or that would affect the structural quality
of the structure, or that would contribute to the longevity or permanence of
the structure.
STRUCTURE — Anything that is constructed, built or erected, using any
material or combination of materials, which is supported by or attached
to the ground, or which is supported by or attached to something that
is supported by or attached to the ground, which is at least relatively
stationary, and which is not entirely enclosed within a building (unless it
is designed to be viewed from outside the building, e.g., an outward-facing
lighted sign in a window). Without limitation, "structure" includes buildings,
signs, fences, walls, driveways, decks, towers, swimming pools, tree houses,
drawbridges, berms, patios, exterior stairs, parking lots, etc.
SUBJECT (lot, site or property) — The lot, site or real property being
referred to, typically in the context of an application for a rezoning, a
conditional use permit, a site and operation plan approval, a special Village
license, a variance, or other Village permit or approval.
SUPERMARKET — A retail store selling groceries and household or
convenience products which has a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or
more.
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure, including a hot tub, that is intended
to hold a minimum of 36 inches of water for recreational or therapeutic
purposes, that has electrical service or utilizes a pump and/or a filter, or any
structure for recreational or therapeutic purposes that is intended to hold
water with a water depth of 42 inches or greater. A hot tub is defined as a
fabricated hydromassage unit for recreational or therapeutic use which is
designed for immersion of users and at a minimum has a filter, heater and
motor-driven blower that is integral to the unit.[Amended 10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-49]
TAVERN — An establishment used primarily for the serving of alcoholic
beverages by the drink to the public and where food or packaged alcoholic
beverages may be served or sold only as an accessory use to the primary
use.
TECHNOLOGY ACADEMY — A type of career academy that should focus on
the resources, studies and lab areas in which students/participants would
have hands-on learning on high technology equipment to help prepare
them for their future education or the workplace of today or tomorrow
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1342
and/or provide training for employers in area businesses and industrial
development.
TEMPORARY FOUNDATION — A foundation as constructed per the
Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, excluding a full basement or crawl
space.
THEATER — A structure used for dramatic, operatic, motion-picture, or
other performances, for admission to which entrance money is received and
no audience participation or meal service allowed.
THROUGH LOT — A lot that abuts a public street at the rear end of the lot
as well as at the front end of the lot.
TOXIC MATTER — Those materials which are capable of causing injury
to living organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small
amounts.
TRUCK STOP AND/OR TRUCK SERVICE FACILITY — A facility that
provides services to the trucking industry, including but not limited to
any of the following activities: the fueling, servicing, repairing, or parking
of semitrucks or tractor trucks with or without trailers or other similar
heavy commercial vehicles; the sale of accessories and equipment for such
semitrucks, tractor trucks or other similar heavy commercial vehicles; and/
or truck washes. A truck stop may also include overnight or extended
time truck parking, sleeping accommodations, showers, weight scales, or
restaurant facilities for the use by truck crews.[Added 4-17-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-15]
TWO-FAMILY STRUCTURE (DUPLEX) — Two attached dwelling units.
UNIT OF A BUILDING — The specified area of a building in which a
tenant or other person has a right of use and occupancy for nonresidential
purposes, e.g., a store space in a shopping center building or a suite of
offices in an office building.
USE — The employment and/or occupancy of particular real property for
a particular purpose or purposes, or a particular use of real property
that is specifically recognized by this chapter. (Note: "Use" is intended to
be sufficiently elastic to refer simultaneously to the most limited possible
hypothetical use, e.g., the retail sale of books, and to an actual use of
which such hypothetical use is a component, e.g., a combined bookstorecoffeehouse.)
(See "uses conducted together in the same principal
building," "uses located together in the same principal building," "uses not
conducted together," "uses not located together," "allowed use," "permitted
use," "auxiliary permitted use," "conditional use," "special licensed use,"
"nonconforming use," "prohibited use," "principal use" and "accessory
use.")
USES CONDUCTED TOGETHER IN THE SAME PRINCIPAL BUILDING
— Uses conducted in the same principal building by the same owner or
operator as part of the same business, company, firm or organization.
USES LOCATED TOGETHER IN THE SAME PRINCIPAL BUILDING — Two
or more principal uses located in the same principal building, if there are no
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1343
units of such building, or two or more principal uses located in the same unit
of a principal building; provided, however, that uses located in different,
physically separate defined areas approved pursuant to this chapter will be
deemed not to be located together.
USES NOT CONDUCTED TOGETHER — Uses not conducted together in the
same principal building, as defined herein.
USES NOT LOCATED TOGETHER — Uses not located together in the same
principal building, as defined herein.
UTILITY SUBSTATION — Public or private electric power substation or gasmetering
substation not enclosed in a building.[Amended 7-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-44; 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21]
UTILITY SUBSTATION BUILDING — Public or private utilities and
associated equipment located within a building, including lift
stations.[Amended 3-15-2010 by Ord. No. 10-21]
VETERINARIAN EMERGENCY SERVICES OFFICE — An office or clinic that
provides examinations, diagnosis and treatment, including surgical care,
for animals available 24 hours per day. A veterinarian emergency services
office excludes facilities for boarding animals or facilities for the cremating
of animals.[Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-58]
VETERINARIAN OFFICE — An office or clinic that provides examinations,
diagnosis and treatment, including surgical care, for animals. A veterinarian
office excludes facilities for boarding animals or facilities for the cremating
of animals.[Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-58]
WAREHOUSE — A structure or part of a structure for storing goods, wares,
and merchandise, whether for the owner or for others, and whether it is a
public or private warehouse.
WETLAND SETBACK — A required setback from a staked wetland area.
WRECKING, JUNK, DEMOLITION AND SCRAP YARD — See "junkyard."
YARD — The portion of a lot generally located between the principal
building and a specified property line or feature of the lot. (See "street
yard," "side street yard," "side yard," "rear yard," "rear street yard" and
"shore yard." Note that dimensional yard requirements in this chapter shall
be interpreted as setback requirements, and dimensional restrictions on
encroachments into yards shall be interpreted as exceptions to setback
requirements.)
ZONED RESIDENTIAL (or variations thereof) — Zoned to a residential
zoning district classification; provided, however, that any portion of a
planned development zoning district where residential uses are permitted
will be deemed to be zoned residential, and any C-2 Upland Resource
Conservancy District directly abutting an area zoned residential will be
deemed to be zoned residential.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Zoning Administrator or an
individual duly authorized to perform the duties and functions of the Village
Zoning Administrator.
§ 420-152 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-152
344:1344
ZONING MAP — The official Village map delineating the boundaries of
zoning districts. The Zoning Map, along with the zoning text, comprises the
Village Zoning Ordinance.
§ 420-152 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-152
344:1345

ARTICLE XXII
Planned Development Zoning District
[Added 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 07-08]
§ 420-153. Planned Development Zoning Districts.
The Village Board reserves the right, from time to time and on a completely
discretionary, case-by-case basis, to create a planned development zoning
district (PDD) which is unique and site-specific for the purpose of
accommodating, facilitating and regulating a particular proposed
development and use project. No specific criteria are set out here to limit
the Village Board's discretion in creating such districts since the nature of
the project characteristics which might give rise to the desirability for a
PDD cannot reasonably be foreseen. Generally, however, the Village Board
will consider a PDD only if a proposed development and use project is
not practicable under the Village's traditional zoning districts; involves
multiple uses; is unusual, large and complex; and is so substantially in the
public interest as to justify extraordinary efforts to accommodate, facilitate
and regulate it. Because the creation of a PDD requires an enormous
commitment of resources by the Village, no person shall have any right to a
PDD classification under any circumstances, and no person shall have any
right to a public hearing on a proposed ordinance to create a PDD, unless
such hearing is specifically approved by the Village Board after a detailed
report on the proposed PDD from the Village staff. Since a PDD cannot be
created by the Village Board unilaterally and must be consented to by the
affected landowner(s), and since the drafting of a proposed PDD ordinance
is necessarily a difficult, time-consuming and cooperative effort, and since
the creation of a PDD will usually require the negotiation and drafting of
a companion development agreement relating to the public and private
infrastructure that is required to serve the proposed development and
use(s), the preparation of a proposed PDD ordinance will generally involve
extensive closed-door discussions and negotiations between members of the
Village staff and the Village attorneys and representatives of the owner(s)
and developer(s) of the land covered by the proposed PDD. The purpose of
such discussions and negotiations shall not be to commit the Village Board
in any way to the proposed ordinance but rather to mutually explore the
needs and desires of the owner(s) and developer(s) and the requirements,
policies and practices of the Village, to attempt to structure a proposed
ordinance that both the Village staff and the owner(s) and developer(s)
can support, to identify potential problems and issues which should be
addressed at a public hearing, and to attempt to work out potential
solutions to any such problems or issues, so that the proposed PDD
regulations and all relevant facts, issues and problems can be presented
meaningfully and efficiently to the Village Plan Commission, the Village
Board and all interested persons at a public hearing.265
265. Editor’s Note: The following sections, all added 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 07-09, which
immediately followed this section, were repealed 4-17-2017 by Ord. No. 17-11: § 420-154,
PDD-1 Planned Development District No. 1; § 420-154.1, PDD-1 Exhibit A: PDD-1 property
legal description; § 420-154.2, PDD-1 Exhibit B: SEWRPC letter; § 420-154.3, PDD-1
Exhibit C: Zoning Map; § 420-154.4, PDD-1 Exhibit D: Sub-District legal description; §
§ 420-153 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § 420-153
344:1347
420-154.5, PDD-1 Exhibit E: BA-1 Sub-District legal description; § 420-154.6, PDD-1
Exhibit F: BA-2 Sub-District legal description; § 420-154.7, PDD-1 Exhibit G, BA-3 Sub-
District legal description; § 420-154.8, PDD-1 Exhibit H: conceptual development plan; §
420-154.9, PDD-1 Exhibit I: initial shared open space legal description; § 420-154.10,
PDD-1 Exhibit J: building areas legal description; § 420-154.11, PDD-1 Exhibit K:
minimum parking requirements; § 420-154.12, PDD-1 Exhibit L: Use Table; § 420-154.13,
PDD-1 Exhibit M: replacement shared open space and encroachment area; and §
420-154.14, PDD-1 Exhibit N: examples of acceptable design Exhibit N features.
§ 420-153 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § 420-153
344:1348
Appendix
Chapter A495
ANNEXATIONS AND LAND TRANSFERS
§ A495-1. Annexation Ordinance No. 1. [Adopted 4-10-1995]
A. Territory annexed. In accordance with Sec. 66.021266 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and the petition for direct annexation filed with the Village
Clerk on the 14th day of March, 1995, signed by a number of electors
residing in the territory equal to at least the majority of votes cast for
governor in the territory at the last gubernatorial election and the
owners of 100% of the land in area and 100% of the real property in
assessed value in the territory, the following described territory in the
Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, is annexed to the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin:
(1) Part of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section
25, Town 1 North, Range 21 East of the Fourth Principal Meridian,
lying and being in the Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin
and being more particularly described as: Beginning at the
southeast corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 25;
thence S 88°50'24" W along the south line of said quarter section
1323.465 feet to the west line of said quarter quarter section;
thence N 02°17'29" W along said west line 1325.65 feet to the
north line of said quarter quarter section; thence N 88°54'59" E
along said north line 788.57 feet; thence S 02°22'12" E parallel to
the east line of the Northeast Quarter of said section 120.00 feet;
thence N 88°54'59 E parallel to the north line of said quarter
quarter section 533.11 feet to the east line of the Northeast
Quarter of said section; thence S 02°22'12" E along said east line
1203.92 feet to the southeast corner of the Northeast Quarter of
said section and the point of beginning; containing 38.746 acres,
more or less; subject to State Trunk Highway I-94 along the
easterly portion thereof and subject to easements and restrictions
of record.
B. Effect of annexation. From and after the date of this ordinance the
territory described in Subsection A shall be a part of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie for any and all purposes provided by law and all
persons coming or residing within such territory shall be subject to all
ordinances, rules and regulations governing the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
C. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is invalid or
unconstitutional, or if the application of this ordinance to any person or
266. Editor's Note: Section 66.021, Wis. Stats., was renumbered in part and repealed in part by
1999 Act 150, §§ 44 to 63, effective 1-1-2001. See now § 66.0217, Wis. Stats.
§ 420-153 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § A495-1
344:1349
§ A495-2. Annexation Ordinance No. 2. [Adopted 5-15-1995]
circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications
of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provision or application.
D. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and
publication as provided by law.
A. Territory annexed. In accordance with Sec. 66.021 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and the petition for direct annexation filed with the Village
Clerk on the 26th day of April, 1995, signed by a number of electors
residing in the territory equal to at least the majority of votes cast for
governor in the territory at the last gubernatorial election and the
owners of 100% of the land in area and 100% of the real property in
assessed value in the territory, the following described territory in the
Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, is annexed to the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin:
(1) The East Half of the Northwest Quarter and the East 42 Acres of
the West Half of the Northwest Quarter of Section 25, the West Half
of the Northeast Quarter of Section 25 except that part for road
purposes as described in Volume 1505 page 942 as project
1032-04-20, the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of
said Section 25 and that part being described as part of the
Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 25, Town 1
North, Range 21 East of the Fourth Principal Meridian, and being
more particularly described as: Being at the Southeast corner of
the Northeast Quarter of said Section 25; thence S 88°50'24" W
along the South line of said Quarter Section 1323.465 feet to the
West line of said Quarter Quarter Section; thence N 2°17'29" W
along said West line 1325.65 feet to the North line of said Quarter
Quarter Section; thence N 88°54'59" E along said North line
788.57 feet; thence S 2°22'12" E parallel to the East line of the
Northeast Quarter of said Section 120.00 feet; thence N 88°54'59"
E parallel to the North line of said Quarter Quarter Section 533.11
feet to the East line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section;
thence S 2°22'12" E along said East line 1203.92 feet to the
Southeast corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Section and the
point of beginning. Said land lying and being in the Town of Bristol,
County of Kenosha and State of Wisconsin.
B. Effect of annexation. From and after the date of this ordinance the
territory described in Subsection A shall be a part of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie for any and all purposes provided by law and all
persons coming or residing within such territory shall be subject to all
ordinances, rules and regulations governing the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
§ A495-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § A495-2
344:1350
§ A495-3. Annexation Ordinance No. 3. [Adopted 5-15-1995]
C. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is invalid or
unconstitutional, or if the application of this ordinance to any person or
circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications
of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provision or application.
D. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and
publication as provided by law.
A. Territory annexed. In accordance with Sec. 66.021 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and the petition for direct annexation filed with the Village
Clerk on the 10th day of April, 1995, signed by a number of electors
residing in the territory equal to at least the majority of votes cast for
governor in the territory at the last gubernatorial election and the
owners of 100% of the land in area and 100% of the real property in
assessed value in the territory, the following described territory in the
Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, is annexed to the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin:
(1) Part of the Southeast Quarter of Section 13, Town 1 North, Range
21 East of the Fourth Principal Meridian, lying and being in the
Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin and being more
particularly described as: Beginning on the south line of said
quarter section at a point S89°01'03"W 494.00 feet from the
southeast corner of said quarter section; thence continue
S89°01'03"W along the south line of said quarter section 2153.14
feet to the southwest corner of said quarter section; thence
N02°11'05"W along the west line of said quarter section 1061.98
feet to the center line of Co. Tr. Hwy. "C" (Wilmot Road); thence
N73°50'24"E along said center line of said road 1579.59 feet;
thence N61°14'35"E along said center line of said road 368.96 feet;
thence S01°01'23"E 121.23 feet; thence N77°42'37"E 288.35 feet
to the west line of premises known as Certified Survey Map No.:
587; thence N02°29'23"W along said west line and parallel to the
east line of said quarter section 210.80 feet to the center line of
said road; thence N61°14'35"E along said center lien 550.69 feet to
the center line of said road; thence S02°29'23"E along the east line
of said quarter section 1080.68 feet to a point on said east line
which is N02°29'23"W 969.02 feet from the southeast corner of
said quarter section; thence S89°23'45"W 494.10 feet to the
southwest corner of the aforesaid Certified Survey Map No.: 587;
thence S02°29'23"E parallel to the east line of said quarter section
and along the west lines of premises known as Certified Survey
Map Nos.: 586 and 585, 973.18 feet to the south line of said quarter
section and the point of beginning; containing 77.45 acres, more or
less; subject to easements and restrictions of record.
§ A495-2 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § A495-3
344:1351
§ A495-4. Annexation Ordinance No. 4. [Adopted 9-25-1995]
B. Effect of annexation. From and after the date of this ordinance the
territory described in Subsection A shall be a part of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie for any and all purposes provided by law and all
persons coming or residing within such territory shall be subject to all
ordinances, rules and regulations governing the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
C. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is invalid or
unconstitutional, or if the application of this ordinance to any person or
circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications
of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provision or application.
D. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and
publication as provided by law.
A. Territory annexed. In accordance with Sec. 66.021 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and the petition for direct annexation filed with the Village
Clerk on the 8th day of August, 1995, signed by a number of electors
residing in the territory equal to at least the majority of votes cast for
governor in the territory at the last gubernatorial election and the
owners of 100% of the land in area and 100% of the real property in
assessed value in the territory, the following described territory in the
Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, is annexed to the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin:
(1) Part of the Northeast Quarter of Section 25, Town 1 North, Range
21 East of the Fourth Principal Meridian, lying and being in the
Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin and being more
particularly described as: Beginning at a point on the north line of
said quarter section which is N 88°59'34" E 313.47 feet from the
northwest corner thereof; thence continue N 88°59'34" E along
said north line 2326.34 feet to the northeast corner of said quarter
section; thence S 02°22'12" E along the east line of said quarter
section 1443.94 feet; thence S 88°54'59" W 533.11 feet; thence N
02°22'12" W parallel to said east line 120.00 feet; thence S
88°54'59" W 788.57 feet; thence N 02°17'29" W 684.93 feet;
thence N 45°11'07" W 15.78 feet; thence N 23°59'39" W 115.29
feet; thence northwesterly 270.51 feet along the arc of a circular
curve concave to the east, said curve having a central angle of
27°13'28", a radius of 569.30 feet and a chord which bears N
14°41'52" W 267.97 feet; thence N 01°05'07" E 40.65 feet; thence
N 46°08'05" W 140.91 feet; thence S 88°51'16" W 86.59 feet;
thence N 87°52'03" W 170.72 feet; thence N 80°13'19" W 302.66
feet; thence N 89°07'50" W 246.68 feet; thence N 01°40'25" W
23.83 feet; thence N 01°40'25" W 21.17 feet; thence N 01°00'26" W
3.84 feet to the north line of said quarter section and the point of
beginning; subject to easements and restrictions of record.
§ A495-3 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § A495-4
344:1352
§ A495-5. Annexation Ordinance No. 5.
[Annexation Ordinance No. 5 was denied.]
§ A495-6. Annexation Ordinance No. 6.
[Annexation Ordinance No. 6 was denied.]
§ A495-7. Annexation Ordinance No. 7. [Adopted 4-6-1998]
B. Effect of annexation. From and after the date of this ordinance the
territory described in Subsection A shall be a part of the Village of
Pleasant Prairie for any and all purposes provided by law and all
persons coming or residing within such territory shall be subject to all
ordinances, rules and regulations governing the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
C. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is invalid or
unconstitutional, or if the application of this ordinance to any person or
circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications
of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provision or application.
D. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and
publication as provided by law.
A. Territory annexed. In accordance with Sec. 66.021 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and the petition for direct annexation filed with the Village
Clerk on the 6th day of March, 1998, signed by a number of electors
residing in the territory equal to at least 20% of the votes cast for
governor in the territory at the last gubernatorial election, and the
owners of at least 50% of the aforesaid property either in area or
assessed value in the territory, the following described territory in the
Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, is annexed to the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin:
(1) Part of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section
25, Town 1 North, Range 21 East of the Fourth Principal Meridian,
lying and being in the Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin
and being more particularly described as: Beginning at the
northeast corner of said Southeast Quarter Section; thence
S88°50'24"W along and upon the north line of said Southeast
Quarter Section 1323.465 feet and to the northwest corner of the
Northeast Quarter of said Southeast Quarter Section; thence
S2°05'59"E along and upon the west line of the Northeast Quarter
of said Southeast Quarter Section 1326.58 feet to the southwest
corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Southeast Quarter Section;
thence N88°51'09"E along and upon the south line of the Northeast
Quarter of said Southeast Quarter Section 1322.63 feet and to the
southeast corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Southeast
§ A495-4 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § A495-7
344:1353
§ A495-8. Annexation Ordinance No. 8. [Adopted 11-2-1998]
Quarter Section; thence N2°03'49"W along and upon the east line
of said Southeast Quarter Section 1326.865 feet and to the point of
beginning. Subject to easements and restrictions of record.
B. Effect of annexation. From, and immediately upon adoption of this
ordinance the territory described in Subsection A shall be a part of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie for any and all purposes provided by law and
all persons coming or residing within such territory shall be subject to
all ordinances, rules and regulations governing the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
C. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is invalid or
unconstitutional, or if the application of this ordinance to any person or
circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications
of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provision or application.
D. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage as
provided by law.
A. Territory annexed. In accordance with Sec. 66.021 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and the petition for direct annexation filed with the Village
Clerk on the 9th day of September, 1998, signed by a number of
electors residing in the territory equal to at least 20% of the votes cast
for governor in the territory at the last gubernatorial election, and the
owners of at least 50% of the aforesaid property either in area or
assessed value in the territory, the following described territory in the
Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, is annexed to the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin:
(1) Part of the Southeast Quarter and part of the Southwest Quarter of
Section 24, Town 1 North, Range 21 East of the Fourth Principal
Meridian, lying and being in the Town of Bristol, Kenosha County,
Wisconsin and being more particularly described as: Beginning at
the southwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of said section; also
being the southeast corner of the Southwest Quarter of said
section; thence N 88°59'34" E along the south line of the Southeast
Quarter of said section 313.47 feet; thence N 01°00'26" W 25.00
feet; thence N 88°59'34" E parallel to the south line of the
Southeast Quarter of said section 768.47 feet; thence N 43°54'28"
E 187.35 feet; thence N 01°05'07" W 684.94 feet; thence
northeasterly 391.21 feet along the arc of a curve concave to the
east; said curve having a central angel of 24°39'52", a radius of
908.83 feet; and a chord which bears N 11°14'46" E 388.19 feet to
the east line of the West Half of the Southeast Quarter of said
section; thence N 02°08'34" W along said east line 99.14 feet to the
north line of the South Half of said quarter section; thence S
88°55'18" W along said north line 1321.44 feet to the west line of
§ A495-7 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § A495-8
344:1354
§ A495-9. Annexation Ordinance No. 9. [Adopted 12-7-1998]
Southeast Quarter of said section; thence N 02°12'39" W along
said west line 1319.76 feet to the northwest corner of said quarter
section; also being the northeast corner of the Southwest Quarter
of said section; thence S 89°00'16" W along the north line of the
Southwest Quarter of said section 1323.345 feet to the west line
of the East Half of said quarter section; thence S 02°07'15" E
along said west line 2639.855 feet to the south line of said quarter
section; thence N 88°59'11' E along said south line 1327.475 feet
to the southeast corner of said quarter section; also being the
southwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of said section and the
point of beginning; containing 117.207 acres, more or less, subject
to a public highway over and across the southerly portion thereof
and subject to easements and restrictions of record.
B. Effect of annexation. From, and immediately upon adoption of this
ordinance the territory described in Subsection A shall be a part of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie for any and all purposes provided by law and
all persons coming or residing within such territory shall be subject to
all ordinances, rules and regulations governing the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
C. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is invalid or
unconstitutional, or if the application of this ordinance to any person or
circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications
of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provision or application.
D. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage as
provided by law.
A. Territory annexed. In accordance with Sec. 66.021 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and the petition for direct annexation filed with the Village
Clerk on the 9th day of November, 1998, signed by a number of electors
residing in the territory equal to at least 20% of the votes cast for
governor in the territory at the last gubernatorial election, and the
owners of at least 50% of the aforesaid property either in area or
assessed value in the territory, the following described territory in the
Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, is annexed to the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin:
(1) Part of the Northwest Quarter and part of the Northeast Quarter
and part of the Southeast Quarter of Section 24 and part of the
Southeast Quarter of Section 13, in Town 1 North, Range 21 East of
the Fourth Principal Meridian, lying and being in the Town of
Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin and being more particularly
described as: Beginning at a point on the south line of the
Southeast Quarter of said Section 24 which is N 88°59'34" E
313.47 feet from the southwest corner of said quarter section;
§ A495-8 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § A495-9
344:1355
thence N 01°00'26" W 25.00 feet; thence N 88°59'34" E parallel
to the south line of said quarter section 768.47 feet; thence N
43°54'28" E 187.35 feet; thence N 01°05'07" W 684.94 feet; thence
northeasterly 391.21 feet along the arc of a curve concave to the
east; said curve having a central angle of 24°39'52", a radius of
908.83 feet and a chord which bears N 11°14'46" E 388.19 feet
to the east line of the West Half of the Southeast Quarter of
said Section 24; thence N 02°08'34" W along said east line 99.14
feet to the north line of the South Half of said quarter section;
thence S 88°55'18" W along said north line 1321.44 feet to the
west line of said quarter section; thence N 02°12'39" W along said
west line 1319.76 feet to the northwest corner of said quarter
section; also being the southeast corner of the Northwest Quarter
of said Section 24; thence S 89°00'16" W along the south line of
the Northwest Quarter of said Section 24, 1323.345 feet to the
west line of the East Half of said quarter section; N 02°03'35" W
along said west line 2645.13 feet to the north line of said quarter
section; thence N 89°03'43" E along said north line 1320.26 feet
to the northeast corner of said quarter section; also being the
southwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 13;
thence N 89°01'03" E along the south line of the Southeast Quarter
of said Section 13, 2153.14 feet to the southwest corner of Certified
Survey Map No. 585, a plat of record; thence N 02°29'23" W
969.92 feet to the northwest corner of Certified Survey Map No.
586, a plat of record; thence N 89°01'03" E along the north line
of said certified survey map, 494.00 feet to the east line of the
Southeast Quarter of said Section 13; thence S 02°29'23" E along
said east line 969.92 feet to the southeast corner of said quarter
section; also being the northeast corner of the Northeast Quarter
of said Section 24; thence S 02°06'17" E along the east line of the
Northeast Quarter of said Section 24, 2636.15 feet to the southeast
corner of said quarter section; also being the northeast corner of
the Southeast Quarter of said Section 24; thence S 02°04'29" E
along the east line of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 24,
2645.93 feet to the southeast corner of said quarter section; thence
S 88°59'34" W along the south line of said quarter section 2326.35
feet to the point of beginning; containing 375.004 acres, more or
less; subject to public highways over and across the southerly and
easterly portions thereof and subject to easements and restrictions
of record.
B. Effect of annexation. From, and immediately upon adoption of this
ordinance the territory described in Subsection A shall be a part of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie for any and all purposes provided by law and
all persons coming or residing within such territory shall be subject to
all ordinances, rules and regulations governing the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
C. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is invalid or
unconstitutional, or if the application of this ordinance to any person or
§ A495-9 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § A495-9
344:1356
§ A495-10. Annexation Ordinance No. 10. [Adopted 12-2-2002]
circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications
of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provision or application.
D. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage as
provided by law.
A. Territory annexed. In accordance with Sec. 66.0217 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and the petition for direct annexation filed with the Village
Clerk on the 14th day of October, 2002, signed by a number of electors
residing in the territory equal to at least 20% of the votes cast for
governor in the territory at the last gubernatorial election, and the
owners of at least 50% of the aforesaid property either in area or
assessed value in the territory, the following described territory in the
Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, is annexed to the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin:
(1) The Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 25,
Town 1 North, Range 21 East of the Fourth Principal Meridian,
lying and being in the Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin
and being more particularly described as: Beginning at the
northwest corner of said Southeast Quarter Section; thence
N88°50'24'E along and upon the north line of said Southeast
Quarter Section, 1323.465 feet and to the northeast corner of the
Northwest Quarter of said Southeast Quarter Section; thence
S02°06'00'E along and upon the east line of the Northwest Quarter
of said Southeast Quarter Section, 1326.575 and to the southeast
corner of the Northwest Quarter of said Southeast Quarter Section;
thence S88°51'09'W along and upon the south line of the
Northwest Quarter of said Southeast Quarter Section, 1322.63 feet
and to the southwest corner of the Northwest Quarter of said
Southeast Quarter Section; thence N02°08'10'W along and upon
the west line of the Northwest Quarter of said Southeast Quarter
Section, 1326.305 feet and to the point of beginning. Subject to the
easements and restrictions of record.
B. Effect of annexation. From, and immediately upon adoption of this
ordinance the territory described in Subsection A shall be a part of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie for any and all purposes provided by law and
all persons coming or residing within such territory shall be subject to
all ordinances, rules and regulations governing the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
C. Temporary zoning classification. Upon recommendation of the Plan
Commission, the territory annexed to the Village of Pleasant Prairie by
this ordinance is temporarily zoned as follows and shown on the
attached map,267 pursuant to Section 66.0217(8) of the Wisconsin
Statutes:
§ A495-9 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § A495-10
344:1357
§ A495-11. Annexation Ordinance No. 11. [Added 7-5-2005]
(1) B-5, Freeway Office District on the northern portion;
(2) M-1, Limited Manufacturing on the southern portion;
(3) C-1, Lowland Resource Conservancy District on the southwest
corner pursuant to the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission (SEWRPC) interpolated wetland map;
(4) FPO, Floodplain Overlay District in the southern portion of the
property pursuant to the Des Plaines River Watershed Study of the
Floodplain/Floodways Study prepared by SEWRPC; and the area of
the property adjacent to the creek would be subject to Shoreland
regulations
D. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is invalid or
unconstitutional, or if the application of this ordinance to any person or
circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications
of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provision or application.
E. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage as
provided by law.
A. Territory annexed. In accordance with Sec. 66.0217 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and the petition for direct annexation filed with the Village
Clerk on the 3rd day of March, 2005, signed by a number of electors
residing in the territory equal to at least 20% of the votes cast for
governor in the territory at the last gubernatorial election, and the
owners of at least 50 percent of the aforesaid property either in area or
assessed value in the territory, the following described territory in the
Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, is annexed to the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin:
(1) Part of the Southeast Quarter of Section 13, Town 1 North, Range
21 East of the Fourth Principal Meridian, lying and being in the
Town of Bristol, Kenosha County, Wisconsin and being more
particularly described as: Commencing on the south line of said
Quarter Section at a point S89° 01’03”W 494.00 feet from the
southeast corner thereof; thence N02° 29’23”W along and upon the
west line of Certified Survey Maps Nos. 585, 586 and 587, 1793.91
feet and to the center line of County Trunk Highway C (Wilmot
Road); thence S61° 14’35”W along and upon said center line,
140.59 feet and the point of beginning of parcel hereinafter
described; thence continue S61° 14’35”W along and upon said
center line, 172.83 feet; thence S01° 01’23”E 121.23 feet; thence
267. Editor's Note: Said map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A495-10 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § A495-11
344:1358
§ A495-12. Land Transfer Ordinance No. 1. [Added 10-18-2010]
N77° 42’37”E 156.03 feet, thence N01° 02’21”W 171.18 feet and
to the point of beginning. Containing 22,371 square feet, more or
less.
B. Effect of annexation. From, and immediately upon adoption of this
ordinance the territory described in Subsection A shall be a part of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie for any and all purposes provided by law, and
all persons coming or residing within such territory shall be subject to
all ordinances, rules and regulations governing the Village of Pleasant
Prairie.
C. Temporary zoning classification. Upon recommendation of the Plan
Commission, the territory annexed to the Village of Pleasant Prairie by
this ordinance is temporarily zoned as follows and shown on the
attached map,268 pursuant to Section 66.0217(8) of the Wisconsin
Statutes:
(1) Both parcels will be zoned C-1, Lowland Resource Conservancy
District.
(2) Tax Parcel 35-4-121-134-0120 is located entirely within the FPO,
Floodplain Overlay District pursuant to the Des Plaines River
Watershed Study of the Floodplain/Floodways Study prepared by
SEWRPC.
(3) The majority of Tax Parcel Number 35-4-121-134-0124 is located
within the within the FPO, Floodplain Overlay District pursuant to
the Des Plaines River Watershed Study of the Floodplain/Floodways
Study prepared by SEWRPC.
D. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is invalid or
unconstitutional, or if the application of this ordinance to any person or
circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications
of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provision or application.
E. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage as
provided by law.
A. Territory land transferred. In accordance with Section 1.(o) of the
Alternate Procedure for Transfer of Land to Village under the 1997
Settlement and Cooperation Agreement by and between the Village of
Pleasant Prairie, the Pleasant Prairie Water Utility, the Pleasant Prairie
Sewer Utility District D, the Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility District No.
1, the Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility District F, the Town of Bristol, the
Town of Bristol Utility District No. 3, the Town of Bristol Utility District
No. 5 and the Town of Bristol Water Utility District (the "1997
268. Editor's Note: Said map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A495-11 VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN § A495-12
344:1359
§ A495-13. Land Transfer Ordinance No. 2. [Added 1-21-2013]
Settlement and Cooperation Agreement"), including the 1st
Amendment to the 1997 Settlement and Cooperative Agreement and
the petition for a land transfer filed with the Village Clerk on the 7th
day of September, 2010, by the owners of the land, Route 165 LLC and
the Charles and Bobette Eichberger Family Trust dated December 11,
2000, the following described territory in the Village of Bristol (f/k/a
Town of Bristol), Kenosha County, Wisconsin, is hereby transferred into
the Village of Pleasant Prairie, Kenosha County, Wisconsin:
(1) All that part of the Northwest 1/4 and Southwest 1/4 of the
Northwest 1/4 and the Northwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of
Section 25, Town 1 North, Range 21 East, in the Village of Bristol,
Kenosha County, Wisconsin bounded and is described as follows:
(a) Commencing at the northwest corner of said Northwest 1/4
section; thence South 02°09'26" East along the west line of
said Northwest 1/4 section, 556.00 feet; thence North
88°59'11" East, 233.05 feet to the point of beginning; thence
continuing North 88°59'11" East, 393.96 feet to the westerly
line of Lot 1 of Certified Survey Map No. 2634; thence South
02°09'26" East along said westerly line, 2104.84 feet to the
north line of said Southwest 1/4 section and a southerly line of
said Certified Survey Map; thence North 88°48'51" East along
said north line and along said southerly line, 701.74 feet;
thence South 02°09'01" East along the westerly line of said
Certified Survey Map, 625.39 feet; thence South 87°50'09"
West, 1095.36 feet; thence North 02°09'51" West and parallel
to the west line of said Southwest 1/4 Section, 648.06 feet;
thence North 02°09'26" West and parallel to the west line of
said Northwest 1/4 Section, 2102.06 feet to the point of
beginning. The land area contains 1,524,600 square feet
(35.0000 acres), more or less.
B. Effect of land transfer. From, and immediately upon adoption of this
ordinance the territory described in Subsection A shall be a part of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie for any and all purposes provided by law, and
all properties within such territory shall be subject to all ordinances,
rules and regulations governing the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
A. Land Transferred. In accordance with Section 1.(o) the Alternate
Procedure for Transfer of Land to Village under the 1997 Settlement
and Cooperation Agreement by and between the Village of Pleasant
Prairie, the Pleasant Prairie Water Utility, the Pleasant Prairie Sewer
Utility District D, the Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility District No. 1, the
Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility District F, the Town of Bristol, the Town
of Bristol Utility District No. 3, the Town of Bristol Utility District No. 5
and the Town of Bristol Water Utility District (the “1997 Settlement and
Cooperation Agreement”), including the 1st Amendment to the 1997
Settlement and Cooperative Agreement and the petition for a land
§ A495-12 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § A495-13
344:1360
Chapter A500
CHARTER ORDINANCES
transfer filed with the Village Clerk on the 16th day of November, 2012,
by the owner of the land, Louis Rosen, dated November 16, 2012,
the following territory shown and described in the attached Exhibit
A,269 in the Village of Bristol (f/k/a Town of Bristol), Kenosha County,
Wisconsin, is hereby transferred into the Village of Pleasant Prairie,
Kenosha County, Wisconsin.
B. Effect of Land Transfer. From, and immediately upon adoption of this
ordinance, the territory described in Subsection A shall be a part of the
Village of Pleasant Prairie for any and all purposes provided by law, and
all properties within such territory shall be subject to all ordinances,
rules and regulations governing the Village of Pleasant Prairie.
269. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 9-1-2013.
§ A495-13 CHARTER ORDINANCES § A495-13
A500:1361

ARTICLE I
Village Clerk
[Adopted 1-22-1990 by Charter Ord. No. 1]
§ A500-1. Statutory authority.
The Village of Pleasant Prairie, pursuant to §§ 61.195, 61.197 and 66.0101,
Wis. Stats., hereby elects not to be governed by those portions of §§ 61.19
and 61.25, Wis. Stats., which are in conflict with this ordinance.
§ A500-2. Appointment.
The duties of the office of Village Clerk shall be performed by the person
appointed by the Village President subject to confirmation by the Village
Board commencing on May 1, 1991. The incumbent Village Clerk shall
continue to serve as Clerk until the qualification and appointment of the
Village Clerk. If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Clerk prior to the
appointment of a Clerk, the Village Board may make an appointment to
serve the remaining term of the Clerk.
§ A500-3. Term of office.
The appointed Village Clerk shall hold office for an indefinite term, subject
to removal as provided in § 17.13, Wis. Stats.
§ A500-4. Duties.
The appointed Village Clerk shall perform all duties required of the office
of Village Clerk as provided for by law and those other duties as the Village
Board directs to be executed by the Village Clerk from time to time.
§ A500-5. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ A500-6. When effective.
This charter ordinance shall take effect 60 days after its passage and
publication unless within the sixty-day period a referendum petition as
provided by § 66.0101, Wis. Stats., shall be filed, in which event this
ordinance shall not take effect until it shall have been submitted to a
referendum vote of the electors and approved by a majority of the electors
voting thereon.
§ A500-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § A500-6
A500:1363

ARTICLE II
Village Treasurer
[Adopted 1-22-1990 by Charter Ord. No. 2]
§ A500-7. Statutory authority.
The Village of Pleasant Prairie, pursuant to §§ 61.195, 61.197 and 66.0101,
Wis. Stats., hereby elects not to be governed by those portions of §§ 61.19
and 61.26, Wis. Stats., which are in conflict with this ordinance.
§ A500-8. Appointment.
The duties of the office of Village Treasurer shall be performed by the
person appointed by the Village President subject to confirmation by the
Village Board commencing on May 1, 1991. The incumbent Village
Treasurer shall continue to serve as Treasurer until the qualification and
appointment of the Village Treasurer. If a vacancy occurs in the office of the
Treasurer prior to the appointment of a Treasurer, the Village Board may
make an appointment to serve the remaining term of the Treasurer.
§ A500-9. Term of office.
The appointed Village Treasurer shall hold office for an indefinite term,
subject to removal as provided in § 17.13, Wis. Stats.
§ A500-10. Duties.
The appointed Village Treasurer shall perform all duties required of the
office of Village Treasurer as provided for by law and those other duties as
the Village Board directs to be executed by the Village Treasurer from time
to time.
§ A500-11. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ A500-12. When effective.
This charter ordinance shall take effect 60 days after its passage and
publication unless within the sixty-day period a referendum petition as
provided by § 66.0101, Wis. Stats., shall be filed, in which event this
ordinance shall not take effect until it shall have been submitted to a
referendum vote of the electors and approved by a majority of the electors
voting thereon.
§ A500-7 CHARTER ORDINANCES § A500-12
A500:1365

ARTICLE III
Village Constable
[Adopted 1-22-1990 by Charter Ord. No. 3]
§ A500-13. Statutory authority.
The Village of Pleasant Prairie, pursuant to §§ 61.195, 61.197 and 66.0101,
Wis. Stats., hereby elects not to be governed by those portions of §§ 61.19
and 61.29, Wis. Stats., which are in conflict with this ordinance.
§ A500-14. Office eliminated.
The office of Village Constable shall be eliminated by the Village Board
commencing on May 1, 1991. The incumbent Village Constable shall
continue to serve as Constable until May 1, 1991. If a vacancy occurs in the
office of the Constable prior to the elimination of the office of Constable, the
Village Board may make an appointment to serve the remaining term of the
Constable.
§ A500-15. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ A500-16. When effective.
This charter ordinance shall take effect 60 days after its passage and
publication unless within the sixty-day period a referendum petition as
provided by § 66.0101, Wis. Stats., shall be filed, in which event this
ordinance shall not take effect until it shall have been submitted to a
referendum vote of the electors and approved by a majority of the electors
voting thereon.
§ A500-13 CHARTER ORDINANCES § A500-16
A500:1367
Disposition List
Chapter LUDL
LAND USE DISPOSITION LIST
§ LUDL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-01 1-17-2005 Building and mechanical
code amendment
Ch. 370
05-04 1-17-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
05-05 1-17-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-06 1-17-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-07 1-17-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-08 2-7-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-09 2-7-2005 Building and mechanical
code amendment
Ch. 370
05-10 3-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
05-15 5-2-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-21 6-6-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-22 6-6-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-23 6-6-2005 Zoning: Willow Pointe
Planned Unit Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
05-41 10-3-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-42 10-3-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-43 10-3-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
05-44 10-3-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ A500-16 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1368
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-45 10-3-2005 Zoning: Sagewood
Condominiums at Village
Green Planned Unit
Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
05-46 10-3-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-47 10-3-2005 Zoning: Arbor Ridge
Condominiums Planned Unit
Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
05-49 10-17-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
05-50 10-17-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-51 11-7-2005 Security Ordinance Ch. 410
05-55 Denied
05-56 12-5-2005 Zoning: Creekside Crossing
Condominiums Planned Unit
Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
05-57 12-5-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-58 12-19-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
05-59 12-19-2005 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
05-60 12-19-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
05-61 12-19-12005 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
06-02 1-16-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
06-03 2-6-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-07 2-20-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-08 2-20-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-09 2-6-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-10 2-20-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-12 3-6-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1369
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-13 3-20-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
06-14 3-20-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-15 3-20-2006 Zoning: The Shoppes at
Prairie Ridge Commercial/
Office Development Planned
Unit Development
Repealed by Ord.
No. 07-29
06-16 4-10-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-17 4-10-2006 Zoning: Prairie Villa Senior
Apartments Planned Unit
Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
06-18 4-10-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-19 4-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
06-21 6-5-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-22 6-5-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-23 6-5-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-29 6-19-2006 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
06-31 7-5-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-33 7-17-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-34 7-17-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
06-36 8-7-2006 Zoning: Lexington Village
Condominium Planned Unit
Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
06-37 8-21-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-40 9-5-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-41 9-5-2006 Zoning: Willow Point Plaza
Planned Unit Development
amendment
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
06-42 9-5-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1370
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-43 9-18-2006 Zoning: Prime Outlets
Planned Unit Development
amendment
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
06-44 9-18-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
06-46 10-2-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-47 10-2-2006 Zoning: Gordon Food
Service Marketplace
Planned Unit Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
06-48 10-2-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-49 10-2-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-50 10-2-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
06-52 10-16-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-53 11-6-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-54 11-6-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-55 11-20-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-56 11-20-2006 Zoning: Prairie Ridge
Commons Planned Unit
Development
Repealed by Ord.
No. 08-38
06-58 12-5-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-61 12-18-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-62 12-18-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
06-63 12-18-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
06-64 12-18-2006 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
07-01 1-15-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-05 2-19-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1371
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-06 3-5-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-07 4-2-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-08 4-2-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-09 4-2-2007 Zoning amendment; Zoning
Map amendment
Ch. 420
07-10 4-2-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-12 4-16-2007 Zoning: Vintage Parc
Condominium Planned Unit
Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
07-13 4-16-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-16 5-7-2006 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-17 5-7-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-18 5-7-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-19 5-7-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-20 5-7-2007 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
07-21 5-7-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-23 5-21-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-24 5-21-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-25 5-21-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-28 7-16-2007 Zoning: Prairie Ridge
Planned Unit Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
07-29 7-16-2007 Zoning: The Shoppes at
Prairie Ridge Commercial/
Office Development PUD
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
07-32 9-4-2007 Zoning: The Shoppes at
Prairie Ridge Commercial/
Office Development PUD
amendment
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
07-33 9-4-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1372
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-34 9-17-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-35 9-17-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-36 9-17-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-37 9-17-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-39 10-1-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-40 10-1-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-42 10-15-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-43 10-15-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-44 10-15-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-46 11-5-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-47 11-5-2007 Security Ordinance
amendment
Ch. 410
07-49 11-19-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-50 11-19-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-51 12-3-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-52 12-17-2007 Building and mechanical
code amendment
Ch. 370
07-54 12-17-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420
07-55 12-17-2007 Zoning: 2nd Addendum to
Creekside Crossing
Condominium Planned Unit
Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
07-56 12-17-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
07-57 12-7-2007 Zoning: Certified Survey
Map 2613 Agricultural
Planned Unit Development
(The Landing at Bain
Station Crossing
Condominiums)
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1373
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-58 12-17-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-59 12-17-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-60 12-17-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
07-61 12-17-2007 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
08-02 1-21-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-03 1-21-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-04 1-21-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-05 1-21-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-07 2-18-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-08 2-18-2008 Zoning: Springbrook Place
Condominium Planned Unit
Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
08-09 2-18-2008 Zoning: The Courtyard
Junction Condominium
Planned Unit Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
08-10 2-18-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-11 3-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-12 3-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-13 3-3-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-14 3-3-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-15 3-3-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-16 3-3-2008 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
08-17 3-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-18 3-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-19 3-17-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-20 4-21-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1374
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
08-21 4-21-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-22 4-21-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-23 Zoning amendment Postponed
08-24 4-21-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-27 5-19-2008 Zoning: Springbrook Place
Condominium Planned Unit
Development amendment
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
08-28 5-19-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-29 5-19-2008 Zoning: Timber Ridge
Manufactured/Mobile Home
Park Planned Unit
Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
08-30 5-19-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-33 6-2-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-34 6-16-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-35 6-16-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-36 6-16-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-38 7-7-2008 Zoning: Prairie Ridge
Commons Planned Unit
Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
08-41 8-4-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-42 8-4-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-43 8-18-2008 Moratorium on solid fuelfired
outdoor heating
devices
NCM
08-44 9-2-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-45 9-2-2008 Zoning: Uline Corporate
Campus Planned Unit
Development
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
08-47 9-2-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1375
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
08-48 9-2-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-49 Tabled
08-51 10-6-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-52 10-20-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-53 10-20-2008 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
08-55 11-17-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
08-58 12-15-2008 Building and mechanical
code amendment
Ch. 370
09-01 2-2-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-05 3-2-2009 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
09-06 3-2-2009 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
09-07 3-2-2009 Moratorium on solid fuelfired
outdoor heating
devices
NCM
09-08 3-16-2009 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
09-09 3-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-10 3-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-11 3-16-2009 Prairie Springs Park
Planned Unit Development
repealed
Ch. 420, Appendix
C (footnote only)
09-12 3-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-13 3-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-14 3-16-2009 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
09-15 3-16-2009 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
09-16 3-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-17 3-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-19 4-20-2009 Zoning: Truesdell Plaza
Planned Unit Development
amendment
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
09-20 5-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-21 5-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1376
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
09-22 5-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-23 5-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-24 5-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-25 5-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-26 5-4-2009 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
09-30 5-18-2009 Construction site
maintenance and erosion
control amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 16-17
09-31 5-18-2009 Public improvement
projects amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 16-11
09-33 5-18-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-34 5-18-2009 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
09-35 5-18-2009 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
09-36 5-18-2009 Zoning: 118th Avenue and
STH 50 Planned Unit
Development amendment
Ch. 420, Appendix
C
09-37 5-18-2009 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
09-44 7-20-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-46 8-3-2009 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
09-47 8-17-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-49 9-8-2009 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
09-51 10-19-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-56 11-2-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-59 12-21-2009 Comprehensive Plan Ch. 390
09-60 12-21-2009 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390
09-61 12-21-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
09-62 12-21-2009 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1377
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
09-63 12-21-2009 Building and mechanical
code amendment
Ch. 370
10-05 2-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-06 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-07 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-08 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-09 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-10 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-11 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-12 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-13 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-14 3-15-2010 Animal control amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 119, Art. II;
420
10-15 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-16 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-17 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-18 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-19 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-20 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-21 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-22 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-23 3-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-24 3-15-2010 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
10-26 4-19-2010 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
10-27 4-19-2010 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390
10-29 5-17-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-30 5-17-2010 Peace and good order
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 250; 420
10-31 5-17-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-34 6-7-2010 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
10-35 6-7-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1378
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-36 6-21-2010 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
10-37 6-21-2010 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
10-38 6-21-2010 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
10-39 6-21-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
10-41 8-9-2010 Zoning Map amendment Did not go into
effect
10-42 8-9-2010 Zoning amendment Did not go into
effect
10-43 8-16-2010 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
10-44 8-16-2010 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
10-45 8-16-2010 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
10-46 8-16-2010 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
10-47 8-16-2010 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
10-48 9-20-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-49 9-20-2010 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
10-50 9-20-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-51 9-20-2010 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
10-56 10-18-2010 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
10-57 10-18-2010 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
10-58 10-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
10-59 10-18-2010 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1379
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-60 10-18-2010 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
10-61 10-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-62 10-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-63 11-15-2010 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
10-64 Zoning Map amendment Tabled; number not
used
10-65 Zoning Map amendment Tabled; number not
used
10-66 12-20-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
10-67 12-20-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
11-02 2-21-2011 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
11-03 2-21-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
11-04 2-21-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
11-05 2-21-2011 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
11-06 2-21-2011 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
11-07 4-18-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
11-08 4-18-2011 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
11-09 4-18-2011 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
11-10 4-18-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
11-18 7-18-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
11-19 7-18-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
11-20 7-18-2011 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
11-23 9-19-2011 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
11-24 9-19-2011 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1380
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-25 9-19-2011 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390
11-26 9-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
11-27 9-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
11-28 9-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
11-29 9-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
11-30 9-19-2011 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
11-32 10-24-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
11-34 12-19-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
11-35 12-19-2011 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
11-36 12-19-2011 Building and mechanical
code amendment
Ch. 370
12-01 1-16-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
12-03 1-30-2012 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
12-04 1-30-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
12-05 1-30-2012 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
12-06 2-6-2012 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
12-07 2-6-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
12-08 2-6-2012 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
12-14 3-19-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
12-15 3-19-2012 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
12-16 3-19-2012 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
12-17 3-19-2012 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
12-18 5-7-2012 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
12-19 6-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1381
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-25 8-20-2012 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
12-26 8-20-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
12-27 8-20-2012 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
12-28 8-20-2012 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
12-29 8-20-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
12-32 9-17-2012 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390 and Ch.
390, Appendix A
12-33 10-15-2012 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
12-34 10-15-2012 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
12-35 10-15-2012 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
12-36 10-15-2012 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
12-37 10-15-2012 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
12-38 10-15-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
12-39 11-19-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
12-40 11-19-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
13-01 1-7-2013 Building and mechanical
code amendment
Ch. 370
13-05 1-21-2013 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390
13-06 1-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
13-07 1-21-2013 Building and mechanical
code amendment
Ch. 370
13-08 2-18-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
13-09 3-18-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
13-10 4-1-2013 Security Ordinance
amendment
Ch. 410
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1382
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-11 5-6-2013 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
13-12 5-6-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
13-13 5-6-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
13-15 5-20-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
13-16 5-20-2013 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390
13-17 5-20-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
13-18 5-20-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
13-19 5-20-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
13-20 6-3-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
13-21 6-17-2013 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
13-22 6-17-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
13-23 6-17-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
13-24 6-17-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
13-25 7-1-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
13-26 7-1-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
13-27 7-15-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
13-28 7-15-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
13-29 7-15-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
13-31 8-5-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
13-36 9-16-2013 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
13-37 9-16-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1383
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-38 9-16-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
13-39 9-16-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
13-40 9-16-2013 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
13-41 9-16-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
13-45 10-7-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
13-48 10-7-2013 Building and mechanical
code amendment
Ch. 370
13-50 9-16-2013 Public improvement
projects amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 16-11
13-51 10-21-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
14-02 3-17-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
14-03 3-17-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
14-04 3-17-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
14-05 4-7-2014 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390 and
Appendix A
14-06 4-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
14-07 4-7-2014 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
14-08 4-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
14-09 4-21-2014 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
14-10 4-21-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
14-11 5-19-2014 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
14-12 5-19-2014 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
14-13 5-19-2014 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
14-14 5-19-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
14-16 6-16-2014 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1384
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-17 6-16-2014 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
14-18 6-16-2014 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
14-19 6-16-2014 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
14-20 7-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
14-21 7-7-2014 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
14-22 7-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
14-23 8-4-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
14-26 8-4-2014 Building and Mechanical
Code amendment
Ch. 370
14-27 8-18-2014 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
14-28 8-18-2014 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
14-29 10-6-2014 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
14-30 10-6-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
14-31 10-6-2014 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
14-33 11-17-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
15-01 2-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
15-02 2-2-2015 Land division and
development control
amendment
Ch. 395
15-03 2-2-2015 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
15-04 2-2-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
15-05 2-2-2015 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
15-06 2-2-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1385
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-07 2-2-2015 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
15-08 3-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
15-09 3-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
15-12 4-6-2015 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
15-13 4-6-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
15-14 4-6-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
15-15 4-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
15-16 4-20-2015 Building and Mechanical
Code amendment
Ch. 370
15-21 7-6-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
15-22 7-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
15-23 7-20-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
15-24 7-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
15-30 8-3-2015 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
15-31 8-17-2015 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
15-32 8-17-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
15-33 8-17-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
15-34 8-17-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
15-36 10-5-2015 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
15-37 10-5-2015 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
15-38 10-5-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
15-42 11-16-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
15-43 11-16-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1386
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-44 11-16-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
15-44 11-16-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
15-46 12-14-2015 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
15-47 12-14-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
16-01 2-15-2016 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
16-02 3-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
16-03 3-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
16-04 3-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
16-05 3-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
16-06 3-7-2016 Security Ordinance
amendment
Ch. 410
16-08 3-21-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
16-09 3-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
16-11 5-2-2016 Design standards and
construction specifications
Ch. 405
16-12 5-2-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
16-13 6-6-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
16-14 6-6-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
16-15 6-6-2016 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
16-17 6-6-2016 Land disturbance,
construction site
maintenance, and erosion
control
Ch. 381
16-22 6-20-2016 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
16-23 6-20-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1387
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-24 6-20-2016 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
16-26 7-18-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
16-28 9-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
16-29 9-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
16-30 9-19-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
16-32 10-3-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
16-33 11-7-2016 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
16-34 11-7-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
16-35 11-21-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
16-36 11-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
16-37 11-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
16-38 11-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
16-39 11-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
16-40 11-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
16-42 12-5-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
16-43 12-5-2016 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
16-45 12-19-2016 Design standards and
construction specifications
amendment
Ch. 405
17-01 1-16-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-02 1-16-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-03 1-16-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-04 1-16-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1388
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-06 2-20-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390
17-07 2-20-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
17-08 3-20-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
17-09 3-20-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-10 4-17-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-11 4-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
17-12 4-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
17-13 4-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
17-14 4-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
17-15 4-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
17-16 4-17-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-17 4-17-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-18 4-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
17-19 4-17-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-20 4-17-2017 Security ordinance
amendment
Ch. 410
17-23 6-5-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-24 6-5-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-26 7-17-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-27 7-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
17-28 7-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
17-29 7-17-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390
17-30 7-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
17-31 7-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
17-32 7-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1389
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-33 7-17-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-34 7-17-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-36 8-21-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-37 8-21-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-38 8-21-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-39 8-21-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
17-41 8-28-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
17-42 8-28-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-43 9-18-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-44 9-18-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-45 9-18-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-47 Tabled
17-48 10-2-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-49 10-2-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-50 10-2-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
17-51 10-16-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420
17-52 11-6-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-53 11-6-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-54 11-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
17-55 11-6-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-56 11-6-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1390
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-57 11-6-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-58 11-6-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-61 12-4-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-62 12-4-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-63 12-4-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
17-64 12-18-2017 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
17-65 12-18-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-66 12-18-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
17-67 12-18-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
17-68 12-18-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
17-69 12-18-2017 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
18-02 1-15-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
18-03 1-15-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
18-04 1-15-2018 Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. 420
18-05 2-19-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
18-06 2-19-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
18-07 2-19-2018 Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. 420
18-08 3-5-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
18-09 3-5-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1391
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-10 3-5-2018 Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. 420
18-11 4-2-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
18-12 4-16-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
18-13 4-16-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
18-14 4-16-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
18-15 5-7-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
18-16 5-7-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
18-17 5-7-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
18-18 5-7-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
18-19 5-14-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 420
18-20 5-21-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
18-21 6-4-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
18-22 6-18-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
18-23 6-18-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
18-24 6-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
18-25 6-18-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
18-26 6-18-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
18-27 6-18-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
18-28 6-18-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
18-29 6-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 420
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § LUDL-1
A500:1392
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-30 6-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
18-31 6-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
18-35 8-20-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390
18-36 8-20-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
18-37 8-20-2018 Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. 420
18-38 8-20-2018 Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. 420
18-40 9-17-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390
18-41 9-17-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
18-44 10-15-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390
18-45 10-15-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
18-46 12-17-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
18-47 12-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
18-48 12-17-2018 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
18-49 12-17-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
19-01 1-21-2019 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
19-02 2-4-2019 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
19-03 2-4-2019 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
B
19-04 2-4-2019 Land Division and
Development Control
Amendment
Ch. 395
19-05 2-18-2019 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390
§ LUDL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § LUDL-1
A500:1393
Ord.No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-06 3-18-2019 Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Ch. 390, Appendix
A
19-07 3-18-2019 Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. 420
19-10 5-20-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 420, Appendix
C
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-02 1-17-2005 Park Commission amendment Ch. 18, Art. II
05-03 1-17-2005 Recreation Commission Ch. 18, Art. VII
05-11 3-7-2005 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 194
05-12 3-7-2005 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
05-13 4-18-2005 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
05-14 4-18-2005 Block parties Ch. 133
05-16 5-16-2005 Sewers: Lake Michigan Sewer
Utility District and Sewer
Utility District D amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
05-17 5-16-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 348
05-18 6-6-2005 Curfew Ch. 155
05-19 6-6-2005 Sewers: Lake Michigan Sewer
Utility District and Sewer
Utility District D amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
05-20 6-6-2005 Sewers: general regulations
amendment
Ch. 285, Arts. I
and II
05-25 6-20-2005 Impact fees Ch. 181
05-26 6-20-2005 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
05-27 6-20-2005 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
§ LUDL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § DL-1
A500:1394
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-28 6-20-2005 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
7-5-2005 Annexation Ordinance No. 11 Ch. A495
05-33 8-1-2005 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
05-35 8-15-2005 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
05-37 9-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 348
05-38 9-6-2005 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
05-48 10-3-2005 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
05-52 11-7-2005 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
05-53 11-21-2005 Clean Water Utility Ch. 148
05-54 11-21-2005 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
05-62 12-19-2005 Fire and rescue protection
amendment
Ch. 180
06-01 1-16-2006 Emergency management Ch. 165
06-04 2-6-2006 Parks and recreation
amendment
(LakeView RecPlex fees)
Ch. 242
06-05 2-6-2006 Parks and recreation
amendment
(IcePlex rental fees)
Ch. 242
06-06 2-6-2006 Parks and recreation
amendment
(park fees)
Ch. 242
06-20 5-15-2006 Board of Review amendment Ch. 18, Art. VI
06-24 6-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 348
06-25 6-5-2006 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 254
06-26 6-5-2006 Water amendment Ch. 355
06-27 6-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 348
§ DL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § DL-1
A500:1395
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-28 6-19-2006 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
(sidewalk construction and
repair)
Ch. 305
06-30 6-19-2006 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
06-32 7-5-2006 Impact fees amendment Ch. 181
06-35 7-17-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 348
06-38 9-5-2006 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
06-39 9-5-2006 Parks and recreation
amendment
(IcePlex rental cancellation
policy)
Ch. 242
06-45 9-18-2006 Parks and recreation
amendment
(contracted professional
skating instructors)
Ch. 242
06-57 11-20-2006 Parks and recreation
amendment (RecPlex program
rates)
Ch. 242
06-59 12-18-2006 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
06-60 12-18-2006 Towing amendment Ch. 332
06-65 12-18-2006 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 305
07-02 1-15-2007 Zoning Board of Appeals
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. V
07-03 1-15-2007 Fire and rescue protection
amendment
Ch. 180
07-04 2-5-2007 Police services Ch. 260
07-11 4-2-2007 Stormwater management and
stormwater drainage system
facilities
Repealed by
Ord. No. 16-16
07-14 4-16-2007 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
§ DL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § DL-1
A500:1396
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-15 4-16-2007 Lake Michigan Sewer Utility
District and Sewer Utility
District D amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
07-22 5-7-2007 Manufactured/mobile homes Ch. 221
07-26 5-21-2007 All-terrain vehicles amendment Ch. 344
07-27 6-18-2007 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 250
07-30 9-4-2007 Village Board amendment Ch. 98
07-31 8-20-2007 Sex offenders: residency
restrictions
Superseded by
Ord. No. 08-37
07-38 9-17-2007 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
07-41 10-1-2007 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
07-48 11-5-2007 Dog licensing and regulation
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 13-46
07-53 12-19-2007 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 250
08-01 1-7-2008 Fire and rescue protection
amendment
Ch. 180
08-06 2-4-2008 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 18
08-25 4-21-2008 Fire and rescue protection
amendment
Ch. 180
08-26 5-5-2008 Solid waste and recycling Ch. 292
08-31 5-19-2008 Moratorium on solid-fuelburning
outdoor heating
devices for 90 days
NCM
08-32 5-19-2008 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
08-37 6-19-2008 Sex offenders: residency
restrictions
Repealed by
Ord. No. 16-10
08-39 7-7-2008 Village Board amendment Ch. 98
08-40 7-21-2008 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 194
08-46 9-2-2008 Zoning Board of Appeals
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. V
§ DL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § DL-1
A500:1397
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
008-50 9-2-2008 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 305
08-54 10-20-2008 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 305
08-56 12-4-2008 Lake Michigan Sewer Utility
District and Sewer Utility
District D amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
08-57 12-4-2008 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
09-02 2-2-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 348
09-03 3-2-2009 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
09-04 3-2-2009 Water amendment Ch. 355
09-18 3-16-2009 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 194
09-27 5-18-2009 Stormwater management and
stormwater drainage system
facilities amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 16-16
09-28 5-18-2009 Storm sewers: illicit discharges
and connections
Ch. 297, Art. I
09-29 5-18-2009 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 305
09-32 5-18-2009 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 18
09-38 5-18-2009 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 18
09-39 5-18-2009 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
09-40 6-1-2009 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 214
09-41 7-20-2009 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 194
09-42 7-20-2009 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 254
09-43 7-20-2009 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 214
09-45 7-20-2009 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
§ DL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § DL-1
A500:1398
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
09-48 8-17-2009 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 194
09-50 9-8-2009 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 250
09-52 10-19-2009 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 18
09-53 10-19-2009 Fire and rescue protection
amendment
Ch. 180
09-54 10-19-2009 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
09-55 10-19-2009 Village Board amendment Ch. 98
09-57 11-16-2009 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 18
09-58 11-16-2009 Manufactured/mobile homes
amendment
Ch. 221
09-64 12-22-2009 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
10-01 1-18-2010 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
10-02 1-18-2010 Village Board amendment Ch. 98
10-03 1-18-2010 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 18
10-04 2-1-2010 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
10-14 3-15-2010 Animal control amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 119, Art. II
(superseded by
Ord. No. 13-46);
Ch. 420
10-25 4-5-2010 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 194
10-28 5-3-2010 Municipal facilities: rental of
Fire Station No. 2 training
room
Ch. 68, Art. II
10-30 5-17-2010 Peace and good order
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 250; Ch. 420
10-32 5-17-2010 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
§ DL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § DL-1
A500:1399
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-33 5-17-2010 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
10-34 5-17-2010 Cabarets repealer Ch. 139,
reference only
10-40 7-19-2010 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
10-52 9-20-2010 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 250
10-53 10-18-2010 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 250
10-54 10-4-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 348
10-55 10-18-2010 Annexations and land transfers
amendment
Ch. A495
10-18-2010 Land Transfer Ordinance No. 1 Ch. A495
11-01 2-21-2011 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
11-11 5-2-2011 Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility
and Lake Michigan Sewer
Utility District amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
11-12 5-2-2011 Junk dealers repealer Ch. 203,
reference only
11-13 5-2-2011 Drive-in theaters amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 16-18
11-14 5-2-2011 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 214
11-15 5-16-2011 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 18
11-16 6-20-2011 Water amendment Ch. 355
11-17 7-11-2011 Village Board amendment Ch. 98
11-20 8-15-2011 Fire and rescue protection
amendment
Ch. 180
11-21 8-15-2011 Fire and rescue protection
amendment
Ch. 180
11-22 8-15-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 348
11-31 10-24-2011 Secondhand article and
secondhand jewelry dealers
amendment
Ch. 246
11-33 11-7-2011 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 18
§ DL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § DL-1
A500:1400
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-37 12-19-2011 Village Board amendment Ch. 98
12-02 1-16-2012 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
12-09 2-6-2012 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 194
12-10 2-6-2012 Municipal facilities: rental of
Fire Station No. 2 training
room
Ch. 68, Art. II
12-11 2-6-2012 Contractors amendment Ch. 150
12-12 3-5-2012 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
12-13 4-2-2012 Social hosts Ch. 290
12-20 6-4-2012 Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility
and Lake Michigan Sewer
Utility District amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
12-21 6-4-2012 Water amendment Ch. 355
12-22 8-6-2012 Water amendment Ch. 355
12-23 8-6-2012 Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility
and Lake Michigan Sewer
Utility District amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
12-24 8-6-2012 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
12-30 9-4-2012 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 305
12-31 9-4-2012 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 250
12-41 11-19-2012 Budget and finance
amendment
Ch. 23
12-42 11-19-2012 Municipal Court amendment Ch. 30
12-43 12-3-2012 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
12-44 12-17-2012 Fire and rescue protection
amendment
Ch. 180
13-02 1-7-2013 Escorts and escort services Ch. 170
13-03 1-7-2013 General provisions:
construction and penalties
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
§ DL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § DL-1
A500:1401
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-04 1-7-2013 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 214
1-21-2013 Land Transfer Ordinance No. 2 Ch. A495
13-14 5-6-2013 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
13-30 7-15-2013 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
13-32 8-5-2013 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
13-33 8-5-2013 Weights and measures
amendment
Ch. 360
13-34 8-5-2013 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 214
13-35 8-5-2013 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
13-42 9-16-2013 Clean Water Utility amendment Ch. 148
13-43 9-16-2013 Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility
and Lake Michigan Sewer
Utility District amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
13-44 9-16-2013 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
13-46 10-7-2013 Animals Ch. 119
13-47 10-7-2013 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 250
13-49 10-7-2013 Fire and rescue protection
amendment
Ch. 180
13-52 11-4-2013 Christmas trees amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 16-19
13-53 11-4-2012 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 214
13-54 12-2-2013 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
13-55 12-2-2013 Fire and rescue protection
amendment
Ch. 180
14-01 3-17-2014 Storm sewers: illicit discharges
and connections amendment
Ch. 297, Art. I
14-15 6-16-2014 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
§ DL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § DL-1
A500:1402
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-24 8-4-2014 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 250
14-25 8-4-2014 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 250
14-32 10-20-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 348
14-34 12-15-2014 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
14-35 12-15-2014 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
15-10 3-2-2015 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 75
15-11 3-16-2015 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 75
15-17 5-18-2015 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 194
15-18 5-18-2015 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 214
15-19 5-18-2015 Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility
and Lake Michigan Sewer
Utility District amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
15-20 6-1-2015 Municipal Court amendment Ch. 15-20
15-25 7-20-2015 Fire and rescue protection
amendment
Ch. 180
15-26 7-20-2015 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 250
15-27 8-3-2015 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 194
15-28 8-3-2015 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 18
15-29 8-3-2015 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 305
15-35 10-5-2015 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
15-39 11-2-2015 Village Board Ch. 98
15-40 11-2-2015 Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility
and Lake Michigan Sewer
Utility District amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
§ DL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § DL-1
A500:1403
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-41 11-2-2015 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 250
15-48 12-21-2015 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 305
15-49 12-21-2015 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
16-07 3-7-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 348
16-10 4-18-2016 Sex offenders Repealed by
Ord. No. 16-27
16-16 6-6-2016 Stormwater management and
stormwater drainage system
facilities
Ch. 298
16-18 6-20-2016 Drive-in theaters repealer Ch. 326,
reference only
16-19 6-20-2016 Christmas trees repealer Ch. 146,
reference only
16-20 6-20-2016 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 214
16-21 6-20-2016 Village Board amendment Ch. 98
16-25 6-20-2016 Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility
and Lake Michigan Sewer
Utility District amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
16-27 9-6-2016 Sex offenders Ch. 287
16-31 9-19-2016 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 292
16-41 11-21-2016 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 214
16-44 12-5-2016 Fire and rescue protection
amendment
Ch. 180
16-46 12-19-2016 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
17-05 1-16-2017 Pleasant Prairie Sewer Utility
and Lake Michigan Sewer
Utility District amendment
Ch. 285, Art. II
17-21 4-24-2017 Municipal Court Ch. 30
17-22 4-24-2017 Officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 75
17-25 6-19-2017 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 214
§ DL-1 PLEASANT PRAIRIE CODE § DL-1
A500:1404
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-35 7-17-2017 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 250
17-40 9-18-2017 Sex offenders: residency and
activity restrictions
amendment
Ch. 287, Art. I
17-46 9-18-2017 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 242
17-59 11-6-2017 Taxation amendment Ch. 320
17-60 11-20-2017 Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages
amendment
Ch. 194
17-70 12-18-2017 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment
Ch. 18
18-01 1-15-2018 Boards, Commissions and
Committees Amendment
Ch. 18
18-32 Number not
used
18-33 Number not
used
18-34 8-20-2018 Water Amendment Ch. 355
18-39 8-20-2018 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 305
18-42 9-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 348
18-43 9-17-2018 Taxation Amendment Ch. 320
18-45A 11-19-2018 Licenses and Permits
Amendment
Ch. 214
18-50 12-17-2018 Village Board Amendment Ch. 98
19-08 5-6-2019 Nuisances: Abandoned
Vehicles, Junk and Debris
Amendment
Ch. 234, Art. II
19-09 6-3-2019 Emergency Management
Amendment
Ch. 165
§ DL-1 CHARTER ORDINANCES § DL-1
A500:1405