VILLAGE OF PADDOCK LAKE
CODE OF ORDINANCES
VOLUME 1
Published by Authority of the Village Board of Trustees
of the
Village of Paddock Lake, Wisconsin
Prepared by:
DAVISON, MULLIGAN & SCHILTZ, LTD.
June 1993
VILLAGE OF PADDOCK LAKE
CODE OF ORDINANCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.01 Paddock Lake Village Code
1.02 Definitions
1.03 Repeal of Ordinances
1.04 Ordinances Repealed Not Reenacted
1.05 Jurisdiction
1.06 Responsibility for Acts
1.07 Penalties
1.08 Severability of Provisions
1.09 Copies on File
1.10 Municipal Court Costs Upon Conviction
Chapter 2: VILLAGE BOARD
2.01 Members
2.02 Meetings of the Village Board
2.03 Conduct of Meetings
2.04 Ordinances and Resolutions
2.05 Rules and Order
2.06 Committees
2.07 Emergency Situations
Chapter 3: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATION
3.01 Registration of Voters
3.02 Opening and Closing of Polls; Staffing of Polls
3.03 Election Board
3.04 Nonpartisan Primary
3.05 Terms of the Office of Village Clerk/Treasurer
3.06 Appointed Officials
3.07 Municipal Court
3.08 REPEALED
3.09 Weed Commissioner
3.10 Regulation of Village Officers
3.11 Travel Expenses, Per Diem
3.12 Plan Commission (ALSO FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
3.13 Joint Action Emergency Government
3.14 Public Records
3.125 Recycling Commission
3.15 Tree Commission
3.16 Abolition of the Offices of Village Constable and
Village Marshall and the Contracting for Police
Services
3.17 Board of Review
3.18 Office of Village Administrator
3.19 Fire Inspections and Prevention
Chapter 4: VILLAGE FINANCES
4.01 Installment Payment of Taxes
4.02 Disbursement from Treasury
4.03 Preparation of Tax Roll and Tax Receipts
4.04 Liability for Clerk/Treasurer
4.05 Claims Against the Village
4.06 Preparation and Adoption of Annual Budget
4.07 Special Assessments (ALSO FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
4.08 Licenses and Permits Withheld for Non-Payment of
Charges, Fees or Personal Taxes
Chapter 5: RECYCLING
5.01 Title
5.02 Purpose
5.03 Statutory Authority
5.04 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
5.05 Interpretation
5.06 Severability
5.07 Applicability
5.08 Administration
5.09 Effective Date
5.10 Definitions
5.11 Separation of Recyclable Materials
5.12 Separation Requirements Exempted
5.13 Care of Separated Recyclable Materials
5.14 Management of Lead Acid Batteries, Major
Appliances, Waste Oil and Yard Waste
5.15 Preparation and Collection of Recyclable Materials
5.16 Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of
Multiple-Family Dwellings
5.17 Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of
Non-Residential Facilities and Properties
5.18 Prohibitions on Disposal of Recyclable Materials
Separated for Recycling
5.185 Contractor Permit for Contractor Yard Waste
5.186 Placement of Curbside Garbage/Recycling
5.19 Enforcement
5.20 Billing Practices for Collection of Curbside
Garbage/Recycling
5.21 Illegal Dumping
Chapter 6: STREETS (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 7: MUNICIPAL UTILITIES (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 8: PLUMBING REGULATIONS (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 9: BUILDING PERMIT AND STREET FEES (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 10: VILLAGE TREE COMMISSION (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 11: ROAD NAMING AND BUILDING NUMBERING
11.01 Regulation of Road Naming and Building Number
11.02 Road Naming
11.03 Road Name Signs
11.04 Building Numbering
11.05 Building Numbering Signs
11.06 Damage to Signs
Chapter 12: ZONING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 13: SWIMMING POOLS (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 14: FENCES (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 15: REGULATION OF PADDOCK LAKE
15.01 Intent
15.02 Applicability and Enforcement
15.03 State Boating and Water Safety Laws Adopted
15.04 Weed Harvester
15.05 Definitions
15.06 Speed and Operating Restrictions
15.07 Capacity Restrictions
15.08 Buoys, Piers and Rafts
15.09 Swimming Regulations
15.10 Towing Water Devices
15.11 Littering Waterways Prohibited
15.12 Races, Regattas, Sporting Events and Exhibitions
15.13 Driving Automobiles or Other Vehicles on the Ice
15.14 Senior Citizens Park Restrictions
15.15 Use of Paddock Lake Boat Launch
15.16 Restrictions and Use at Paddock Lake Boat Launch
15.17 Penalties
Chapter 16: REGULATION OF HOOKER LAKE
16.01 Intent
16.02 Applicability and Enforcement
16.03 State Boating and Water Safety Laws Adopted
16.04 Definitions
16.05 Speed Restrictions
16.06 Capacity Restrictions
16.07 Buoys, Piers and Rafts
16.08 Swimming Regulations
16.09 Water Skiing
16.10 Littering Waterways Prohibited
16.11 Races, Regattas, Sporting Events and Exhibitions
16.12 Driving Automobiles or Other Vehicles on the Ice
16.13 Penalties
16.14 Jurisdiction
16.15 Use of Hooker Lake Boat Launch
Chapter 17: ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
17.01 Lawn Fertilizer Application Control
17.02 Animals, Birds and Fowl
17.03 Penalties
Chapter 18: NUISANCES
18.01 Public Nuisances Prohibited
18.02 Definitions
18.03 REPEALED
18.04 Cost of Abatement
18.05 Weeds
18.06 Vehicles-Nuisances-Repair Work
18.07 (repealed by Ordinance #272, 9/19/84)
18.08 Junk or Debris Accumulation
Chapter 19: ANIMALS, BIRDS AND FOWL
19.01 Definitions
19.02 Dogs
19.03 Limitation on Number of Dogs and Cats per
Residentially Zoned Premises
19.04 Maintenance of Sanitary Conditions
19.05 Kennels and Pet Shops
19.06 Certain Animals Prohibited; Fowls Regulated
19.07 Dangerous Exotic Animals
19.08 Vietnamese Potbellied Pig License
19.09 Cruelty to Animals
19.10 Trapping
19.11 Rabies Control
19.12 Vicious Animals
19.13 Enforcement of This Chapter and Certain State
Statutes
19.14 Penalties
Chapter 20: BUSINESS LICENSES AND PERMITS
20.01 Licenses and Permits Required
20.02 Application
20.03 Payment of Fee
20.04 Bond and Insurance
20.05 Approval or Denial of Licenses
20.06 Certificates
20.07 License and Permit Term
20.08 Exhibition of Certificate
20.09 Transfer
20.10 Renewal
20.11 Revocation
20.12 Hearings
20.13 Inspections
Chapter 21: DIRECT SELLERS
21.01 Registration Required
21.02 Definitions
21.03 Exemptions
21.04 Registration
21.05 Investigation
21.06 Appeal
21.07 Regulation of Direct Sellers
21.08 Records
21.09 Revocation of Registration
21.10 Penalty
Chapter 22: LIQUOR AND BEER LICENSES
22.01 Licensing and Regulation of Sale and Consumption
of Alcohol Beverages
22.02 Provisional Operator's License
22.03 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
22.04 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
22.05 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
22.06 Restriction on Sale and Consumption
22.07 Penalties
Chapter 23: CABARETS
23.01 License Required and Scope of License
23.02 Probationary Cabaret License
23.03 Regular License
23.04 Renewals
23.05 Regulations
23.06 Revocation of License
23.07 Penalty
Chapter 24: AMUSEMENT MACHINES AND CIGARETTES
24.01 Amusement Machines
24.02 Sale of Cigarettes
24.03 Possession and Consumption of Tobacco Products by
Minors
Chapter 25: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY & MORALS
25.01 Disorderly Conduct
25.02 Weapons
25.03 Firearms
25.04 Fireworks
25.045 Repealed
25.05 Littering
25.06 Barbed Wire Fences
25.07 Noise
25.08 Damaging Property
25.09 Regulation of Fires
25.10 Pollution
25.11 Loitering and Obstructing Streets
25.12 Gambling, Lotteries, Fraudulent Devices
25.13 Curfew
25.14 Intoxicating Beverages in Public Places
25.145 Alcohol Beverages
25.15 Possession of Liquor on School Grounds Prohibited
25.16 Possession of Marijuana
25.17 Concession Permits, Public Places
25.18 Assembly in Public Places - Permit
25.19 Park and Bench Regulations
25.20 Shoplifting
25.21 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
25.22 Trespass to Land
25.23 Trespass to Dwellings
25.24 Entry of Locked Vehicles
25.25 Toxic Inhalants
25.26 Penalties
25.27 Obscene Material
25.28 Drug Paraphernalia
25.29 "Look-alike" Controlled Substances
25.30 Skateboards
25.31 Scrap Salvage, Garbage & Refuse Collectors
25.32 Municipal Truancy Ordinance
25.325 Non-Habitual Truancy
25.33 Restrictions on the Sale of Spray Paint and Marker
Pens to Minors
25.34 Children's Code Adopted
25.35 Prohibition of Erotic Dancing in Licensed
Establishment
25.36 Synthetic Marijuana and Related Compounds
25.37 Synthetic Bath Salts and Related Compounds
Chapter 26: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
26.01 State Laws Adopted
26.02 Parking Regulations
26.03 Speed Limits and Speed Zoning Declaration
26.04 Traffic Signs
26.05 Weight Limits and Traffic Routes
26.06 Accident Reports
26.07 Erection of Traffic Signs and Signals
26.08 Regulation of Traffic on School Property
26.09 Penalty and Forfeiture
26.10 Schedule of Cash Bail or Deposits for Traffic
Violations
26.11 Mopeds, Motorcycles, Etc.
26.12 Non-Moving Violation and Registration Program
26.13 Prohibited Operation of Motor-Driven Vehicles
Chapter 27: SNOWMOBILES
27.01 State Snowmobile Laws Adopted
27.02 Operation Regulations
27.03 Snowmobile Renters
27.04 Penalties
27.05 Enforcement
Chapter 28: BICYCLES AND BICYCLE LANES
28.01 Definitions
28.02 State Statutes Adopted
28.03 Additional Rules for Operation of Bicycles
28.04 Registration on Sale of Bicycle
28.05 Report on Sale of Bicycle
28.06 Bicycle Lanes Established
28.07 Penalties
Chapter 29: ANNEXATION (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 30: CABLE TELEVISION
30.01 Purposes
30.02 Definitions
30.03 Grant of Authority
30.04 Franchise Conditions
30.05 Subscriber Fees and Records
30.06 System Operations
30.07 General Provisions
Chapter 31: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 32: FAIR HOUSING
32.01 Declaration of Policy
32.02 Definitions
32.03 Prohibited Acts
32.04 Acts Not Prohibited
32.05 Administration and Enforcement
32.06 Penalties
32.07 Severability
Chapter 33: BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD PRONE AREAS
(FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 34: SEXUAL OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS.
34.01 Background & Purpose
34.02 Residency and Activity Restrictions
34.03 Definitions
34.04 Sexual Offender and Sexual Predator Residence
Prohibitions; Exceptions
34.05 Sexual Offender and Sexual Predator Prohibited
Activity Restrictions
34.06 Property Owners Prohibited from Renting Real
Property to Certain Offenders and Sexual
Predators; Notification Requirements
34.07 Exception for Placements under Chapter 980 of the
Wisconsin Statutes
34.08 Severability
34.09 Injunction
34.10 Penalties
34.11 Continuation
Chapter 35: INTERIM ZONING IN EXTRATERRITORIAL AREAS
(FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 36: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
(FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 37: ORDINANCE NO. 382 SUPPLEMENTING ORDINANCE NO. 70-
(1967); AUTHORIZING THE ISSUANCE AND AWARDING THE SALE OF
$1,500,000 SEWAGE REVENUE REFUNDING BONDS AND PROVIDING FOR THE
PAYMENT OF SUCH BONDS AND OTHER DETAILS AND COVENANTS WITH
RESPECT THERETO
Chapter 38: LAND DIVISION (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 39: AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT OF 1990
39.01 Declaration of Policy
39.02 Definitions
39.03 Grievance Procedure
39.04 Nature of Remedies: Non-Exclusive Jurisdiction
Chapter 41: FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 42: FORESTRY MANAGEMENT (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 43: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 44: GOLF CARTS (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
SEWRPC COMMUNITY ASSISTANCE REPORT NO. 145 (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY REPORT (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
COMPREHENSIVE BUILDING CODE (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
BOND SCHEDULE (FOUND IN VOLUME 2)
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.01 Paddock Lake Village
1.02 Definitions
1.03 Repeal of Ordinances
1.04 Ordinances Repealed Not Reenacted
1.05 Jurisdiction
1.06 Responsibility for Acts
1.07 Penalties
1.08 Severability of Provisions
1.09 Copies on File
1.10 Municipal Court Costs Upon Conviction
1.01 PADDOCK LAKE VILLAGE CODE.
(a) Title. This Code of Ordinance shall be known and
cited as the Paddock Lake Village Code.
(b) Amendments. Any additions or amendments to this
Code are incorporated in this Code so that a reference to the
Paddock Lake Village Code includes such additions and amendments.
(c) Numbering of Sections. Each section number of
this Code shall consist of two component parts separated by a
period. The figure before the period refers to the chapter
number and the figure after the period refers to the section
within the chapter.
(d) Numbering Additions. The decimal system shall be
used for all additions or amendments to this Code. When a
chapter or section is to be added, the new chapter or section
shall be given a decimal character.
1.02 DEFINITIONS
(a) Terms used in this Code, unless specifically
defined in this Code, have the meanings prescribed by the
Wisconsin Statutes for the same terms.
(b) Terms used in this Code have the following
meanings:
(1) "Village": Village of Paddock Lake, Kenosha
County, Wisconsin
(2) "County": Kenosha County
(3) "State": State of Wisconsin
(4) "Village Board" or "Board of Trustees": The
Village Board of Trustees of the Village of
Paddock Lake. Similarly, the title of any other
official, board or commission shall refer to such
official, board or commission of the Village of
Paddock Lake unless otherwise stated.
(5) "Ordinances": The ordinances of the Village
of Paddock Lake and all amendments thereto,
including this Code.
(6) "This Code": The Paddock Lake Village Code.
(7) "Wisconsin Statutes": Any Wisconsin Statute
referred to by this Code shall refer to the latest
published edition of the Wisconsin Statutes and
any renumeration of, or amendments to, such
statute.
(8) "Person": Any individual, firm, partnership,
corporation, company, association, club, joint
adventure, estate, trust or any group or
combination acting as a unit and the individuals
constituting such group or unit; and the plural as
well as the singular number; and the masculine
gender includes the feminine and neuter genders,
unless the intention to give more limited meaning
is disclosed by the context. As applied to
partnerships, the word "person" includes the
members of the partnership; as applied to
corporations it includes the officers, agents or
employees responsible for the act referred to.
1.03 REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.
(a) All public and general ordinances or parts thereof
not included in this Code are repealed except ordinances granting
franchises or rights to corporations, and extensions and
limitations of such rights, and ordinances establishing the grade
of streets, and ordinances annexing territory to the Village, and
ordinances making appropriations for public expenditures, and
ordinances establishing, naming, altering, widening, contracting
or vacating streets, or establishing the width thereof, and
ordinances establishing salaries of Village officers and
employees, and ordinances authorizing the issuance of bonds.
(b) The provisions of this Code, so far as they are
the same in substance as those of existing ordinances, are
continuations of such ordinances and not new enactments. Any act
done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired,
or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to
the time of this repeal are not affected by this repeal, but may
be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully
and to the same extent as if such repeal had not been effected.
1.04 ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED.
No ordinance or part of any ordinance repealed shall be
considered reordained or reenacted by virtue of this Code, unless
specifically reenacted. The repeal of any curative or validating
ordinance does not impair or affect any cure or validation
already affected thereby.
1.05 JURISDICTION.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, this Code
applies to acts performed within the corporate limits of the
Village of Paddock Lake. Provisions of this Code also apply to
acts performed outside the corporate limits and up to the limits
prescribed by law, where the law confers power on the Village to
regulate such particular acts outside the corporate limits.
1.06 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS.
Every person concerned in the commission of an act
prohibited by this Code, whether he directly commits the act, or
counsels, aids, or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted
and, on conviction, is punishable as if he had directly committed
such act.
1.07 PENALTIES.
(a) Standard Penalty. Unless another penalty is
expressly provided by this Code for any particular provision,
section, or chapter, any person violating any provision of this
Code, or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance
thereof, or any provision of any code adopted herein by reference
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than $1.00 or more than $500 and the costs of prosecution for
each violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and
costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail or the County House
of Correction until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are
paid, such imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
(b) Each Day a Violation. Each act of violation and
every day upon which a violation occurs or exists constitutes a
separate offense.
(c) Amendments. In case of any amendment of, or
addition to, any section or chapter of this Code, the penalty
provided for the violation of such section or chapter shall also
relate to the amendment or addition, whether reenacted in the
amendatory ordinance or not, unless such penalty is specifically
repealed or amended therein.
(d) Reference to Sections. Reference to any section
of this Code shall be understood to also refer to and include the
penalty section relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
(e) Failure of Officers to Perform Duties. The
failure of any officer or employee of the Village to perform any
official duty imposed by this Code shall not subject such officer
or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of this Code,
unless a penalty is specifically provided.
1.08 SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause and provision
of this Code is severable, and if any provision is held
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall
not affect the remainder of this Code, nor any part thereof other
than that affected by such decision.
1.09 COPIES ON FILE.
Copies of this Code shall be kept on file and open to
public inspection in the office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer.
1.10 MUNICIPAL COURT COSTS UPON CONVICTION.
Upon conviction of a violation of any provision of this
Code, or any statute or administrative rule adopted in connection
therewith or by reference herein, municipal court costs shall be
imposed in the sum of Thirty-eight ($38.00) Dollars for each such
violation, in addition to any fine, penalties or other sanction
imposed by the court for such violation(s).
Chapter 3
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATION
3.01 Registration of Voters
3.02 Opening and Closing of Polls; Staffing of
Polls
3.03 Election Board
3.04 Nonpartisan Primary
3.05 Terms of the Office of Village
Clerk/Treasurer
3.06 Appointed Officials
3.07 Municipal Court
3.08 REPEALED
3.09 REPEALED
3.10 Regulation of Village Officers
3.11 Travel Expenses, Per Diem
3.12 Plan Commission
3.13 Joint Action Emergency Government
3.14 Public Records
3.125 Recycling Commission
3.15 Tree Commission
3.16 Abolition of the Offices of Village Constable
and Village Marshall and the Contracting
for Police Services
3.17 Board of Review
3.18 Office of Village Administrator
3.19 Fire Inspections and Prevention
3.01 REGISTRATION OF VOTERS.
Pursuant to the authority of Section 6.28(1) Wisconsin
Statutes, every voter is required to register by 5 p.m. on the
2nd Wednesday preceding any election. The process and procedure
of registration and voting shall be controlled and shall be
carried out pursuant to Sections 6.26 and 6.95 inclusive,
Wisconsin Statutes, and the said statutes are incorporated herein
by reference, as if set forth in full.
3.02 OPENING AND CLOSING OF POLLS; STAFFING OF POLLS.
(a) The polls at all general elections in the Village
of Paddock Lake shall be opened at 7:00 a.m. and closed at 8:00
p.m.
(b) At every primary and general election, there shall
be, pursuant to state statutes, not less than three (3) nor more
than seven (7) poll workers who shall be appointed by the Village
Clerk/Treasurer. Prior to each primary or general election, the
Village Clerk/Treasurer shall determine the number of poll
workers which shall be necessary to work at such election and
make arrangements to have such poll workers present at the polls.
Individual poll workers may be present either for the entire
duration of time which the polls are opened as specified in
subsection (a), above, or may be present only for a portion of
such hours that the polls are open, so long as the total number
of poll workers who are present at the polls never falls below
the number required to be present at the polls, as determined by
the Village Clerk/Treasurer.
3.03 ELECTION BOARD.
The Election Board of the Village shall be composed of
seven members and shall be governed by the Wisconsin Statutes
pertaining thereto.
3.04 NONPARTISAN PRIMARY.
(a) This section is adopted in accordance with
Sections 8.05 and 66.01 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
It is hereby provided that candidates for elective
Village offices shall be nominated by a nonpartisan primary to be
held four weeks before the spring election. Nomination papers
shall be signed by not less than 3 percent of the number of
electors voting in the Village for governor at the last preceding
general election, but not less than 15 voters, and shall be filed
with the Village Clerk/Treasurer not less than 20 days before
such primary, not later than 5:00 p.m. on said last day. No
additional candidates may be nominated for such offices by the
other methods provided in the subsections of Section 8.05 of the
Wisconsin Statutes. It is further provided that if the number of
candidates for any elective Village office does not exceed double
the number to be elected for such office, no primary shall be
held for such office, and the names of such candidates shall be
printed upon the official ballot for the ensuing election.
3.05 TERM OF THE OFFICE OF VILLAGE CLERK/TREASURER.
The statutory offices of Village Clerk and Village
Treasurer shall be combined pursuant to Sections 61.195, 61.197
and 66.0101 of the Wisconsin Statutes and shall be subject to the
terms of Section 3.06 of these ordinances, stated below. At
least annually, the books and records of accounts maintained by
the Clerk/Treasurer shall be audited by the Village Auditor.
3.06 APPOINTED OFFICIALS.
(a) The Village officials set forth shall be appointed
at the first regular meeting of the Village Board in May of odd
numbered years by the Village President, subject to confirmation
by a majority of the members of the Village Board:
(1) Attorney
(2) Director of Emergency Government
(3) Building Inspector
(4) Deputy Building Inspector
(5) Humane Officer
(6) Clerk/Treasurer
(b) All other officers and employees shall be
appointed as needed by the Village President subject to
confirmation by the Village Board.
(c) The terms of office of each official appointed
under subsection (a), above, shall be two (2) years. All terms
shall commence upon appointment. All other appointments shall be
for the term corresponding to the office.
(d) Pursuant to Section 61.197(f) of the Wisconsin
Statutes, as may be amended from time to time, a corporation or
an independent contractor may be appointed as Village Assessor
who shall furnish appraisal and assessment services to the
Village by contract. The term, conditions and compensation of
such independent contractor shall be determined by a majority
vote of the Village Board.
3.07 MUNICIPAL COURT.
(a) Created. Pursuant to the authority granted by
Chapter 755, Wisconsin Statutes, there is hereby created a
Municipal Court for the Village of Paddock Lake.
(b) Justice. There is hereby created a Municipal
Justice of the Municipal Court.
(c) Election; Term. The Municipal Justice shall be
elected at large at the spring election of an odd-numbered year
for a term of four (4) years commencing May 1 succeeding his
election.
(d) Bond; Oath. The Municipal Justice and the
Municipal Court Clerk shall execute and file with the Clerk of
the Circuit Court for Kenosha County the oath prescribed by Sec.
757.02 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and a bond in the penal sum of
$1,000. No salary shall be paid to the Justice for any time
during his term for a which he has not executed and filed his
official oath and bond.
(e) Jurisdiction. The Municipal Justice shall have
such jurisdiction as provided in Section 755.045 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and exclusive jurisdiction of violations of Village
ordinances.
(f) Title, Court Hours. The court of the Municipal
Justice shall be called the "Municipal Court for the Village of
Paddock Lake, Wisconsin," and shall be in session at such times
as the court shall deem necessary.
(g) Municipal Court Clerk; Deputies. The Municipal
Justice shall appoint a Municipal Court Clerk and such Deputy
Clerk or Clerks as are deemed necessary to discharge the
functions of the Municipal Court. Compensation of the Municipal
Court Clerk and/or Deputy Clerks shall be established from time
to time by the Village Board, taking into consideration the
functions and duties of such positions.
(h) Location. The Municipal Justice shall keep his or
her office and hold court in the Village Hall.
(i) Procedure. The procedure in Municipal Court shall
be as provided by law including, but not limited, to Chapters 755
and 800 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(j) Receipts, Disposition. The Municipal Court Clerk
shall collect all forfeitures and costs in any action or
proceeding before him and shall pay over such monies to the
Village Clerk/Treasurer not later than the seventh day after the
last day of the month in which received.
(k) Deferred Payment of Forfeiture. Except as may be
otherwise provided by Statute, the Municipal Judge may, after
good cause shown, pursuant to a poverty hearing under Wisconsin
Act 17 defer payment of a forfeiture, penalty and costs for a
period not to exceed sixty days or may allow a defendant to pay
his or her forfeiture in installments as may be determined by the
Municipal Judge.
(l) Contempt Powers of Municipal Judge. The municipal
judge may impose a sanction authorized under Section 800.12(2),
Stats., for contempt of court, as defined in Section 785.01(1),
Stats., in accordance with the procedures under Section 785.03,
Stats.
(m) Dispositional Orders in Juvenile Cases. Pursuant
to §938.17(2)(cm), Wis. Stats., for a juvenile adjudicated to
have violated a municipal ordinance, the Municipal Judge may
impose any of the dispositions enumerated in §938.343 and
§938.344, Wis. Stats., as may be amended or renumbered from time
to time, which statutory provisions are hereby incorporated by
reference.
(n) Violations of Dispositional Orders in Juvenile
Cases. Pursuant to §938.17(2)(cm), Wis. Stats., for a juvenile
adjudicated to have violated a municipal ordinance who, following
the entry of a dispositional order in such case, violates a
condition of such dispositional order of the municipal order of
the Municipal Judge imposed under §938.343 and/or §938.44, Wis.
Stats., the Municipal Judge is authorized to impose any of the
sanctions enumerated in §938.355(6)(d), Wis. Stats., as may be
amended or renumbered from time to time, which statutory
provision is hereby incorporated by reference.
3.08 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. (Repealed by Ordinance #554,
4/20/05)
3.09 REPEALED by Ordinance #10-03, 3/17/10
3.10 REGULATION OF VILLAGE OFFICERS.
(a) Effect. The provisions of this section shall
apply to all officers of the Village, regardless of the time of
creation of the office or selection of the officer unless
otherwise specifically provided by ordinance or resolution of the
Village Board.
(b) Oath of Office. Every officer of the Village,
including members of the village boards and commissions, shall
before entering upon his duties and within 5 days of his/her
election of appointment or notice thereof take the oath of office
prescribed by law an file said oath in the office of the Village
Clerk/Treasurer, except the Village Clerk/Treasurer who shall
file his/her oath in the office of the Village President. Any
person re-elected or re-appointed to the name office shall take
and file an official oath for each term of service.
(c) Bond. Every officer shall, if required by law or
the Village Board, upon entering upon the duties of his office,
give a bond in such amount as may be determined by the Village
Board with such sureties as are approved by the Village
President, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of his office. Official bonds shall be filed as are oaths
as provided in subsection (b) of this section.
(d) Salaries. Members of the Village Board and other
elected officers shall be paid salaries as follows:
(1) The President of the Village Board shall
receive the sum of Six Thousand and no/100
($6,000.00) Dollars per year.
(2) Trustees shall receive a salary of Three
Thousand and no/100 ($3,000.00) Dollars per year.
(3) (Repealed by Ordinance No. 554, 4/20/05)
(4) (Repealed by Ordinance No. 554, 4/20/05)
(5) The Municipal Justice shall receive a salary
of Six Thousand and no/100 ($6,000.00) Dollars per
year effective January 1, 2017.
(e) Vacancies. Vacancies in elective offices shall be
filled by appointment by a majority vote of the Village Board for
the remainder of the unexpired term. Vacancies in appointive
offices shall be filed in the same manner as the original
appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term unless the
term for such office is indefinite.
3.11 TRAVEL EXPENSES, PER DIEM.
On all trips authorized or approved by the Village
Board, officers and employees shall be reimbursed for expenses
actually incurred in accordance with written guidelines therefore
established by the standing committee for finance of the Village
Board, as may be revised from time to time, including all meals
and room charges therefore unless disapproved by the Board of
Trustees, shall receive a per mile car allowance equal to that
allowed by the Internal Revenue Service at the time of incurrence
and shall receive a per diem allowance of Twenty ($20.00) Dollars
for the first four (4) hours and Three ($3.00) Dollars per hour
thereafter. Per diem allowances shall not be paid for hourly
employees who receive their regular wage while on Village
business.
3.12 PLAN COMMISSION.
(a) Members. That the Village Plan Commission shall
consist of seven (7) members as follows: the Village President,
who shall be its presiding officer; a Trustee; and five (5)
citizens. Citizen members shall be persons of recognized
experience and qualification. In addition, an alternate to the
Village Plan Commission may be appointed pursuant to subsection
(b), below, who shall serve at the call of the presiding officer
in the event that one or more regular members of the Commission
are unable to attend a regular or special meeting of the
Commission.
(b) Appointments. The Trustee member of the
Commission shall be elected by a 2/3 vote of the Village Board
upon creation of the commission and during each April thereafter.
Three citizen members shall be appointed by the Village President
upon creation of the commission to hold office for a period
ending one (1), two (2) and three (3) years respectively from the
succeeding first day of May, and thereafter annually during April
one such member shall be appointed for a term of 3 years. The
additional citizen member who shall be appointed by the Village
President, shall be first appointed to hold office for a period
ending one year from the succeeding first day of May and
thereafter annually during April. Whenever a Park Board is
created, the President of such board shall succeed to a place on
the Commission when the term of such additional citizen member
shall expire.
(c) Meetings. The regular meeting date for such Plan
Commission shall be the first Monday of each and every month and
shall meet at such other times as may be necessary to conduct the
business of the commission. A special meeting of the Commission
may be called by the presiding officer upon 24 hours notice to
each of the Commissioners. Such notice shall specify the time,
place and subject matter of the special meeting, and such special
meeting shall be called only in the event that the matter to be
considered is of such urgency that delay for a regular meeting
would be harmful to the best interest of the Village.
(d) Compensation. No member of the Plan Commission
attending either a regular or special meeting shall receive any
compensation for attendance at such a meeting. The foregoing
notwithstanding, upon motion of the Village Board, any and all
members of the Plan Commission may be reimbursed for
extraordinary out-of-pocket costs incurred in connection with
their service to the Village.
3.13 JOINT ACTION EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT.
Pursuant to §166.03(4) Wis. Stats., the Village hereby
adopts the program for "Joint Action Emergency Government",
Chapter 5 of the Municipal Code of Kenosha County as revised in
July, 1981. A copy of such program shall be kept on file with
the Village Clerk/Treasurer.
3.14 PUBLIC RECORDS.
(a) Definitions.
(1) "Authority" means any of the following
Village entities having custody of a Village
record: an office, elected official, agency,
board, commission, municipal court, committee,
counsel, department or other authority as
enumerated in Section 19.32(1) of the Wisconsin
Statutes or public body corporate and politic
created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or
order; or a formally constituted sub-unit of the
foregoing.
(2) "Custodian" means that officer, department
head, division head, or employee of the Village
designated under sub-paragraph (c) below, or
otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve
any Village records or file, deposit or keep such
records in his or her office, or is lawfully in
possession or entitled to possession of such
public records and who is required by this section
to respond to requests for access to such records.
(3) "Record" means any material on which written,
drawn, printed, spoken, visual, or electromagnetic
information is recorded or preserved, regardless
of physical form or characteristics, which has
been created or his being kept by an authority.
"Record includes, but is not limited to
handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts,
photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including
computer tapes), and computer printouts. "Record"
does not include drafts, notes, preliminary
computations and like materials prepared for the
originator's personal use or prepared by the
originator in the name of a person for whom the
originator is working; materials which are purely
the personal property of the custodian and have no
relations to his or her office; materials to which
access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest;
and published materials in the possession of an
authority other than a public library which are
available for sale, or which are available for
inspection at a public library.
(b) Duty to Maintain Records.
(1) Except as provided under sub-paragraph (g),
below, each officer and employee of the Village
shall safely keep all records received from their
predecessors. They shall also safely keep all
records required by law to be filed, deposited or
kept in their office or which are in the lawful
possession or control of their office.
(2) Upon the expiration of one's term of office
or employment, or whenever the office or position
of employment becomes vacant, each such officer or
employee shall deliver to his or her successor all
records then in his or her custody. The successor
shall then give a receipt to the officer or
employee, who shall file the receipt with the
Village Clerk/Treasurer. If a vacancy occurs
before a successor is selected or qualifies, such
records shall be delivered to the Village
Clerk/Treasurer.
(c) Legal Custodian.
(1) The Village Clerk/Treasurer, or the Deputy
Clerk/Treasurer in the Village Clerk/Treasurer's
absence, shall be the legal custodian of all
Village records.
(2) The legal custodian shall have full legal
power to render decisions and to carry out the
duties of an authority pursuant to Section 19.33
of the Wis. Statutes, and this section.
(d) Public Access to Records.
(1) Except as provided in sub-paragraph (f),
below, any person has a right to inspect a record
and to make or receive a copy of any record as
provided in Section 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
(2) Records will be available for inspection and
copying during all regular office hours.
(3) If regular office hours are not maintained at
the location where records are kept, the records
will be available for inspection and copying upon
48 hours notice.
(4) A requester shall be permitted to use
facilities comparable to those available to
Village employees to inspect, copy or abstract a
record, pursuant to Section 19.35(2), Wis. Stats.
(5) The legal custodian may require supervision
during inspection and may impose other reasonable
restrictions on the manner of access to an
original record if the record is irreplaceable or
easily damaged.
(6) A requester shall be charged a fee to defray
the cost of locating and copying records as
follows:
(a) The cost of photocopying shall be $.50
(fifty cents) per page.
(b) If the form of a written record does to
permit photocopying, the actual and necessary
cost of photographing and photographic
processing shall be charged.
(c) The actual full cost of providing a copy
of other records not in printed form on
paper, such as films, computer printouts and
audio or video-tapes, shall be charged. In
addition, costs of complete copy of the
Village Planning Study in bound form shall be
$50.00.
(d) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the
actual cost thereof shall also be charged.
(e) There shall be no charge for locating a
record unless the actual cost exceeds $50.00,
in which case the actual cost shall be
determined by the legal custodian and billed
to the requester.
(f) The legal custodian shall estimate the
cost of all applicable fees and may require a
cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if
such estimate exceeds $5.00.
(g) Elected and appointed officials of the
Village of Paddock Lake shall not be required
to pay for public records they may reasonably
require for the proper performance of their
official duties.
(7) Pursuant to Section 19.34, Wis. Stats., each
authority shall adopt, prominently display, and
make available for inspection and copying at its
offices a notice containing a description of its
organization and the procedure by which the public
may obtain access to records in its custody. This
subsection does not apply to members of the
Village Board.
(e) Access Procedures.
(1) A request to inspect or copy a record shall
be made to the legal custodian. A request shall
be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes
the requested record of the information requested.
However, a request for a record without a
reasonable limitation as to subject matter or
length of time represented by the record does not
constitute a sufficient request. A request may be
made orally, but a request must be in writing
before an action to enforce the request is
commenced under Section 19.37, Wis. Stats. Except
as provided below, no request may be refused
because the person making the request is unwilling
to be identified or to state the purpose of the
request. No request may be refused because the
request is received by mail, unless prepayment of
a fee is required under sub-paragraph (d)(6)(f),
above. A requester may be required to show
acceptable identification whenever the requested
record is kept at a private residence or whenever
security reasons or federal law or regulations so
require.
(2) Each custodian, upon request for any record,
shall, as soon as practicable either fill the
request or notify the requester of the reasons for
denying the request. If the legal custodian,
after conferring with the Village Attorney,
determines that a written request is so general as
to be unduly time consuming, the party making the
request may first be required to itemize his or
her request in a manner which would permit
reasonable compliance.
(3) A request for a record may be denied as
provided in sub-paragraph (f), below. If a
request is made orally, the request may be denied
orally unless a demand for a written statement of
the reasons denying the request is made by the
requester within five (5) business days of the
oral denial. If a written request is denied in
whole or in part, the requester shall receive a
written statement of the reasons for denying the
request. Every written denial of a request shall
inform the requester that if the request for the
record was made in writing, then the determination
is subject to review upon petition for a writ of
mandamus under Section 19.37(1), Wis. Stats., or
upon application to the Attorney General or a
district attorney.
(f) Limitations on Right to Access.
(1) As provided by Section 19.36, Wis. Stats.,
the following records are exempt from inspection
under this section.
(a) Records specifically exempted from
disclosure by state and federal law or
authorized to be exempted from disclosure by
state law;
(b) Any record relating to investigative
information obtained for law enforcement
purposes if federal law or regulations
require exemption from disclosure or if
exemption from disclosure is a condition to
receipt of aids by the state;
(c) Computer programs, although the material
used as input for a computer program or the
materials produces as a product of the
computer program is subject to inspection;
and
(d) A record or any portion of a record
containing information qualifying as a common
law trade secret.
(2) As provided by Section 43.30, Wis. Stats.,
public library circulation records are exempt from
inspection under this section.
(3) In responding to a request for inspection or
copying or a record which is not specifically
exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after
conferring with the Village Attorney, may deny the
request, in whole or in part, only if he
determines that the harm to the public interest in
full access to the requested record. Examples of
matters for which disclosure may be refused
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Records obtained under official pledges
of confidentiality which were necessary and
given in order to obtain the information
contained in them.
(b) Records of current deliberations after a
quasijudicial hearing.
(c) Records of current deliberations
concerning employment, dismissal, promotion,
demotion, compensations, performance, or
discipline or any Village officer or
employee, or the investigation of charges
against a Village officer or employee, unless
such officer or employee consents to such
disclosure.
(d) Records concerning current strategy for
crime detection or prevention.
(e) Records of current deliberations or
negotiations on the purchase of Village
property, investing of Village funds, or
other Village business whenever competitive
or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure.
(f) Financial, medical, social, or personal
histories or disciplinary data or specific
persons which , if disclosed, would be likely
to have a substantial adverse effect upon the
reputation of any person referred to in such
history or data.
(g) Communications between legal counsel for
the Village and any officer, agent or
employee of the Village, when advice is being
rendered concerning strategy with respect to
current litigation in which the Village or
any of its officers, agents or employees is
or is likely to become involved, or
communications which are privileged under
Section 905.03, Wis. Stats.
(4) If a record contains information that may be
made public and information that may not be made
public, the custodian shall confer with the
Village Attorney prior to releasing any such
record and shall follow the guidance of the
Village Attorney when separating out the exempt
material. If in the judgment of the custodian and
the Village Attorney there is no feasible way to
separate the exempt material from the nonexempt
material without unreasonably jeopardizing
nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire
record shall be withheld from disclosure.
(g) Destruction of Records.
(1) Village officers may destroy the following
nonutility financial records of which they are the
legal custodians and which are considered
obsolete, after completion of any required audit
by the Bureau of Municipal Audit or an auditor
licensed under Chapter 442 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, but not less than seven (7) years after
payment or receipt of any sum involved in the
particular transaction, unless a shorter period
has been fixed by the State Public Records Board
pursuant to Section 16.61(3)(e), Wis. Stats.:
(a) bank statements;
(b) canceled checks;
(c) receipt forms; and
(d) vouchers.
(2) Village officers may destroy the following
utility records of which they are the legal
custodians and which are considered obsolete after
completion of any required audit by the Bureau of
Municipal Audit or an auditor licensed under
Chapter 442 of the Wisconsin Statutes, subject to
State Public Service Commission regulations, but
not less than seven (7) years after the record was
effective unless a shorter period has been fixed
by the State Public Records Board pursuant to
Section 16.61(3)(e), Wis. Stats., except that
water stubs, receipts of current billings and
customers' ledgers may be destroyed after two (2)
years:
(a) contracts;
(b) excavation permits; and
(c) inspection records.
(3) Village officers may destroy the following
records of which they are the legal custodian and
which are considered obsolete, but not less than
seven (7) years after the record was effective,
unless another period has been set by statute:
(a) old insurance policies;
(b) election notices; and
(c) canceled registration cards.
(4) Unless notice is waived by the State
Historical Society, at least sixty (60) days
notice shall be given the State Historical society
prior to the destruction of any record as provided
by Section 19.21(4)(a), Wis. Stats.
(5) Any tape recordings of a governmental meeting
of the Village may be destroyed, erased or reused
no sooner than ninety (90) days after the minutes
of the meting have been approved and published, if
he purpose of he recording was to make minutes of
the meeting.
(6) All other records shall be retained in
accordance with the attached Schedule “A” which is
incorporated herein by reference and which may be
modified or updated as is prescribed by changes in
state law.
(h) Preservation Through Microfilm. Any Village
officer, or the director of any department or division of Village
government may, subject to the approval of the Village Board,
keep and preserve public records in his or her possession by
means of microfilm or other photographic reproduction method.
Such records shall meet the standards for photographic
reproduction set forth in Section 16.61(7)(a) and (b), Wis.
Stats., and shall be considered original records for all
purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with other files
of the department or division and shall be open to public
inspection and copying according to the provisions of state law
and of subparagraphs (d) through (f), above.
(i) Documents for Sale to the Public. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the following fees shall be charged by
the Clerk/Treasurer for specific documents created for sale to
the public:
(1) Zoning Maps - $5.00.
(2) Lists of residents of the Village - $50.00.
(3) Lists of registered voters in the Village -
$50.00.
(4) Copies of tax bills - $1.00 if personally
picked up and $5.00 if mailed.
(5) Assessment/tax letters - $25.00 per parcel.
3.125 RECYCLING COMMISSION.
(a) Members. The Village Recycling Commission shall
consist of six members as follows: five citizen members of
recognized experience in qualification and the chairman of the
Village Board Health and Welfare Committee who shall act in an
advisory (non-voting) role only.
(b) Appointments. Citizen members of the Recycling
Commission shall be appointed by the Village President upon
confirmation by a majority of the Board of Trustees upon creation
of the Commission to hold office for a period ending on the
succeeding first day of May, and every two years thereafter.
(c) Meetings. The regular meeting date for such
recycling commission shall be the final Monday of each and every
month at 6:30 p.m. and shall meet at such other times as may be
necessary to conduct the business of the Commission. The
Commission shall elect a chairman and recording secretary from
its membership. A special meeting of the Commission may be
called by the chairman, or temporary chairman, upon 24 hours
notice to each of the commissioners. Such notice shall specify
the time, place and subject matter of the special meeting, and
such special meeting shall be called only in the event that the
matter is to be considered of such urgency that delay for a
regular meeting would be harmful to the best interest of the
Village or its inhabitants.
(d) Powers. The Recycling Commission shall be
empowered to create such policies, rules or regulations as are
consistent with the commissioners duty to oversee recycling
within the Village and which are not inconsistent with these
ordinances or resolutions of the Board of Trustees. The
Commission may make recommendations to the Village Board,
including budgetary recommendations which relate to the scope of
the Commission's authority.
3.15 TREE COMMISSION.
(a) Members. The Village Tree Commission shall
consist of six (6) members as follows: five (5) citizen members
of recognized experience and qualification and the chairman of
the Village Parks Committee who shall act in an advisory (nonvoting)
role only, and who shall report monthly to the Village
Board concerning the activities of the Commission.
(b) Appointments. Citizen members of the Tree
Commission shall be appointed by the Village President upon
confirmation by a majority of the Board of Trustees upon creation
of the Commission to hold office for a period ending on the
succeeding 1st day of May and every two (2) years thereafter.
(c) Powers. The Tree Commission shall be empowered to
create such policies, rules or regulations as are consistent with
the commissioners' duty to oversee the planting and removal of
trees within the Village and which are not inconsistent with the
rights of private citizens or these ordinances or resolutions of
the Board of Trustees. The Commission may make recommendations
to the Village Board, including budgetary recommendations which
relate to the scope of the Commissions authority.
3.16 ABOLITION OF THE OFFICES OF VILLAGE CONSTABLE AND
VILLAGE MARSHALL AND THE CONTRACTING FOR POLICE SERVICES.
(a) The Village of Paddock Lake elects not to be
governed by those portions of the Wisconsin Statutes relating to
the selection and tenure of constable and marshall and hereby
abolishes the offices of Village Constable and the office of
Village Marshall.
(b) The Village Board, pursuant to Section 61.65,
Wisconsin Statutes, shall contract for police services for the
Village with a city, another village, or Kenosha County.
3.17 BOARD OF REVIEW.
(a) Members. The Board of Review shall consist of
eight (8) members as follows: the President, the Clerk/Treasurer
and six (6) Trustees. No member of the Board of Review shall be
compensated for his or her service except as to actual out-ofpocket
expenses which may be incurred as a direct result of such
participation where such expenses are approved by a majority vote
of the Board of Trustees at a duly noticed meeting.
(b) Meetings. All meetings of the Board of Review
shall be publicly held in accordance with §70.47 of the Wisconsin
Statutes except that the hours of the Board of Review meetings
shall be from 6:00 o’clock p.m. to 8:00 o’clock p.m., or such
longer hours as the Board may designate from time to time, on
such dates as may be designated by the Board beginning with the
first meeting at any time during the 30-day period beginning on
the second Monday of May.
(c) Notice of Meeting. The first meeting of the Board
of Review shall be noticed by publication of the date and time of
such meeting in the Kenosha News and by posting of such notice in
not less than three (3) public places and at the Village Hall, at
least ten (10) days prior to such meeting. If an adjournment is
made of a meeting for more than one (1) day, a written notice
shall be posted on the outer door of the place of the meeting and
in at least three (3) public places in the Village, stating to
what time the meeting is adjourned. The Board of Review may, but
shall not be obligated to, postpone and reschedule a hearing as
it relates to a property, at the request of the property owner or
his or her representative. Any such postponement must be based
upon good cause and no more than one time per session of the
Board of Review.
(d) Objections to Valuations. All objections to the
amount or the valuation of real or personal property must be made
in writing on forms which are available from the Village
Clerk/Treasurer and must be filed with the Clerk/Treasurer prior
to close of public hearings by the Board. If, after submitting a
request for a hearing before the Board of Review, the property
owner files a Request for Waiver of Board of Review Hearing on
forms provided by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue at least
forty-eight (48) hours prior to the first meeting of the Board of
Review, the Board of Review may waive the hearing so that the
property owner can directly appeal the assessment to the Circuit
Court. If the property owner waives his or her hearing before
the Board of Review following the foregoing procedure, the Board
of Review shall issue a written determination sustaining the
assessment established by the Assessor and denying the hearing.
Thereafter, the property owner is responsible for initiating any
appeal of such determination in the Circuit Court within sixty
(60) days. The decision of the Board of Review to waive a
hearing is discretionary with the Board of Review and, if
granted, the reason for granting such waiver shall be stated on
the record at the time of the first meeting of the Board of
Review.
(e) Election Not to Accept Sworn Written or Telephone
Testimony. Because facilities are not available for telephone
conferencing at the Village Hall and because it is difficult to
weigh the credibility of witnesses without being able to observe
witnesses giving testimony, sworn written or telephone testimony
shall not be accepted at hearings conducted by the Board of
Review. In addition, the ability of the Assessor to cross
examine or for members of the Board of Review to make inquiry of
witnesses providing written testimony is compromised. In many
instances, follow-up questions are crucial for the Board of
Review in ascertaining the factual basis for a property owner’s
appeal and/or the property owner’s objection to the methodology
employed by the Assessor in arriving at an assessment.
(f) Confidentiality of Information. Whenever the
Assessor, in the performance of the Assessor’s duties, requests
or obtains income and expense information pursuant to Section
70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., or any successor statute thereto,
then, such income and expense information that is provided to the
Assessor shall be held by the Assessor on a confidential basis,
except, however, that the information may be revealed to and used
by persons: in the discharging of duties imposed by law; in the
discharge of duties imposed by office (including, but not limited
to, use by the Assessor in performance of official duties of the
Assessor’s office and use by the Board of Review in performance
of its official duties); or pursuant to order of a court. Income
and expense information provided to the Assessor under Section
70.47(7)(af), unless a court determines that it is inaccurate,
is, per Section 70.47(7)(af), not subject to the right of
inspection and copying under Section 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
3.18 OFFICE OF VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
(a) Upon passage, this ordinance shall become
effective following the expiration of sixty (60) days from the
date of signing by the Village President and Clerk/Treasurer.
Upon passage, the Village Clerk/Treasurer shall publish as a
Class 1 notice under Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes a copy
of this ordinance, shall record in a permanent book kept by the
Clerk/Treasurer the original ordinance with a statement of the
manner of its adoption, including the names and manner each
trustee voted upon such legislation and shall forward a certified
copy of this ordinance to the office of the Secretary of State.
(b) Office of the Village Administrator. In order to
provide the Village of Paddock Lake with a more efficient,
effective and responsible government under a system of a parttime
Board President and Village Board operating as a Village
Board (hereinafter referred to as "Village Board") at a time when
Village government is becoming increasingly complex, there is
hereby created the Office of Village Administrator for the
Village of Paddock Lake (hereinafter referred to as
"administrator").
(c) Appointment, Term of Office and Removal. The
administrator shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due
regard to training, experience, administrative ability and
general fitness for the office, by a majority vote of the Village
Board. For the purposes of appointing or terminating the
administrator, the Board President and each Board member shall
cast one vote. The administrator shall hold office for an
indefinite term subject to removal at any time by a majority vote
of the Village Board. This section, however, shall not preclude
the Village Board from establishing other employment terms and
conditions not inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance
or the Municipal Code of the Village of Paddock Lake.
(d) Functions and Duties of the Administrator. The
administrator, subject to the limitations defined in resolutions
and ordinances of the Village of Paddock Lake and Wisconsin State
Statutes, shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Village, responsible only to the Village Board for the proper
administration of the business affairs of the Village, pursuant
to the statutes of the State of Wisconsin, the ordinances of the
Village of Paddock Lake, and the resolutions and directives of
the Village Board, with power and duties as follows:
(1) General duties.
(a) Carry out directives of the Village
Board which require administrative
implementation, reporting promptly to the
Board President and Village Board any
difficulties encountered herein;
(b) Be responsible for the administration of
all day-to-day operations of the Village
government including the monitoring of all
Village ordinances, resolutions, Village
Board meeting minutes and state statutes;
(c) Establish when necessary administrative
procedures to increase the effectiveness and
efficiency of Village government according to
current practices in local government, not
inconsistent with directives of the Village
Board;
(d) Serve as ex-officio nonvoting member of
all Village commissions and committees of the
Village, except as specified by the Board
President and Village Board or Wisconsin
State Statutes;
(e) Keep informed concerning current
federal, state, and county legislation and
administrative rules affecting the Village
and submit appropriate reports and
recommendations thereon to the Village Board;
(f) Keep informed concerning the
availability of federal, state and county
funds for local programs. Assist department
heads, Board President and the Village Board
in obtaining these funds under the direction
of the Village Board;
(g) Represent the Village in matters
involving legislative and inter-governmental
affairs as authorized and directed as to that
representation by the Village Board;
(h) Act as public information officer for
the Village with the responsibility of
assuring that the news media are kept
informed about the operations of the Village
and that all open meeting rules and
regulations are followed;
(i) Establish and maintain procedures to
facilitate communications between citizens
and Village government to assure that
complaints, grievances, recommendations and
other matters receive prompt attention by the
responsible official, and to assure that all
such matters are expeditiously resolved;
(j) Promote the economic well-being and
growth of the Village through public and
private sector cooperation;
(2) Responsibilities to the Board President and
Village Board.
(a) Attend all meeting of the Village Board,
assisting the Village Board as required in
the performance of their duties;
(b) In coordination with the Board
President, Village Board and the
Clerk/Treasurer, ensure that appropriate
agendas are prepared to all meetings of the
Village Board, all Village Board committees,
and all other appropriate committees and
commissions of the Village, together with
such supporting material as may be required;
with nothing herein being construed as to
give the administrator authority to limit or
in any way prevent matters from being
considered by the Village Board, or any of
its committees and commissions;
(c) Assist in the preparation of ordinances
and resolutions as requested by the Village
Board, or as needed;
(d) Keep the Village Board regularly
informed about the activities of the
administrator's office by oral and written
reports at regular and special meetings of
the Village Board;
(3) Personnel.
(a) Be responsible for the administrative
direction and coordination of all employees
of the Village according to the established
organization procedures;
(b) Recommend to the Village Board the
appointment, promotion, and when necessary
for the good of the Village, the suspension
or termination of department heads;
(c) In consultation with the appropriate
department head, be responsible for the
appointment, promotion, and when necessary
for the good of the Village, the suspension
or terminations of employees below the
department head level;
(d) Serve as personnel officer for the
Village with responsibilities to see that
complete and current personnel records,
including specific job descriptions, for all
Village employees are kept; develop and
enforce high standards of performance by
Village employees; assure that Village
employees have proper working conditions;
work closely with department heads to
promptly resolve personnel problems or
grievances;
(e) Work closely with department heads to
assure that employees receive adequate
opportunities for training to maintain and
improve their job-related knowledge and
skills and act as the approving authority for
requests by employees to attend conferences,
meetings, training schools, etc., provided
that funds have been budgeted for these
activities.
(4) Budgeting and purchasing.
(a) Be responsible for the preparation of
the annual Village budget, in accordance with
guidelines as may be provided by the Village
Board and in coordination with department
heads, and pursuant to state statutes, for
review and approval by the the Village Board;
(b) Administer the budget as adopted by the
Village Board;
(c) Report regularly to the Village Board on
the current fiscal position of the Village;
(d) Supervise the accounting system of the
Village and insure that the system employs
methods in accordance with current
professional accounting practices;
(e) Cooperation. All officials and employees of the
Village shall cooperate with and assist the administrator so that
the Village government shall function effectively and
efficiently.
(f) Severability. The provisions of this ordinance
shall be deemed severable and it is expressly declared that the
Village Board of the Village of Paddock Lake would have passed
the other provisions of this ordinance irrespective of whether or
not one or more provisions may be declared invalid; and if any
provisions of this ordinance or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the
ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons
or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(g) Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect
and be in force from and after its passage and publication as
provided by law.
3.19 FIRE INSPECTIONS AND PREVENTION.
(a) Fire Inspectors. The Town of Salem Fire
Department, as the contracted Fire Department for the Village,
shall be responsible for fire inspections in cooperation with the
Village Building Inspector.
(1) Chief to be Fire Inspector. Pursuant to
§101.14, Wis. Stats., the Chief of the Town of
Salem Fire Department shall hold the office of
Fire Inspector and may appoint one (1) or more
Deputy Fire Inspectors, who shall perform the same
duties and have the same powers as the Fire
Inspector.
(2) Duty of Inspection.
(a) Inspections required. The Fire
Inspector shall inspect semi-annually all
public and commercial buildings, premises and
thoroughfares within the Village to correct
any condition liable to cause fires or to
impede access. Repairs or alterations
necessary to remove a hazardous condition
shall be made within a reasonable time at the
owner’s expense. The Inspector shall also
investigate the storage and handling of
explosives and flammable liquids within the
Village.
(b) Special inspection warrant. If consent
to entry to personal or real properties which
are not public buildings, or to portions of
public buildings which are not open to the
public, has been denied, the Building
Inspector shall obtain a special inspection
warrant under §66.0119, of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(3) Record and Reports of Inspections. The Fire
Inspector shall keep a written record of each
property inspected which shall conform to the
requirements of the Wisconsin Department of
Workforce Development, and shall complete the
quarterly report of inspections required by such
department.
(4) Correction of Fire Hazards. When any
inspection by the Fire Inspector or a deputy
reveals a fire hazard, the Inspector or deputy may
request that the Village Building Inspector serve
a notice in writing upon the owner of the
property, giving such owner a reasonable time in
which to remove the hazard. If the fire hazard is
not removed within the time allowed, it shall be
deemed a nuisance; and the Building Inspector may
have the same removed by the Village, and the cost
of such removal shall be recovered in an action by
the Village against the owner of the property and
may be entered in the tax roll as a special charge
against the property.
(5) Compliance with Fire Inspector. No person
shall hinder or obstruct the Fire Inspector in the
performance of a lawful duty or refuse to observe
any lawful direction given.
(b) Fire Prevention.
(1) State Fire Prevention Manual, Adopted. The
Wisconsin Fire Prevention Manual detailing
provisions for the prevention of fire is adopted
and by reference made a part of these ordinances
as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to
be performed or prohibited by such manual is
required or prohibited by this section.
(2) Conflicting Provision. In case of a conflict
between the provisions of this section or between
this section and existing Village ordinances, the
strictest provision shall apply.
(3) Copies to Be on File. Copies of the State
Fire Prevention Manual shall be available for
inspection during reasonable hours in the Village
Clerk/Treasurer’s office.
(c) False Alarms.
(1) False Alarms. No person shall suffer,
permit, give or cause to be given by any person
whatsoever a false fire alarm with the intent that
the Fire Department shall respond to such alarm.
(2) Fire Alarm Control System. Any person who
shall install a mechanical or electrical devise
which upon being activated transmits a signal for
the purpose of obtaining a response by the Fire
Department shall be responsible for proper
installation, maintenance and testing of said
alarm system to prevent a false alarm from being
transmitted.
(3) Costs to Be Assessed. Any person who shall
cause a false fire alarm to be given, whether by
personal call, a fire control system or otherwise,
and such false alarm causes the Fire Department to
respond, shall be responsible to the Village of
Paddock Lake for all costs resulting from such
false alarm. Costs shall be determined by the
Village Board and shall include fire engines and
apparatus, rescue squad equipment, wages paid to
personnel and a surcharge for administration and
overhead of the Fire Department.
The Fire Chief shall provide a statement of such
charges to the Village Clerk/Treasurer who shall
bill the owner of the premises in the event of a
false alarm by a fire control system, or the
person who caused said alarm to be given. In the
event charges are not paid within thirty (30)
days, the Village Board shall take appropriate
collection action.
(d) Penalties. Any person violating any portion of
this ordinance, in addition to the costs to be imposed under
subsection (c)(3), above, shall be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than Fifty ($50.00) Dollars and not more than Five Hundred
($500.00) Dollars.
SCHEDULE “A”
RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE
Utility Records (Sewer, Water & Electric) Retention
Records of inventory, inventory disposition
& scrap
3 years
Customer applications, contracts, deposit
records, interest receipts
3 years
Meter reading records 2 years
Revenue summaries 6 years
Customer ledgers, bill summaries, trial
balances, account indices
3 years
Collection reports, summaries, bill stubs,
bill copies, customer account adjustments,
high bill complaints
3 years
Uncollectible account & customer credit
records
3 years
Water quality laboratory tests (deep well
and landfill well water analyses detail and
summary reports; chemical and
bacteriological analyses of municipal
drinking water detail and summary reports;
municipal drinking water fluoride analyses;
swimming pool water bacteriological
analyses; and water quality control
readings)
Retain individual
sample records 5
years and
destroy. If
information has
been transferred
to a permanent
test site
location file,
retain for 1 year
and destroy
Work Permits
Work permits Until child turns
21
Sales & Use Tax
Returns, schedules, work papers, etc. 6 years
Real Property Records
Deeds Permanent
Opinions of title Permanent
Abstracts and certificates of title Permanent
Title insurance policies Permanent
Plats Permanent
Easements Permanent
Leases 7 years after
termination of
lease and destroy
Vacation or alteration of plat Permanent
Assessment Records
Final assessment roll Permanent
Personal property blotters 7 years
Assessment workroll 2 years
Assessment property cards Until superceded
Accounting Documents–Accounts Payable
Purchase invoices 7 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Vouchers 7 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Accounting Documents–Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable invoices 7 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Receipts 7 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Collection blotters 1 year after
audit and destroy
Journals, Registers & Ledger
Receipts journal 15 years and
destroy
Voucher/order register 15 years and
destroy
General journal 15 years and
destroy
Journal voucher 15 years and
destroy
Appropriation journal 15 years and
destroy
Appropriation journal voucher 15 years and
destroy
General ledger 15 years and
notify State
Historical
Society
Trial balance Until audited and
destroy
Treasurer’s Records
Cashbook 15 years and
destroy
Daily cash drawer reconciliations 1 year after
audit and destroy
Bank reconciliations 7 years and
destroy
Bank statements 7 years and
destroy
Canceled order checks 7 years and
destroy
Lists of outstanding checks 7 years and
destroy
Check register 7 years and
destroy
Duplicate deposit tickets 1 year after
audit and destroy
Bank credit/debit notices 1 year after
audit and destroy
Investment records 7 years and
destroy
All receipts 7 years
Payroll
Payroll support records 2 years and
destroy provided
the records have
been audited
Employee’s withholding allowance
certificate
5 years after
being superseded
and destroy
Employee’s Wisconsin withholding exemption
certificate
5 years after
being superseded
and destroy
Employee enrollment and waiver cards 2 years after
being superseded
or terminated and
destroy
Employee earning records 5 years and
destroy
Payroll check register 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Payroll distribution record 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Payroll voucher 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Canceled payroll checks 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Wage and tax statement 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Report of Wisconsin income tax withheld 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Employer’s annual reconciliation of
Wisconsin income tax withheld from wages
5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Federal deposit tax stubs 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Quarterly report of federal income tax
withheld
5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Annual report of federal income tax
withheld
5 years and
destroy
State’s quarterly report of wages paid 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Monthly memorandum report 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Quarterly report, payroll summary 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Premium due notices 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Purchasing
Purchase requisitions 1 year after
purchase order
issued
Purchase orders 7 years and
destroy
Receiving report 7 years and
destroy
Bids, successful 7 years after the
contract has
expired and
destroy
Bids, unsuccessful 1 year after
purchase order
issued
Inventory of property Retain until
superseded and
destroy
Budgets and Audits
Budget work sheets 3 years and
destroy
Minutes of the board of estimates Permanent
Final budget Permanent
Audit reports Permanent
Special Assessments
Preliminary resolution 2 years and
destroy provided
a copy of the
report is on file
with the public
works project
records
Report on special assessment project 2 years and
destroy provided
a copy of the
report is on file
with the public
works project
records
Waiver of special assessment notice and
hearing
1 year and
destroy, or
retain 1 year
after the final
resolution is
approved and
destroy
Final resolution Permanent
Certificate special assessment roll Retain until all
assessments are
collected or for
7 years,
whichever is
longer
Statement of new special assessments 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Special assessment payment register Retain until all
assessments are
collected or for
7 years,
whichever is
longer
Board of Review
Form of objection to property assessment
and supporting documentation
7 years after the
final action of
the Board of
Review or the
completion of
appeal and
destroy
Minutes book of Board of Review 7 years and then
notify the State
Historical
Society
Proceedings of the Board of Review on audio
tapes or as stenographic notes including
any transcriptions thereof
7 years after the
final action of
the Board of
Review or the
completion of
appeal and
destroy
Notice of determinations of the Board of
Review
7 years after the
final action of
the Board of
Review or the
completion of
appeal and
destroy
Tax Calculation
Tax levy certification of the school
district clerk
3 years and
destroy provided
the record has
been audited
Certificates of apportionment 3 years and
destroy provided
the record has
been audited
State shared aid payment notices, any and
all
Retain 6 years
and destroy
provided record
has been audited
Final work sheet for determining allowable
levy
5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Statement of taxes Retain final copy
permanently
Statement of new special assessments 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Statement of sewer service charges 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
General property tax credit certification 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Explanation of property tax credit
certification
5 years and
destroy provided
the records have
been audited
Real property tax roll This record is
transferred to
the county
treasurer
Personal property tax roll Retain 15 years
and notify the
State Historical
Society
Tax Collection
Escrow account list Retain until
superseded and
destroy
Receipts For cities and
villages, retain
7 years and
destroy, provided
record has been
audited. For
towns, retain 15
years and destroy
Receipt stub book 7 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Tax collection blotters Retain until
audited and
destroy
Statement of taxes remaining unpaid Retain with the
tax roll
Tax settlement receipt 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Municipal treasurer’s settlement 5 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Personal property tax roll 15 years and
notify the State
Historical
Society
Licenses and Permits
Applications accepted and rejected
All liquor and beer related license
applications
4 years and
destroy
All other license applications 3 years and
destroy
Receipts 7 years and
destroy
License stubs All liquor and
beer related
license stubs 4
years. All other
stubs 3 years and
destroy
Cat & dog licenses monthly reported to
County Clerk (by Treasurer)
3 years and
destroy
Municipal Borrowing
Bond procedure record 7 years after
bond issue
expires and
destroy
Bond register 7 years after
bond issue
expires and
destroy
Bond payment register 7 years after
bond issue
expires or
following payment
of all
outstanding
matured bonds/
notes/coupons,
whichever is
later, and
destroy
Canceled bonds, coupons and promissory
notes
Until audited and
destroy
Certificates of destruction 7 years after
bond issue
expires or
following payment
of all
outstanding
matured bonds/
notes/coupons,
whichever is
later, and
destroy
Fidelity Bond
Fidelity bond 5 years after
bond expires and
destroy
Fidelity bond book 5 years after
last bond entered
expires and
destroy
Oath of office 5 years after the
term of service
covered by the
oath has ended
and destroy
Legal Opinions
Legal opinions Permanent
Voters & Campaign & Election Records
See §7.23, Wis. Stats.
Active registration cards Retain in the
active file as
long as current
Canceled registration cards 4 years after
cancellation and
destroy
Poll list & registry list 2 years after a
non-partison
primary or
election, 4 years
after partisan
primary or
election
Nomination papers 90 days after the
election and
destroy
Certificate listing candidates nominated by
caucus
90 days after the
election and
destroy
Campaign registration statements (EB-1) 6 years and
destroy
Campaign financial reports (EB-2) 6 years and
destroy
Election notices in cities and villages 90 days after the
election and
destroy
Election notices in towns 1 year after the
date of the
election and
destroy. If the
election is
contested, retain
1 year after the
contest has been
settled and
destroy
Applications for absentee ballots 90 days and
destroy provided
applications for
federal elections
are retained 22
months and
destroyed
Paper ballots and voting machine recorders
- local elections
90 days after the
election and
destroy. Voting
machine recorders
may be
reactivated 14
days following a
primary or 60
days following a
spring or general
election
Tally sheets - local elections 90 days after the
election and
destroy
Inspectors statement of defective and
challenged ballots - local elections
90 days after the
election and
destroy
Ballots, voting machine records, tally
sheets, inspector statement of defective &
challenged ballots - federal elections
Retain for 22
months and
destroy
Statement of the municipal board of
canvassers
Engineering and Public Works
Field notes Permanent
Bench mark books Permanent
Section corner monument logs Permanent
Aerial photographs Retain until
superseded and
destroy
City map Permanent
Water, storm and sanitary sewer main maps Permanent
Profile and grade books Permanent
Excavation plans of private utilities Permanent
Index to maps Permanent
Preliminary subdivision plats Retain until
superseded by the
final plat and
destroy
Final subdivision plats Permanent
Annexation plats Permanent
Assessor’s plats Permanent
Structure plans for municipal buildings and
bridges
Retain for life
of the structure
and notify the
State Historical
Society
Annual reports Retain
permanently
Records of the board of public works
(includes minutes of the meetings of the
board and supporting documents submitted to
the board)
Retain
permanently
Records of the plan commission (includes
minutes of the meetings of the commission
and supporting documents submitted to the
commission)
Retain
permanently
Records of the zoning board of appeals
(include minutes of the meetings of the
board and supporting documents submitted to
the board)
Permanent
House number and address change file Permanent
Street vacations and dedications, copies Retain for active
reference life
and destroy
Permits (include permits for the excavation
of streets by private utility companies)
3 years and
destroy
Petitions for street and sewer systems 2 years and
destroy
Special assessment calculations 2 years and
destroy
TV sewer inspections records Retain until
superseded and
destroy
State highway aids program records 7 years and
destroy provided
the record has
been audited
Public Works Projects & Contracts
Notice to contractors Retain in the
contract file 7
years after
completion of the
project and
destroy. For
unsuccessful
bidders, retain 2
years and destroy
Certified check Retain until the
contract has been
signed and return
to bidder
Bid bond Retain in the
contract file 7
years after
completion of the
project and
destroy. For
unsuccessful
bidders, retain 2
years and destroy
Bidder’s proof of responsibility Retain in the
contract file 7
years after the
completion of the
project and
destroy. For
unsuccessful
bidders, retain 2
years and destroy
Bids Retain in the
contract file 7
years after
completion of the
project and
destroy. For
unsuccessful
bidders, retain 2
years and destroy
Affidavit of organization and authority Retain in the
contract file 7
years after
completion of the
project and
destroy. For
unsuccessful
bidders, retain 2
years and destroy
Bid tabulations 2 years and
destroy
Performance bond Retain in the
contract file 7
years after
completion of the
project and
destroy
Contract Retain in the
contract file 7
years after
completion of the
project and
destroy
Master project files 20 years after
the life of the
structure and
notify the
Historical
Society
Blue prints Retain until
superseded by the
as-built tracings
and destroy
As-built tracings Retain for the
life of the
project and
notify the State
Historical
Society
Streets and Highways
Street operations file 2 years after
created or
superseded and
destroy
Street and sidewalk maintenance and repair
records
25 years and
destroy
Tree planting, inspection, trimming and
removal records
25 years and
destroy
Stock control records 2 years and
destroy provided
the record has
been audited
Fuel usage reports 2 years and
destroy provided
the record has
been audited
Heavy equipment and vehicle inventory
ledger
Retain for the
life of the
equipment and/or
vehicle or until
the inventory
ledger is
superseded and
destroy
Vehicle maintenance histories Retain for the
life of the
vehicle and
destroy
Vehicle expense reports Retain for the
life of the
vehicle and
destroy
Vehicle usage reports 2 years and
destroy provided
the record has
been audited
Payroll support records 2 years and
destroy
Purchasing records 7 years and
destroy provided
the record has
been audited
Complaint ledger 2 years and
destroy
Monthly reports 3 years and
destroy
Annual reports Retain
permanently
Parks
Master park plan Retain
permanently
Plats Retain
permanently
Aerial photographs Retain
permanently
Supervisor’s daily report of work completed 2 years and
destroy
Payroll support records 2 years and
destroy provided
record has been
audited
Sanitation and Consumer Protection
Septic tank permits Permanent
Open air burning permits 6 months and
destroy
Weights and measures, field test reports &
package weighing reports
3 years and
destroy
Complaints and follow-up reports 5 years from the
date the
complaint was
resolved and
destroy
Utility disconnections in private residence
investigation reports
3 years and
destroy
Request to declare a medical emergency 3 years and
destroy
Grant Fund Records
Grant fund records Minimum 10 years
*see below
Committee, Board & Council Records
Minutes of any kind Retain
permanently
Audio tapes Retain 1 year and
destroy or erase
tape, 90 days if
made only for the
purpose of
writing the
minutes
Ordinances, resolutions Retain
permanently
Ordinance book Retain
permanently
Affidavits of publication Retain 3 years
and destroy
provided
affidavits of
publication of
ordinance are
maintained
permanently in
the ordinance
book
All other records Minimum period -
7 years
* NOTE OF CAUTION: In spite of (and “notwithstanding”) this
retention schedule, if the records you are considering to
discard have anything to do with a state or federal grant or
federal pass through money - Wisconsin Fund, Wisconsin
Development Fund, Community Development Block Grant, Urban
Development Block Grants, EPA, EDA, etc., contact the grant
agency first. As a rule of thumb, do not even think about
discarding these kinds of documents unless 10 years have
passed.
Chapter 4
VILLAGE FINANCES
4.01 Installment Payment of Taxes
4.02 Disbursement from Treasury
4.03 Preparation of Tax Roll and Tax Receipts
4.04 Liability for Clerk/Treasurer
4.05 Claims Against the Village
4.06 Preparation and Adoption of Annual Budget
4.07 Special Assessments
4.08 Licenses and Permits Withheld for Non-Payment
of Charges, Fees and Personal Taxes
4.01 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF TAXES.
Real estate taxes and special assessments in a total
amount exceeding $20 may be paid in two equal installments,
except that on taxes under $40 the minimum payment on the first
installment shall be $20. The first instalment shall become due
and payable on January 31, and the second installment on July 31.
If the installment method is not elected, the full amount of the
taxes must be paid on or before the last day of February. For
failure to make any installment when due, there shall be added a
penalty of eight-tenths of one percent per month, or fraction
thereof, on the unpaid balance from January 1.
4.02 DISBURSEMENT FROM TREASURY.
All disbursements from the Village Treasury shall be by
order check. No such order check shall be released, nor shall
such check be valid, until signed by the Clerk/Treasurer or the
Deputy Clerk/Treasurer. The Village President or, in the absence
of the Village President, the designee of the Village President,
shall countersign all such order checks. Until countersigned by
the Village President or his or her designee, no such order check
shall be a valid obligation of the Village.
4.03 PREPARATION OF TAX ROLL AND TAX RECEIPTS.
(a) Aggregate Tax Stated on Roll. Pursuant to Section
70.65(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes, the Village Clerk/Treasurer
shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate
amount of state, county, school, and local taxes in a single
column in the roll opposite the parcel or tract of land against
which the tax is levied, or, in the case of personal property, in
a single column opposite the name of the person, firm or
corporation against whom the tax is levied.
(b) Rates Stamped on Receipts. Pursuant to Section
74.08(1) of the Wisconsin Statutes, in lieu of entering on each
tax receipt the several amounts paid respectively for state,
county, local and other taxes, the aggregate amount of such taxes
shall be combined in a single column on the tax receipt issued by
the Village Clerk/Treasurer. The Clerk/Treasurer shall cause to
be printed or stamped on the tax receipt the separate proportion
or rate of taxes levied for state, county, school, local or other
purposes.
4.04 LIABILITY FOR CLERK/TREASURER.
The Village elects not to give the bond on the Village
Clerk/Treasurer provided for by Section 70.67(1) of the Wisconsin
Statutes. Pursuant to Section 70.67(2) of the Wisconsin
Statutes, the Village shall be obligated to pay, in case the
Village Clerk/Treasurer shall fail to do so, all state and county
taxes required by law to be paid by such Clerk/Treasurer to the
County Treasurer.
4.05 CLAIMS AGAINST THE VILLAGE.
(a) Claims to be Certified. Prior to submission of
any amount, demand or claim to the Village Board for approval of
payment, the Village Clerk/Treasurer shall certify, or cause to
be endorsed thereon or on attached papers, that the following
conditions have been complied with:
(1) That funds are available therefor pursuant to
the budget.
(2) That the item or serve was properly
authorized and has been received or rendered in
accordance with the purchase agreement.
(3) That the claim is proper and accurate in
amount.
(b) Finance Committee to Audit Accounts. No account
or demand against the Village, except as provided in subsection
(c) of this section, shall be paid until it has been audited by
the Finance Committee. Every such account shall be itemized and
certified as provided in subsection (a).
After auditing, the Village Board shall cause to be
endorsed by the Clerk/Treasurer, on each account, the words
"allowed" or "disallowed", as the fact is, adding the amount
allowed or specifying the items or parts of items disallowed.
The minutes of the proceedings of the Board or a statement
attached shall show to whom, and for what purpose, every such
account was allowed and the amount thereof.
(c) Payment of Regular Wages or Salaries. Regular
wages or salaries of Village officers and employees shall be paid
by payroll, verified by the proper Village official, department
head, Board, or Commission and filed with the Village
Clerk/Treasurer in time for payment on the regular pay day.
(d) Method of Incurring Claims. All actions of the
Village board appropriating money or creating a charge against
the Village, other than claims for purchases or work previously
authorized by the Board shall only be acted upon at the next
regular meeting after introduction. This rule may, however, be
suspended by affirmative vote of 2/3 of all members of the Board.
A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded on all
appropriations.
4.06 PREPARATION AND ADOPTION OF ANNUAL BUDGET.
(a) Village President to Prepare Budget. On or before
the 20th day of October each year the Village President, with the
assistance of the Village Clerk/Treasurer, shall prepare and
submit to the Village Board a proposed budget presenting a
financial plan for conducting the affairs of the Village for the
ensuing year. Before preparing the proposed budget, the
President shall consult with the heads of the Village departments
and with the Village officials, and shall then determine the
total amount to be recommended in the budget for each Village
department or activity.
(b) Form of Proposed Budget. The proposed budget
shall include the following information:
(1) The actual expenditures of each department
and activity for the expired portion of the
current year and last preceding fiscal year and
the estimated expense of conducting teach
department and activity of the Village for the
remainder of the current year and ensuing fiscal
year, with reasons for any proposed increase or
decrease as compared with actual and estimated
expenditures for the current year.
(2) An itemization of all anticipated income of
the Village from sources other than general
property taxes and bond issues, with a comparative
statement of the amount received by the Village
from each of the same or similar sources for the
last preceding and current fiscal years.
(3) All existing indebtedness of the Village,
including the amount of interest payable and
principal to be redeemed on any outstanding
general obligation bonds of the Village and any
estimated deficiency in the sinking fund of any
such bonds during the ensuing fiscal year.
(4) An estimate of the amount of money to be
raised from general property taxes which, with
income from other sources, will be necessary to
meet the proposed expenditures.
(5) Such other information as may be required by
the Village Board or by state law.
(c) Appropriation Ordinance; Hearing. The Village
President, with the assistance of the Village Clerk/Treasurer,
shall submit to the Village Board with the annual budget a draft
of an appropriation ordinance providing for the expenditures
proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. Before adoption of a final
appropriation ordinance, the Village Board shall hold a public
hearing on the budget and the proposed appropriation ordinance as
required by law.
(d) Changes in Final Budget. Upon written
recommendation of the Village President, the Village Board may at
any time by a 2/3 vote of the entire membership transfer any
portion of an unencumbered balance of an appropriation to any
other purpose or object. Notice of such transfer shall be given
by publication within 8 days thereafter in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village.
(e) Expenditures Limited by Annual Appropriation. No
money shall be drawn from the Treasury of the village nor shall
any obligation for the expenditures of money be incurred, except
in pursuance of the annual appropriation ordinance and changes
authorized in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. At
the close of each fiscal year, any unencumbered balance of an
appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be
subject to reappropriation. However, appropriation may be made
by the Village Board, to be paid out of the income of the current
year, in furtherance of improvements of other objects or works
which will not be completed within such year. Any such
appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which
it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned.
4.07 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
Unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the Board
of Trustees, all payments for special assessments for public
improvements or for any other charges, fees or personal property
taxes payable within sixty (60) days following the date of notice
of the special assessment to the abutting landowner. for
purposes of this section, public improvements include, but are
not limited to, the paving of streets, curbs and gutters; the
construction of sanitary sewer mains or water mains; the
construction, repair or replacement of sidewalks and the grading
and graveling of streets.
(a) Interest. Section 4.01 of these Ordinances
notwithstanding the interest rate on all special assessments for
public improvements and other charges shall be twelve (12%)
percent per annum from the date of billing, with no interest due
in the event that the entire outstanding balance is paid in full
within sixty (60) days of the first date of billing as provided
above.
(b) Tax Roll. Any unpaid special assessments for
public improvements shall be placed on the first tax roll
prepared after said special assessments shall have been
determined as a special tax on the property upon which the
special assessment was levied, and thereafter this tax shall be
treated in all respects as any other municipal tax upon real
property. In the event that the property owner elects to pay a
special assessment in installments, such installments shall be
entered in like manner and with like effect on each of the annual
rolls thereafter until all are levied. If any special assessment
so entered on the tax roll shall not be paid to the
Clerk/Treasurer with all other real property taxes, it shall be
returned to the County as delinquent and accepted and collected
by the County in the same manner as delinquent general taxes on
real estate.
4.08 LICENSES AND PERMITS WITHHELD FOR NON-PAYMENT OF
CHARGES, FEES OR PERSONAL TAXES.
No license or permit shall be issued by the Village to
any person who has not paid an overdue forfeiture resulting from
the violation of a Village ordinance, any unpaid or outstanding
permit or license fee, delinquent personal or real property
taxes, special assessments or utility bills or any other unpaid
fees or charges due to the Village. For residential premises
only, if, in the opinion of the Village Building Inspector the
withholding of a permit under this ordinance creates a situation
where the structural integrity of the residential structure or
where the safety and habitability of the residential structure
could be compromised then the Building Inspector may issue such
permit for the purpose of rectifying or preventing such potential
threat to the health, life and/or safety of the residential
occupants. Such exceptions to the general prohibition on
issuance of licenses and permits under this section could
include, but are not limited to, permits for plumbing,
electrical, HVAC or roofing where the structural integrity or
safety of residential occupants could be compromised. Appeals of
the decision of the Building Inspector under this exception shall
be to the Village Board. This exception shall apply only to
residential properties.
Chapter 5
RECYCLING
5.01 Title
5.02 Purpose
5.03 Statutory Authority
5.04 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
5.05 Interpretation
5.06 Severability
5.07 Applicability
5.08 Administration
5.09 Effective Date
5.10 Definitions
5.11 Separation of Recyclable Materials
5.12 Separation Requirements Exempted
5.13 Care of Separated Recyclable Materials
5.14 Management of Lead Acid Batteries, Major
Appliances, Waste Oil and Yard Waste
5.15 Preparation and Collection of Recyclable
Materials
5.16 Responsibilities of Owners or Designated
Agents of Multiple-Family Dwellings
5.17 Responsibilities of Owners or Designated
Agents on Non-Residential Facilities and
Properties
5.18 Prohibitions on Disposal of Recyclable
Materials Separated for Recycling
5.185 Contractor Permit for Contractor Yard Waste
5.186 Placement of Curbside Garbage/Recycling
5.19 Enforcement
5.20 Billing Practices for Collection of Curbside
Garbage/Recycling
5.21 Illegal Dumping
5.01 TITLE.
This Ordinance shall be known as the Recycling
Ordinance for the Village of Paddock Lake.
5.02 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote recycling,
composting, and resource recovery through the administration of
an effective recycling program, as provided in §159.11, Wis.
Stats., and Chapter NR 544, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
5.03 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
This ordinance is adopted as authorized under
§159.09(3)(b), Wis. Stats., and NR 544.06 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
5.04 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal,
abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing rules,
regulations, ordinances or permits previously adopted or issued
pursuant to law. However, whenever this ordinance imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall
apply.
5.05 INTERPRETATION.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements
and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power
granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where any terms or
requirements of this ordinance may be inconsistent or
conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation
shall apply. Where a provision of this ordinance is required by
Wisconsin Statutes, or by a standard in Chapter NR 544, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, and where the ordinance provision is
unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the
Wisconsin Statutes and the Chapter NR 544 standards in effect on
the date of the adoption of this ordinance, or in effect on the
date of the most recent text amendment to this ordinance.
5.06 SEVERABILITY.
Should any portion of this ordinance be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected.
5.07 APPLICABILITY.
The requirements of this ordinance apply to all persons
within the corporate limits of the Village of Paddock Lake south
of 60th Street (CTH “K”). It is the intention of the Village
Board that there be no municipal garbage or recycling collection
north of 60th Street (CTH “K”).
5.08 ADMINISTRATION.
The provision of this ordinance shall be administered
by the Recycling Commission of the Village of Paddock Lake.
5.09 EFFECTIVE DATE.
The provisions of this ordinance shall take effect on
January 1, 1994.
5.10 DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this ordinance:
(a) "Bi-metal container" means a container for
carbonated or malt beverages that is made primarily of a
combination of steel and aluminum.
(b) "Container board" means corrugated paperboard used
in the manufacture of shipping containers and related products.
(c) “Contractor Yard Waste” means brush, wood, and all
materials contained in the definition of “yard waste” contained
in subsection (aa) herein, which is generated by the labor, work
or efforts of a person, firm or corporation on behalf of or at
the instance and request of an owner or occupant of real estate,
regardless of whether such person, firm or corporation performing
such services is compensated for such efforts.
(d) "Foam polystyrene packaging" means packaging made
primarily from foam polystyrene that satisfies one of the
following criteria:
(1) Is designed for serving food or beverages.
(2) Consists of loose particles intended to fill
space and cushion the packaged articles in a
shipping container.
(3) Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold
and cushion the packaged article in a shipping
container.
(e) "HDPE" means high density polyethylene, labeled by
the SPI code #2.
(f) "LDPE" means low density polyethylene, labeled by
the SPI code #4.
(g) "Magazines" means magazines and other materials
printed on similar paper.
(h) "Major appliance" means a residential or
commercial air conditioner, clothes dryer, clothes washer,
dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven, refrigerator, stove,
furnace, boiler, dehumidifier or water heater.
(i) "Multiple-family dwelling" means a property
containing 5 or more residential units, including those which are
occupied seasonally.
(j) "Newspaper" means a newspaper and other materials
printed on newsprint.
(k) "Non-residential facilities and properties" means
commercial, retail, industrial, institutional and governmental
facilities and properties. This term does not include multiple
family dwellings.
(l) "Office paper" means high grade printing and
writing papers from offices in non-residential facilities and
properties. Printed white ledger and computer printout are
examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This
term does not include industrial process waste.
(m) "Other resins or multiple resins" means plastic
resins labeled by the SPI code #7.
(n) "Person" includes any individual, corporation,
partnership, association, local governmental unit, as defined in
§66.299(1)(a), Wis. Stats., state agency or authority or federal
agency.
(o) "PETE" means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled
by the SPI code #1.
(p) "Plastic container" means an individual, separate,
rigid plastic bottle, can, jar or carton, except for a blister
pack, that is originally used to contain a product that is the
subject of a retail sale.
(q) "Postconsumer waste" means solid waste other than
solid waste generated in the production of goods, hazardous
waste, as defined in §144.61(5), Wis. Stats., waste from
construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles, or
high-volume industrial waste, as defined in §144.44(7)(a)1., Wis.
Stats.
(r) "PP" means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code
#5.
(s) "PS" means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code
#6.
(t) "PVC" means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI
code #3.
(u) "Recyclable materials" includes lead acid
batteries; major appliances; waste oil; yard waste; aluminum
containers; corrugated paper or other container board; foam
polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper;
office paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of
PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple
resins; steel containers; waste tires; and bi-metal containers.
(v) "Recycling Plan" means a comprehensive binding
program of recycling by an owner or occupant of real estate
including, but not limited to, contracting with a licensed waste
hauler to fulfill such program requirements.
(w) "Solid waste" has the meaning specified in
§144.01(15), Wis. Stats.
(x) "Solid waste facility" has the meaning specified
in §144.43(5), Wis. Stats.
(y) "Solid waste treatment" means any method,
technique or process which is designed to change the physical,
chemical or biological character or composition of solid waste.
"Treatment" includes incineration.
(z) "Waste tire" means a tire that is no longer
suitable for its original purpose because of wear, damage or
defect.
(aa) "Yard waste" means leaves, grass clippings, yard
and garden debris and brush, including clean wood vegetative
material no greater than 6 inches in diameter. This term does
not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls.
5.11 SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
Occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit residences,
multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and
properties shall separate the following materials from
postconsumer waste:
(a) Lead acid batteries,
(b) Major appliances,
(c) Waste oil,
(d) Yard waste,
(e) Aluminum containers,
(f) Bi-metal containers,
(g) Corrugated paper or other container board,
(h) Foam polystyrene packaging,
(i) Glass containers,
(j) Magazines,
(k) Newspaper,
(l) Office paper,
(m) Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC,
LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple resins,
(n) Steel containers,
(o) Waste tires.
5.12 SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS EXEMPTED.
The separation requirements of §5.11 do not apply to
the following:
(a) Occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit
residences, multiple-family dwellings and non-residential
facilities and properties that send their postconsumer waste to a
processing facility licensed by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources that recovers the materials specified in §5.11
from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(b) Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel
at a facility if less than 30% of the heat input to the facility
is derived from the solid waste burned as supplemental fuel.
(c) A recyclable material specified in §5.11(e)
through (o) for which a variance has been granted by the
Department of Natural Resources under §159.11(2m), Wis. Stats.,
or §NR 544.14, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
5.13 CARE OF SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable
materials separated in accordance with §5.11 shall be clean and
kept free of contaminants such as food or product residue, oil or
grease, or other non-recyclable materials, including but not
limited to household hazardous waste, medical waste, and
agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be
stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain and other
inclement weather conditions.
5.14 MANAGEMENT OF LEAD ACID BATTERIES, MAJOR APPLIANCES,
WASTE OIL AND YARD WASTE.
Occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit residences,
multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and
properties shall manage lead acid batteries, major appliances,
waste oil, and yard waste as follows:
(a) Lead acid batteries shall be deposited by the
person responsible therefor pursuant to procedures established by
the Recycling Commission.
(b) Major appliances shall be placed at the curb for
collection pursuant to procedures designated by the Recycling
Commission; further, there shall be an additional fee charged for
the disposal of major appliances containing freon or similar
substances.
(c) Waste oil shall be deposited by the person
responsible therefore at the Village waste oil collection
location, as designated by the Recycling Commission, or at
another DNR approved site, all in accordance with regulations
designated by the Recycling Commission or the DNR, as may be
applicable. No person shall deposit any material other than
waste oil at the Village waste oil collection location and shall
only place waste oil in the containers at the location and at the
time specified by the Recycling Commission. No person shall
damage or deface any portion of the Village waste oil collection
location.
(d) Yard waste shall be placed at appropriate
collection points as are designated from time to time by the
Recycling Commission, composted on site or placed at the curb for
collection at specified times of the year as designated by the
Recycling Commission. This provision shall not be applicable to
contractor yard waste, which shall be placed at appropriate
collection points as are designated in the permit issued pursuant
to §5.185 of these ordinances.
(e) Antifreeze shall be deposited by the person
responsible therefore at the Village antifreeze collection
location, as designated by the Recycling Commission, or at
another DNR approved site, all in accordance with regulations
designated by the Recycling Commission or the DNR, as may be
applicable. No person shall deposit any material other than
antifreeze at the Village antifreeze collection location and
shall only place antifreeze in the containers at the location and
at the time specified by the Recycling Commission. No person
shall damage or deface any portion of the Village antifreeze
collection location.
5.15 PREPARATION AND COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
Except as otherwise directed by the Recycling
Commission, occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit residences
shall do the following for the preparation and collection of the
separated materials specified in §5.11(e) through (o):
(a) Aluminum containers shall be placed in such
containers as are designated and provided by the Recycling
Commission.
(b) Bi-metal containers shall be rinsed free of
produce residue and placed in such containers as are designated
by the Recycling Commission.
(c) Corrugated paper or other container board shall be
free of debris, flattened, stacked and tied, and placed at such
location as are designated by the Recycling Commission.
(d) Foam polystyrene packaging shall be placed in such
containers as are designated and provided by the Recycling
Commission.
(e) Glass containers shall be rinsed free of product
residue and placed in such containers as are designated by the
Recycling Commission.
(f) Magazines shall be stacked, tied and placed at
such locations as are designated by the Recycling Commission.
(g) Newspaper shall be stacked, tied and placed at
such locations as are designated by the Recycling Commission.
(h) Office paper shall be stacked, tied and placed at
such locations as are designated by the Recycling Commission.
(i) Rigid plastic containers shall be prepared and
collected as follows:
(1) Plastic containers made of PETE, including
, shall be rinsed free of
product residue and placed in such containers as
are designated by the Recycling Commission.
(2) Plastic containers made of HDPE, including
, shall be rinsed free of
product residue and placed in such containers as
are designated by the Recycling Commission.
(3) Plastic containers made of PVC, including
milk jugs and detergent bottles, shall be rinsed
free of product residue and placed in such
containers as are designated by the Recycling
Commission.
(4) Plastic containers made of LDPE, including
, shall be rinsed free of
product residue and placed in such containers as
are designated by the Recycling Commission.
(5) Plastic containers made of PP, including
, shall be rinsed free of
product residue and placed in such containers as
are designated by the Recycling Commission.
(6) Plastic containers made of PS, including
, shall be rinsed free of
product residue and placed in such containers as
are designated by the Recycling Commission.
(7) Plastic containers made of other resins or
multiple resins, including
, shall be rinsed free of product
residue and placed in such containers as are
designated by the Recycling Commission.
(j) Steel containers shall be rinsed free of product
residue and placed in such containers as are designated by the
Recycling Commission.
(k) Waste tires shall be collected at such times and
in such manner as designated by the Recycling Commission. All
waste tires shall be removed from the wheel rim prior to
collection.
5.16 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR DESIGNATED AGENTS OF
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
(a) Owners or designated agents of multiple-family
dwellings shall do all of the following to recycle the materials
specified in §5.11(e) through (o):
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the
recyclable materials.
(2) Notify tenants in writing at the time of
renting or leasing the dwelling and at least semiannually
thereafter about the established
recycling program.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials
separated from the solid waste by the tenants and
the delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
(4) Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and
recycle solid waste, which materials are
collected, how to prepare the materials in order
to meet the processing requirements, collection
methods or sites, locations and hours of
operation, and a contact person or company,
including a name, address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to
the owners or designated agents of multi-family dwellings if the
postconsumer waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a
processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural
Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in
§5.11(e) through (o) from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible.
5.17 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR DESIGNATED AGENTS OF NONRESIDENTIAL
FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES.
(a) Owners or designated agents of non-residential
facilities and properties shall do all of the following to
recycle the materials specified in §5.11(e) through (o):
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the
recyclable materials.
(2) Notify in writing, at least semi-annually,
all users, tenants and occupants of the properties
about the established recycling program.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials
separated from the solid waste by the users,
tenants and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
(4) Notify users, tenants and occupants of
reasons to reduce and recycle, which materials are
collected, how to prepare materials in order to
meet the processing requirements, collection
methods or sites, locations and hours of
operation, and a contact person or company,
including a name, address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to
the owners or designated agents of non-residential facilities and
properties if the post-consumer waste generated within the
facility or property is treated at a processing facility licensed
by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for
recycling the materials specified in §5.11(e) through (o) from
solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible. For
purposes of compliance with §12.03(1)(c)(4) of these ordinances,
written verification of the existence of a bona fide contract for
the recovery of recyclable materials pursuant to this subparagraph
shall be presumptive evidence of the existence of a
Recycling Plan, as defined in §5.10(u).
5.18 PROHIBITIONS ON DISPOSAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
SEPARATED FOR RECYCLING.
No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal
facility or burn in a solid waste treatment facility any of the
materials specified in §5.11(e) through (o) which have been
separated for recycling, except waste tires may be burned with
energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
5.185 CONTRACTOR PERMIT FOR CONTRACTOR YARD WASTE.
No person, firm or corporation shall perform labor or
services relating to the removal of any brush, branches, trees
(or parts thereof), stumps or other matter known as contractor
yard waste or yard waste, as defined herein, until first having
applied for and securing an annual permit to do so at locations
within the Village. The cost for such annual permit shall be One
Hundred ($100.00) Dollars.
(a) Permit Application. Applications for permit shall
be completed and submitted at least forty-eight (48) hours prior
to the anticipated commencement of the activities described in
the permit application and shall give, at a minimum, the
applicant’s name, residence, usual business, and the name of the
owner and/or occupant of the premises for which the permit is
sought. The permit deposit required in subparagraph (c) below
shall accompany the application. No permit shall be issued
except upon the approval of the designated representative of the
Recycling Committee of the Village Board, which shall be
responsible for the creation of the content of the permit
application.
(b) Regulations.
(1) The permit, once obtained, shall be on site
at any location at which the permittee is working
in the Village.
(2) The term for the permit shall be from January
1 to December 31 of each year.
(3) Upon completion of the activities at any
location within the Village at which the permittee
is working, the permittee shall cause all
trimmings, cuttings, trees, debris or other matter
described as contractor yard waste or yard waste
to be removed from the premises and disposed of in
a lawful manner in order to be eligible for return
of the deposit described in subparagraph (c)
below.
(c) Deposit. As a condition precedent to the granting
of a permit, the applicant shall deposit with the Village
Clerk/Treasurer the sum of Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars, which
amount shall be returned to the permittee upon completion of the
conditions specified in this ordinance and as may be specified in
the permit and upon notification by the permittee of the
permittee’s intention to surrender the permit and no longer
perform work in the Village. If the permittee fails to properly
clean any premises or fails to remove all contractor yard waste
or yard waste which has been generated by the activities of the
applicant, the Village, its employees or representatives, are
authorized to enter upon the subject premises and remove or cause
to be removed and dispose of such contractor yard waste or yard
waste which may have been created by the activities of the
applicant or others and the applicant and the owner shall be
jointly and severally obligated to reimburse the Village for all
costs in restoring the premises to the original condition. In
the event that it becomes necessary for the Village to cause the
removal of contractor yard waste or yard waste, in addition to
the forfeiture of the deposit required hereunder, the owner shall
have such costs imposed as a special assessment against the
subject parcel if the cost therefore remained unpaid after thirty
(30) days of being invoiced for the same.
(d) Designated Representative. The standing committee
on recycling may designate one (1) or more employees, agents or
representatives to act on its behalf in implementing the specific
terms of this ordinance.
(e) Effective Date. This ordinance shall become
effective upon October 1, 2008.
5.186 PLACEMENT OF CURBSIDE GARBAGE/RECYCLING.
No person, owner, designated agent of multiple-family
dwellings or tenant shall place garbage, refuse or recyclables at
or adjacent to the street right-of-way earlier than 5:00 p.m. on
the day prior to the day designated for collection at that
location, excepting only such special pickups as may be
specifically designated by the Recycling Commission and
containers must be removed no later than 8:00 p.m. the day of
collection.
5.19 ENFORCEMENT.
(a) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with
the provisions of this ordinance, any authorized officer,
employee or representative of the Recycling Commission may
inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling,
postconsumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection
sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of
multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and
properties, and any records relating to recycling activities,
which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect
proprietary information. No person may refuse access to any
authorized officer, employee or authorized representative of the
Recycling Commission who requests access for purposes of
inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No person
may obstruct, hamper or interfere with such an inspection.
(b) Any person who violates a provision of this
ordinance may be issued a citation to collect forfeitures. The
issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under any
other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter.
Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same
or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation
under this paragraph.
(c) Penalties for violating this ordinance may be
assessed as follows:
(1) Any person who violates §5.18 may be required
to forfeit $50 for a first violation, $200 for a
second violation, and not more than $2,000 for a
third or subsequent violation.
(2) Any person who violates §5.14(c) or (e) or
§5.185 may be required to forfeit a minimum of
Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars and not more than
Five Thousand ($5,000.00) Dollars, plus the costs
and expense incurred by the Village for
restitution, repair or cleanup of any subsequent
environmental contamination.
(3) Any person who violates the provision of this
ordinance, except 5.18 or 5.14(c) or (e), may be
required to forfeit not less than Ten ($10.00)
Dollars and not more than One Thousand ($1,000.00)
Dollars, for each violation.
5.20 BILLING PRACTICES FOR COLLECTION OF CURBSIDE
GARBAGE/RECYCLING.
Each owner of property benefitted by the curbside
collection of garbage/recycling by contractors under contract
with the Village shall be billed quarterly for such service at
rates established annually by the Village Board. Invoicing from
such services may be combined with municipal utility bills. All
invoices shall be payable within 20 days of billing and any
delinquent bills may be added to the tax roll in the manner of an
unpaid special assessment pursuant to Section 4.07(B) of these
ordinances.
5.21 ILLEGAL DUMPING.
(a) Purpose. The purposes of this ordinance are:
(1) To prohibit the disposal of solid waste at
any location other than at designated and
authorized facilities or sites and to prevent the
unauthorized use of dumpsters, yard waste
recycling bins and refuse totes.
(2) To provide enforcement of this ordinance
which shall be intended to be an effective
deterrent to illegal dumping of solid waste,
hazardous waste and yard waste.
(b) Definitions. In addition to these definitions,
all definitions contained in §5.10 of these ordinances are hereby
incorporated herein by reference:
(1) “Approved solid waste site” means a solid
waste site permitted or registered by the State of
Wisconsin DNR.
(2) “Contractor” means a person who, either for
or without compensation, chooses to transport or
attempt to transport any items defined in
subsections (5), (6), (13), (14), (16), and/or
(17) hereafter for another person, as defined in
subsection (10) hereafter, within the corporate
limits of the Village.
(3) “Commercial Vehicle” is a vehicle that is
operated by a person for commercial purpose or
that is owned by a business or commercial
enterprise.
(4) “Dispose” or “Dispose and dump” means to
abandon, discharge, deposit, inject, dump, spill,
leak or place any substance into or on any land or
water or so that such substance or any content
thereof may enter the environment. The placement
of biodegradable materials shall be in Village
approved locations and by persons authorized to
dispose biodegradable materials in those
locations.
(5) “Garbage” means all degradable and nondegradable
refuse and solid waste without economic
value that is generated through the course of
normal living by residents and organizations in
the community.
(6) “Hazardous waste” means any solid, liquid or
gaseous waste defined as hazardous by any federal
or State of Wisconsin law, rule, ordinance or
regulation. Hazardous waste includes, but is not
limited to, materials considered to be excessively
toxic, poisonous, corrosive, radioactive,
biologically infectious, explosive and flammable
or any combination.
(7) “Household waste” is discarded materials
generated in the normal course of daily activities
not otherwise defined herein.
(8) “Illegal dumping” is the dumping or unloading
or causing to be dumped any waste matter in or
upon any public property, or upon any private
property without the consent of the owners. With
the exception of yard waste generated by Village
residents and placed in Village approved
locations.
(9) “Litter and littering” is the willful and/or
negligent throwing, placing, sweeping, dropping,
shoveling or scattering of waste material left in
a place other than a place or container for proper
disposal whether on public or private property
within the Village.
(10) “Person” means any individual, group,
corporation, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, estate, trust or similar
such entity.
(11) “Public roadway” is the entire width between
property lines of a road, street, way,
thoroughfare, bridge, public beach, public park,
right of ways with and under the control of the
Village of Paddock Lake, County of Kenosha or
State of Wisconsin.
(12) “Public property” is any property open to the
public for any reason including the conduct of
business.
(13) “Recyclable materials” is as defined in §5.10
of these ordinances.
(14) “Solid waste” means any garbage, waste
matter, wood, plastic, metal, vegetation/debris,
trash, paper, ashes, rubbish, cardboard, concrete,
asphalt, electronic waste, and other discarded
materials, including, but not limited to, solid
liquids, semisolid or contained gaseous material
resulting from commercial and residential activity
which are no longer deemed usable.
(15) “Spilling loads” means willfully and
knowingly operating, owning or causing to be
operated on any public roadway, road, street or
public right of way a motor vehicle, trailer or
cart loaded with gravel, rock, slag, bricks,
leaves, brush or similar objects in such a manner
or in such a condition that the content of the
vehicle spills out and causes it to be deposited
on such public roadways.
(16) “Waste matter” is a discarded, used or
leftover substance including, but not limited to,
construction material, automotive parts,
packaging, carcass of a dead animal, furniture,
recyclable material or any object likely to injure
a person or create a hazard.
(17) “Yard waste” is as defined in §5.10 of these
ordinances.
(b) Prohibited Activities. The following activities
are prohibited:
(1) Placing, depositing or dumping, or causing to
be placed, deposited or dumped, any rocks, dirt,
construction material, rubbish, trash, automotive
parts, in or on any portion of a road right of way
or public property without the consent of the
Village of Paddock Lake.
(2) Placing, depositing or dumping, or causing to
be placed, deposited or dumped any rocks,
construction material, gravel, rubbish, trash,
dirt, automotive parts, brush, leaves, stumps,
yard waste in or on any Village property. The
exceptions to this subsection are as follows:
(a) Yard waste generated from Village
residential property is permitted to be
deposited in Village approved yard waste
collection sites by Village residents.
(b) Yard waste generated from Village
residential property is permitted to be
placed at roadways by Village residents
during scheduled yard waste collection
seasons.
(3) The disposal or the allowance of solid waste
at a location that is not an approved solid waste
site.
(4) No person may place any solid waste, yard
waste or recyclables in a dumpster, garbage can,
waste tote, or other solid waste container
belonging to another person without the permission
of the owner or person legally entitled to use of
the dumpster, garbage or other waste container.
(5) Each Village resident is strictly liable for
ensuring that solid waste, recyclables, yard waste
generated is properly disposed of. If solid
waste, recyclables or yard waste generated by
Village resident or person is illegally disposed
of, the person generating solid waste shall be
subject to liability as defined in this ordinance.
(6) No person shall discard any materials other
than yard waste recyclables in any Village
authorized yard waste disposal facilities.
(d) Penalties. Any person violating any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture
of not more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars for the first
offense and Five Thousand ($5,000.00) Dollars for each subsequent
offense.
Chapter 6
STREETS
6.01 Grades
6.02 Sidewalk Construction and Repair
6.03 Driveways
6.04 Culverts
6.05 Right-Of-Way Management
6.06 Obstructions and Encroachments
6.07 Street Privilege Permit
6.08 Removal of Street Encroachment
6.09 Snow and Ice Removal
6.10 Trees
6.11 Damages to or Obstruction of Streets
6.12 Reserved
6.13 Reserved
6.14 Reserved
6.15 Vehicles Transporting Septic or Holding Tank
Waste
6.01 GRADES.
(a) Establishment. The grade of all streets, alleys
and sidewalks shall be established by resolution by the Village
Board and the same recorded by the Village Clerk/Treasurer in his
or her office. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked on
until its grade is established.
(b) Alteration of Grade Prohibited. No person shall
alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground
or any part thereof in the Village by any means unless authorized
or instructed to do so by the Village Board. All such
alterations of grade shall be recorded in the office of the
Village Clerk/Treasurer by the Clerk/Treasurer or the officer
authorizing the alteration.
6.02 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR.
(a) Owner to Construct. It shall be the duty of the
abutting owner to build, repair, construct and perpetually
maintain sidewalks along or upon any street, alley or highway in
the Village and to pay the entire cost hereof. Whenever the
Village Board shall by resolution determine that a sidewalk be
laid, rebuilt, repaired, lowered or raised along or upon any
public street, alley or highway within the Village, it shall
proceed according to Section 66.615, Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Permit Required. No person shall lay, remove,
replace or repair any public sidewalk within the Village of
Paddock Lake unless he is under contract with the Village to do
such work or has obtained a permit from the Building Inspector
before such work is undertaken. No fee shall be charged for such
permits.
6.03 DRIVEWAYS.
(a) Permit. No person shall construct or maintain any
driveway which intersects with any public street, alley or public
right-of-way without first obtaining a driveway permit from the
Building Inspector pursuant to Section 12.03(6) of these
Ordinances.
(b) Specifications for Driveway Construction.
(1) Width. No driveway, including the apron,
shall exceed 24 feet in width at the edge or
intersection of any street, alley or public rightof-
way unless a special permit is obtained from
the Village Board.
(2) Interference with Intersections Prohibited.
At street intersections a driveway shall not
provide direct ingress or egress to or from the
street intersection area and shall not occupy
areas of the roadway deemed necessary by the
Village Board for effective traffic control or for
highway signs or signals.
(3) Interference with Street. No driveway apron
shall extend out into the street further than the
face of the curb, and under no circumstances shall
such driveway apron extend into the gutter area.
All driveway entrances and approaches shall be so
constructed that they shall not interfere with the
drainage of streets, side ditches or roadside
areas or with any existing structure on the right
of way. When recommended by the Committee on
Streets and Roads, the Village Board may require
the property owner to provide for adequate surface
water drainage along the street, and the property
owner shall also provide any necessary culvert
pipe at his own expense.
(4) Number of Approaches Limited. No more than
one driveway entrance and approach shall be
constructed for any lot or premises except where
deemed necessary and feasible without undue
impairment of safety, convenience and utility of
the street by the Building Inspector. Any two
approaches shall be at least 10 feet apart.
(5) Permittee Liable for Damage or Injury. The
permittee shall assume all responsibility for any
injury or damage to persons or property resulting
directly or indirectly during construction or
repair of driveway approaches or entrances. When
the curb or gutter is removed, the new connection
shall be of equivalent acceptable material and
curb returns provided or restored in a neat,
workmanlike manner. Driveway surfaces shall
connect with the street pavement and sidewalk in a
neat, workmanlike manner. Any sidewalk areas
which are damaged or are inadequate by reason of
vehicle travel across the sidewalk shall be
replaced.
6.04 CULVERTS.
No person shall lay, remove, replace or repair any
culvert within the Village unless he is under contract with the
Village to do such work or has obtained a permit from the
Building Inspector before work is undertaken.
6.05 RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT.
(a) Findings and Purpose. The Village finds that the
passage of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 has resulted in
increased use of the public rights-of-way and increased costs to
the taxpayers of the Village and that these costs are likely to
continue into the foreseeable future.
The Village finds that excavation and occupancy of the
public rights-of-way causes direct and indirect costs to be borne
by the Village and its taxpayers including, but not limited to:
(1) Administrative costs associated with public
right-of-way projects, such as registration,
permitting, inspection and supervision, supplies
and materials.
(2) Management costs associated with ongoing
management activities necessitated by public
right-of-way users.
(3) Repair costs to the roadway associated with
the actual excavation into the public right-ofway.
(4) Degradation costs defined as depreciation
caused to the roadway in terms of decreased useful
life, due to excavations into the public rightsof-
way.
In response to the foregoing facts, the Village hereby
enacts this ordinance relating to administration of and permits
to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the public rights-of-way,
together with an ordinance making necessary revisions to other
code provisions. This ordinance imposes reasonable regulations
on the placement and maintenance of facilities currently within
the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies.
The Village’s authority to enact this ordinance is
pursuant, but not limited to, the following federal, state and
local authority: 47 U.S.C. 253(c); §62.11(5), Wis. Stats.;
§66.045 Wis. Stats.; §66.048, Wis. Stats.; §86.16, Wis. Stats.;
§182.017, Wis. Stats.; §196.58(1), Wis. Stats.; §196.499(1), Wis.
Stats.; and Chapters 6 and 12 and 38 of these Ordinances.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide the Village
a legal framework within which to regulate and manage the public
rights-of-way, and to provide for recovery of costs. This
ordinance provides for the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Village as they use the rights-of-way of the
Village, as well as to ensure the structural integrity of the
public rights-of-way. The Village desires to minimize and
anticipate the number of excavations taking place thereon and to
regulate the placement of facilities within the rights-of-way to
ensure that they remain available for public services. The
taxpayers of the Village bear the financial burden for the upkeep
of the rights-of-way. A primary cause for the early and
excessive deterioration of its rights-of-way is the frequent
excavation by persons who locate facilities therein.
Under this chapter, all persons who excavate, obstruct
and/or occupy the public rights-of-way will reimburse the
Village’s administrative, ongoing management and degradation
costs. Right-of-way users will bear a fair share of the
financial responsibilities for the integrity of the public
rights-of-way.
(b) Definitions. The following definitions apply in
this ordinance. References hereafter to “sections” are unless
otherwise specified references to sections in this ordinance.
Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.
(1) “Alternative Telecommunications Utility Other”
has the meaning in §196.01, Wis. Stats.
(2) “Applicant” means any person requesting
permission to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy a
right-of-way.
(3) “Degradation” means the accelerated
depreciation of the right-of-way, caused by an
excavation of the right-of-way, resulting in the
need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than
would be required if the excavation did not occur.
(4) “Department” means the Department of Public
Works of the Village, whether formally constituted
or not, and shall include the Roads, Sewer and
Water Departments of the Village and the Village
Building Inspector.
(5) “Department Inspector” means any person
authorized by the Department to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this
chapter.
(6) “Emergency” means a condition that (1) poses a
clear and immediate danger to life or health, or
of a significant loss of property; or (2) requires
immediate repair or replacement in order to
restore service to a customer.
(7) “Excavate” means to dig into or in any way
remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part
of a right-of-way.
(8) “Facilities” means all equipment owned,
operated, leased or subleased in connection with
the operation of a service or utility service, and
shall include, but is not limited to, poles,
wires, pipes, structures and appurtenances.
(9) “In” when used in conjunction with “right-ofway”,
means over, above, in, within, on or under a
right-of-way.
(10) “Local Representative” means a local person
or persons or designee of such person or persons,
authorized by a registrant to accept service and
to make decisions for that registrant regarding
all matters within the scope of this ordinance.
(11) “Obstruct” means to place any object in a
right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage
over that or any part of the right-of-way.
(12) “Occupy” means to dwell or reside above, on,
in, or below the boundaries of the public rightsof-
way.
(13) “Permittee” means any person to whom a permit
to excavate or occupy a right-of-way has been
granted by the Village under this chapter.
(14) “Person” means, municipality, corporation,
company, association, firm, partnership, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership
and individuals and their lessors, transferees and
receivers.
(15) “PSC” means the Public Service Commission of
the State of Wisconsin.
(16) “Public Utility” has the meaning provided in
§196.01(5), Wis. Stats.
(17) “Registrant” means any person who has
registered with the Village (1) to have its
facilities located in any right-of-way, or (2) to
use or seek to occupy or use the right-of-way or
any facilities in the right-of-way.
(18) “Repair” means to perform construction work
necessary to make the right-of-way useable for
travel, according to Department specifications, or
to return facilities to an operable condition.
(19) “Repair Bond” means a letter of credit, or
cash deposit posted to ensure the availability of
sufficient funds to assure that right-of-way
excavation repair work is completed in both a
timely and quality manner, per Department
specifications.
(20) “Restore or Restoration” means the process by
which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding
area, including pavement and foundation, is
reconstructed according to Department
specifications.
(21) “Restoration Bond” means a letter of credit,
or cash deposit posted to ensure the availability
of sufficient funds to assure that right-of-way
excavation restoration work is completed in both a
timely and quality manner, per Department
specifications.
(22) “Right-of-Way” means the surface and space
above and below a public roadway, highway, street,
bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the
Village has an interest, including other dedicated
rights-of-way for travel purposes.
(23) “Service” or “Utility Service” includes
municipal sewer and water services and also
includes, except as provided herein, but in not
limited to (1) those services provided by a public
utility as defined in §196.01(5), Wis. Stats.; (2)
telecommunications, pipeline, fire and alarm
communications, water, electricity, light, heat,
cooling energy or power services; (3) the services
provided by a district heating or cooling system;
and (4) cable service as defined and regulated
under 47 U.S.C. 521 through 573. Wireless
telecommunications service and cellular mobile
radio telecommunications (CMRS) services as
defined by Section 332(d) of the Federal
Communications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. 332(d)(1))
are excluded, unless these services have a
presence in the right-of-way.
(24) “Supplementary Application” means an
application made to excavate or obstruct more of
the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a
permit that had already been issued.
(25) “Telecommunications Carrier” has the meaning
in §196.01, Wis. Stats.
(26) “Telecommunications Provider” has the meaning
in §196.01, Wis. Stats.
(27) “Telecommunications Rights-of-Way User” means
a person owning or controlling a facility in the
public right-of-way, or seeking to own or control
a facility in the public right-of-way, that is
used or is intended to be used for transporting
telecommunication or other voice or data
information. This includes telecommunications
providers, utilities, ATUs and carriers. For
purposes of this chapter, a cable telephone system
defined and regulated under §66.082(2)(d), Wis.
Stats., and telecommunication activities related
to providing natural gas or electric energy
services, and which are not offered for resale as
telecommunications services, are not
telecommunications right-of-way users.
(28) “Telecommunications Service” means the
offering for sale or the conveyance of voice, data
or other information at any frequency over any
part of the electromagnetic spectrum, including
the sale of service for collection, storage,
forwarding, switching and delivery incidental to
such communication and including the regulated
sale of customer premises equipment.
Telecommunications Service does not include cable
television service, wireless service or broadcast
service.
(29) “Telecommunications Utility” has the meaning
in §196.01, Wis. Stats.
(30) “Unusable Facilities” means facilities in the
right-of-way which have remained unused for one
(1) year and for which the registrant is unable to
provide proof that it has either a plan to begin
using them within the next twenty-four (24) months
or a potential purchaser or user of the
facilities.
(31) “Village” means the Village of Paddock Lake,
a Wisconsin Municipal Corporation.
(c) Administration. The Village Building Inspector is
responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way, and the
permits and ordinances related thereto on behalf of the Village.
(d) Registration for Right-of-Way Occupancy.
(1) Registration. Each person who occupies, uses,
or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or any
facilities in the right-of-way, including by
lease, sublease or assignment, or who has, or
seeks to have, facilities located in any right-ofway
shall register with the Department and pay the
fee set forth in §6.05(f), below. Registration
will consist of providing application information
and paying a registration fee.
This section shall not apply to those persons
exclusively utilizing facilities provided by
another right-of-way user.
(2) Registration prior to work. No person may
construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or
perform any other work on, or use any facilities
or any part thereof in any right-of-way without
first being registered with the Village.
(3) Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed
to repeal or amend the provisions of a Village
ordinance requiring persons to plant or maintain
the tree lawn in the area of the right-of-way
between their property and the street curb,
construct sidewalks, install street signs or
perform other similar activities. Persons
performing such activities shall not be required
to obtain any permits under this chapter.
(e) Registration Information.
(1) Information required. The information
provided to the Village at the time registration
shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Each registrant’s name, Digger’s Hotline
registration certificate number, address and
e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers.
(b) The name, address and e-mail address, if
applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers of a local representative. The local
representative or designee shall be available
at all times. Current information regarding
how to contact the local representative in an
emergency shall be provided at the time of
registration.
(c) All right-of-way users shall demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Village the
financial capability to cover any liability
which might arise out of their presence in
the right-of-way.
(d) If the person is a corporation, a LLC or
LLP, a copy of any certificate required to be
filed under Wisconsin Statutes as recorded
and certified to by the Secretary of State.
(e) A copy of the person’s certificate of
authority from the Wisconsin Public Service
Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully
required to have such certificate from said
commission or other state or federal agency.
(f) Execution of an indemnification agreement
in a form prescribed by the Village, which is
consistent with, and shall not exceed the
obligations provided in §6.05(w) herein.
(2) Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep
all of the information listed above current at all
times by providing to the Department information
as to changes within fifteen (15) working days
following the date on which the registrant has
knowledge of any change.
(f) Registration Fee.
(1) Registration fee. The Village Building
Inspector shall establish the registration fee in
an amount sufficient to recover the costs incurred
by the Village for processing registrants. This
fee shall be computed as the average of labor
costs, indirect costs, and other costs associated
with registration.
(2) Fee computation. The Village may recalculate,
and by resolution, establish the registration fee.
(g) Excavation Permit Requirement.
(1) Excavation permit required. Except as
otherwise provided in this chapter or other
chapters of the Village ordinances, no person
shall excavate any right-of-way or place
facilities in a right-of-way without first having
obtained an excavation permit from the Department.
No person shall excavate the right-of-way or
maintain an excavation in the right-of-way beyond
the date or area specified in the permit unless
such person makes a supplementary application or
another excavation permit before the expiration of
the initial permit, pursuant to §6.05(n), below,
and a new permit or permit extension is granted.
(2) Permit display. A copy of any permit issued
under this chapter shall be made available at all
times by the permittee at the indicated work site
and shall be available for inspection by the
Department upon request.
(h) Excavation Permit Application. Application for a
permit shall be made to the Department. Permit applications
shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon
compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:
(1) Registration with the Department if required
by this chapter;
(2) Submission of a completed permit application
form, including all required attachments, and
scaled drawing showing the location and area of
the proposed project and the location of all
existing and proposed facilities;
(3) Payment of all money due to the Village for:
(a) applicable permit fees and costs as set
forth below;
(b) unpaid fees or costs due for prior
excavations; or
(c) any loss, damage or expense suffered by
the Village because of applicant’s prior
excavations of the rights-of-way or any
emergency actions taken by the Village.
(4) When an excavation permit is requested for
purposes of installing additional facilities, and
the posting of a restoration bond for the
additional facilities is insufficient, the posting
of an additional or larger restoration bond for
the additional facilities may be required.
(i) Excavation Permit Fee.
(1) Fee calculation. The excavation permit fee
shall be established by the Department in an
amount sufficient to recover the costs incurred by
the Village. This fees shall recover costs
incurred by the Village for each of the following
categories as provided herein:
(a) Administrative. The general formula for
computing the administrative fee shall be the
average per-permit costs for labor plus
indirect and other costs.
(b) Repair. No repair fee shall be collected
by the Village, however, the permittee shall
be required to repair the public right-of-way
to Department specifications, subject to
inspection and acceptance by the Department,
as per §6.05(j), and to pay a degradation
fee.
(c) Degradation. The general formula for
computing the degradation fee shall be the
cost per square yard for street, overlay and
seal coat multiplied by the appropriate
depreciation rate for that street multiplied
by the area of the patch.
The area of the patch shall be calculated by
adding two (2) feet to each side of the
actual street cut. Depreciation schedules
shall be provided by type of street.
Degradation Fee = (cost per square yard
for street, overlay and sealcoat) x
(depreciation schedule rates) x (area of
patch)
The total excavation permit fee shall be
calculated as follows:
Total excavation permit fee =
administrative cost + degradation fee
(if applicable).
(2) Village exemption. Notwithstanding
subparagraph (i)(1)(c), the Village and its
contractors shall not pay degradation fees.
(3) Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit
shall be issued without payment of applicable
fees.
(4) Non-refundable. Permit fees paid for a permit
that the Department has revoked for a breach as
stated in §6.05(q) are not refundable.
(j) Right-of-Way Repair.
(1) Timing. The work to be done under the
excavation permit, and the repair of the right-ofway
as required herein, must be completed within
the dates specified in the permit.
(2) Repair. In addition to repairing its own
work, the permittee must repair the general area
of work, and the surrounding areas, including the
paving and its foundations, to the specifications
of the Department. The Department shall inspect
the area of the work and accept the work when it
determines that proper repair has been made, per
specifications of the Department.
A permittee may request to have the Village repair
the right-of-way.
(a) Village repair. If the permittee
requests to have the Village repair the
right-of-way, the Village may accept or
reject the request at its sole option. If
the Village accepts, the permittee shall be
billed for the Village’s costs, and shall pay
the amount thereof within thirty (30) days of
billing.
(b) Permittee repair. If the permittee
chooses to repair the right-of-way, it shall
at the time of application for an excavation
permit post a repair bond in an amount
determined by the Department to be sufficient
to cover the cost of repairing the right-ofway
to Department specifications. If,
thirty-six (36) months after completion of
the repair of the right-of-way, the
Department determines that the right-of-way
has been properly repaired, the repair bond
shall be released.
(3) Standards. The permittee shall perform
repairs according to the specifications of the
Department and/or in the conditions specified in
the permit. The Department shall have the
authority to prescribe the manner and extent of
the repair, and may do so in written procedures of
general application or on a case-by-case basis.
(4) Guarantees. The permittee guarantees its work
and shall maintain it for thirty-six (36) months
following its completion, except for organic
material which shall be maintained for twelve (12)
months. During this period it shall, upon
notification from the Department, correct all
repair work to the extent necessary, using the
method required by the Department. Said work
shall be completed within ten (10) calendar days
of the receipt of the notice from the Department
not including days during which work cannot be
done because of circumstances constituting force
majeure or days when work is prohibited as
unseasonable or unreasonable under §6.05(p).
(5) Failure to repair. If the permittee fails to
repair the right-of-way in the manner and to the
condition required by the Department, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all repair
required by the Department, the Department at its
option may do such work. In that event the
permittee shall pay to the Village, within thirty
(30) days of billing, the cost of repairing the
right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as
required, the Village may exercise its rights
under the repair bond.
(k) Restoration in Lieu of Repair and Degradation. The
permittee may elect to restore the excavation and surrounding
pavement in lieu of repair and a degradation fee. If restoration
is elected, the Department shall specify the area to be restored,
and the methods and materials to be used for the restoration.
The permittee shall then also comply with the preceding §6.05(j),
subparagraphs (1) through (5) as applied to restoration instead
of repair.
(l) Inspection.
(1) Notice of completion. When the work under any
permit hereunder is completed, the Permittee shall
notify the Department.
(2) Site inspection. Permittee shall make the
work site available to the Department and to all
others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon
completion of the work.
(3) Authority of Department. At the time of
inspection, the Village may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a threat to the
life, health, safety or well being of the public.
The Village may issue an order to the registrant
for any work that does not conform to the
applicable standards, conditions or codes. The
order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the
permit. Within ten (10) days after issuance of
the order, the registrant shall present proof to
the Department that the violation has been
corrected. If such proof has not been presented
within the required time, the Department may
revoke the permit pursuant to §6.05(q).
(m) Ongoing Management Fees.
(1) Fee basis. Fees shall reflect the ongoing or
long-term costs to the Village of managing access
to the right-of-way. These costs are exclusive of
administrative costs collected under excavation
permit fees. Fees shall be initially set, and may
be annually recomputed, to recover the costs
incurred by the Village in ongoing management of
the right-of-way. Ongoing management costs
include, but are not limited to, inventory
maintenance, facility tracking, GIS, tree
trimming, grass mowing, right-of-way maintenance,
location marking and general inquiries related to
public right-of-way users. The fee shall be based
on the number of feet of right-of-way occupancy by
a telecommunications right-of-way user.
The per foot management fee shall be calculated as
follows:
Annual management fee per foot = total annual
management cost/total ROW occupancy feet
(2) Payment of fees. Ongoing management fees
shall be subject to adjustment and correction at
the conclusion of the calendar year. Such fees
shall be paid for all and any part of a calendar
year, prorated on a daily basis, during any time
period in which the said person:
(a) Uses or occupies the right-of-way to
furnish telecommunications service, or
(b) Places, maintains or uses the person’s
wires, mains, pipes, or any other facilities
in the right-of-way.
(n) Joint Applications.
(1) Joint application. Registrants may jointly
apply for permits to excavate the right-of-way at
the same place and time.
(2) With village projects. Registrants who join
in a scheduled excavation performed by the
Village, whether or not it is a joint application
by two (2) or more registrants or a single
application, are not required to pay the
degradation portion of the excavation permit fee.
(3) Shared fees. Registrants who apply for
permits for the same excavation, which the
Department does not perform, may share in the
payment of the excavation permit fee. Registrants
must agree among themselves as to the portion each
will pay and indicate the same on their
applications.
(o) Supplementary Applications.
(1) Limitations on area. An excavation permit is
valid only for the area of the right-of-way
specified in the permit. No permittee may perform
any work or excavate outside the area specified in
the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater
than that specified in the permit must be
excavated must, before working in that greater
area (1) make application for a permit extension
and pay any additional fees required thereby, and
(2) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
(2) Limitation on dates. An excavation permit is
valid only for the dates specified in the permit.
No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue
working after the end date. If a permittee does
not finish the work by the permit end date, it
must apply for a new permit for the additional
time it needs, and receive the new permit or an
extension of the old permit before working after
the end date of the previous permit.
(3) Fees for supplementary applications. A
permittee shall pay administration costs for any
additional permits.
A permittee is not required to pay an additional
degradation fee for the same excavation, if one
has already been paid on the original permit.
(p) Other Obligations.
(1) Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a
permit to excavate and/or occupy the right-of-way
does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain
all other necessary permits, licenses, and
authority and to pay all fees required by any
other village, county, state, or federal laws. A
permittee shall perform all work in conformance
with all applicable codes and established rules
and regulations, and is responsible for all work
done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit,
regardless of who does the work.
(2) Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, or
with the approval of the Department, no right-ofway
excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for
such work.
(q) Revocations, Suspensions, Refusals to Issue or
Extend Permits.
(1) Grounds. The Department may refuse to issue a
permit or may revoke, suspend or refuse to extend
an existing permit if it finds any of the
following grounds:
(a) The applicant or permittee is required
by §6.05(d) to be registered and has not done
so;
(b) Issuance of a permit for the requested
date would or interfere with an exhibition,
celebration, festival or other event;
(c) Misrepresentation of any fact by the
applicant or permittee;
(d) Failure of the applicant or permittee to
maintain required bonds and/or insurance;
(e) Failure of the applicant or permittee to
complete work in a timely manner;
(f) The proposed activity is contrary to the
public health, safety or welfare;
(g) The extent of which right-of-way space
where the permit is sought is available;
(h) The competing demands for the particular
space in the right-of-way;
(i) The availability of other locations in
the right-of-way or in other rights-of-way
for the facilities of the permit applicant;
(j) The applicability of ordinances or other
regulations of the right-of-way that affect
location of facilities in the right-of-way.
(k) The condition and age of the right-ofway,
and whether and when it is scheduled for
total or partial reconstruction; or
(l) The applicant or permittee is otherwise
not in full compliance with the requirements
of this chapter or state or federal law.
(2) Discretionary issuance. Notwithstanding
subparagraph (1), above, the Department may issue
a permit where issuance is necessary (a) to
prevent substantial economic hardship to a
customer of the permittee or applicant, or (b) to
allow such customer to materially improve its
utility service, or (c) to allow the permittee or
applicant to comply with state or federal law or
Village ordinance or an order of a court or
administrative agency.
(3) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision
of the Department revoking, suspending, refusing
to issue or refusing to extend a permit may file a
request for review with the Village Board. A
request for review shall be filed within ten (10)
days of the decision being appealed. Following a
hearing, the Village Board may affirm, reverse or
modify the decision of the Department.
(r) Work Done Without a Permit.
(1) Emergency situations. Each registrant shall
immediately notify the Village by verbal notice on
an emergency phone number provided by the Village
of any event regarding its facilities that it
considers to be an emergency. The registrant may
proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to
respond to the emergency. Within two (2) business
days after the occurrence of the emergency, the
registrant shall apply for the necessary permits,
pay the fees associated therewith and otherwise
fully comply with the requirements of this
Chapter.
If the Village becomes aware of an emergency
regarding a registrant’s facilities, the
Department may attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or
potentially affected, by the emergency. The
Village may take whatever action is deems
necessary to protect the public safety as a result
of the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne
by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
(2) Non-emergency situations. Except in an
emergency, any person who, without first having
obtained the necessary permit excavates a rightof-
way must subsequently obtain a permit, and
shall in addition to any penalties prescribed by
ordinance, pay double the normal fee for said
permit, pay double all the other fees required by
this chapter or other chapters of the Village
code, deposit with the Department the fees
necessary to correct any damage to the right-ofway
and comply with all of the requirements of
this chapter.
(s) Supplementary Notification. If the excavation of
the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given
on the permit, permittee shall notify the Department of the
accurate information as soon as this information is known.
(t) Location of Facilities.
(1) Under grounding. Under conformity with
local, state and federal law, unless existing
above-ground facilities is used or specific
advance written permission is obtained by the
Department for the installation of above-ground
facilities, the installation of new facilities and
replacement of old facilities shall be done under
ground or contained within buildings or other
structures in conformity with applicable codes.
(2) Corridors. The Department may assign specific
corridors within the right-of-way, consistent with
Wisconsin Public Service Commission standards.
All excavation or other permits issued by the
Department involving the installation or
replacement of facilities shall designate the
property corridor for the facilities at issue
consistent with the Wisconsin Public Service
Commission’s corridor selection standards.
(3) Limitation of space. The Department may
prohibit or limit the placement of new or
additional facilities within the right-of-way if
there is insufficient space to accommodate all of
the requests of persons to occupy and use the
right-of-way. In making such decision, the
Department shall strive to the extent possible to
accommodate all existing and potential users of
the right-of-way, but may prohibit or limit the
placement of new or additional facilities when
required to protect the public, health, safety or
welfare.
(u) Relocation of Facilities. Except as prohibited by
state or federal law, a registrant must promptly and at its own
expense with due regard for seasonal working conditions,
permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the right-ofway
whenever the Department requests such removal and relocation,
and shall restore the right-of-way to the same condition it was
in prior to said removal or relocation. The Department may make
such request to prevent interference by the company’s facilities
with (i) a present or future Village use of the right-of-way,
(ii) a public improvement undertaken by the Village, (iii) an
economic development project in which the Village has an interest
or investment, (iv) when the public health, safety and welfare
require it, or (v) when necessary to prevent interference with
the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-ofway.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be
required to remove or relocate its facilities from any right-ofway
which has been vacated in favor of a non-governmental entity
unless and until the reasonable costs thereof are first paid to
the person therefor.
(v) Interference With Other Facilities During Municipal
Construction. When the Village performs work in the right-of-way
and finds it necessary to maintain, support, shore or move a
registrant’s facilities, the Village shall notify the local
representative. The registrant shall meet with the Village’s
representative within twenty-four (24) hours and coordinate the
protection, maintenance, supporting, and/or shoring of the
registrant’s facilities. The registrant shall accomplish the
needed work within seventy-two (72) hours, unless the Village
agrees to a longer period.
In the event that the registrant does not proceed to
maintain, support, shore or move its facilities, the Village may
arrange to do the work and bill the registrant, said bill to be
paid within thirty (30) days.
(w) Indemnification. Permittee expressly acknowledges
and agrees, by acceptance of the permit, to indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the Village, its officers, boards, committees,
commissions, elected officials, employees and agents, from and
against all loss or expense (including liability costs and
attorney’s fees) by reason of any claim or suit, or of liability
imposed by law upon the Village or its agents or employees for
damages because of bodily injury, including death at any time
resulting therefrom, sustained by any person or persons or on
account of damages to property, including loss of use thereof,
arising from, in connection with, caused by or resulting from the
permittee’s acts or omissions in the exercise of its rights under
this permit, whether caused by or contributed to by the Village
or its agents or employees.
(x) Abandoned Facilities.
(1) Discontinued operations. A registrant who has
determined to discontinue its operations in the
Village must either:
(a) Provide information satisfactory to the
Department that the registrant’s obligations
for its facilities under this chapter have
been lawfully assumed by another registrant;
or
(b) Submit to the Department a proposal and
instruments for dedication of its facilities
to the Village. If a registrant proceeds
under this clause, the Village may, at its
option:
(1) accept the dedication for all or a
portion of the facilities; or
(2) require the registrant, at its own
expense, to remove the facilities in the
right-of-way at ground or above ground
level; or
(3) require the registrant to post a
bond or provide payment sufficient to
reimburse the Village for reasonably
anticipated costs to be incurred in
removing the facilities.
However, any registrant who has unusable and
abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall
remove it from that right-of-way within two (2)
years, unless the Department waives this
requirement.
(2) Abandoned facilities. Facilities of a
registrant who fails to comply with §6.05(x)(1),
above, and which, for two (2) years, remains
unused shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned
facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. In
addition to any remedies or rights it has at law
or in equity, the Village may, at its option (i)
abate the nuisance, (ii) take possession of the
facilities, or (iii) require removal of the
facilities by the registrant, or the registrant’s
successor in interest.
(3) Public utilities. This section shall not
apply to a public utility as defined by
§916.01(5), Wis. Stats.
(y) Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers. The
Village, by the granting of a permit to excavate, obstruct and/or
occupy the right-of-way, or by registering a person under this
chapter does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair,
or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or maybe
hereafter granted to the Village under the Constitution and
statutes of the State of Wisconsin to regulate the use of the
right-of-way by the permittee; and the permittee by its
acceptance of a permit to excavate, obstruct and/or occupy the
right-of-way or of registration under this chapter agrees that
all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power,
or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested
in or reserved to the Village, shall be in full force and effect
and subject to the exercise thereof by the Village at any time.
A permittee or registrant is deemed to acknowledge that its
rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the
Village to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the
safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply
with all applicable general law, and ordinances enacted by the
Village pursuant to such powers.
(z) Severability. If any section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision
and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions thereof.
6.06 OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS.
(a) Prohibited. No person shall encroach, obstruct,
or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, or land dedicated to
public use, or permit the same on any public way adjoining the
premises of which he is the owner or occupant, except as provided
in subsection (b).
(b) Exceptions. The prohibition of this section shall
not apply to the following:
(1) signs or clocks attached to buildings which
project not more than 6 feet from the fact of such
building and which do not extend below any point
10 feet above the sidewalk, street or alley.
(2) Awnings which do not extend below any point 7
feet above the sidewalk, street or alley.
(3) Public utility encroachments authorized by
state law or the Village Board.
(4) Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being
loaded or unloaded which do not extend more than 3
feet on the sidewalk, provided such goods, wares,
etc. do not remain thereon for a period of more
than 2 hours.
(5) Temporary encroachments or obstructions
authorized by permit under Section 6.07 of this
Code.
(6) Excavations and openings permitted under
Section 6.05 of this Code.
6.07 STREET PRIVILEGE PERMIT.
(a) When Required. Permits for the use of the
streets, alleys, sidewalks, street right-of-ways and other public
ways or places of the Village may be granted to applicants by the
Building Inspector for the purpose of moving any building or
structure or of encumbering the street, alley, sidewalk or rightof-
way with materials necessary in and about the construction or
demolition of any building or structure, or in connection with
the construction of any improvement when such permit is deemed
necessary by the Building Inspector. In addition, a street
privilege permit shall be required in case of the construction of
a primary residence or any commercial building. Such applicant,
though, must comply with the other requirements of this
subsection and obtain a building permit, if required by the
building regulations of the Village. Applications shall be made
for a street privilege permit at the time of application for a
building permit and the building inspector shall, at that time,
determine if such street privilege permit is required. It is the
specific intent of the Village Board of Trustees to eliminate
damages to public streets and adjacent right-of-ways during the
construction of improvements on private lots and, as such, there
shall be a presumption that a street privilege permit is
necessary and that a bond shall be required unless deemed
unnecessary by the Building Inspector. No building permit shall
be issued until such time as the Building Inspector determines
whether a street privilege permit is required.
(b) Bond. No street privilege permit shall be issued
until the applicant executes and files with the Village
Clerk/Treasurer a bond, in cash or certified funds, in the sum of
Seven Hundred Fifty ($750.00) Dollars. Such bond must indemnify
and save harmless the Village from any and all liabilities for
accidents or damage caused by reason of operations under said
permit, and guarantee that the permittee will leave the vacated
premises in a clean and sanitary condition and repair any and all
damage to the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public property of
the Village resulting from such building or moving operations.
The permittee shall restore all Village property to the condition
of said property prior to the issuance of the permit which shall
include, but will not be limited to, the removal of construction
debris, tree limbs, branches or trunks, grading and restoration
of ditch lines. In the event any damage is incurred to streets
or public improvements or land, or any cleanup costs are incurred
by the Village, then, upon three (3) days notice to applicant,
the Village may forfeit such sums as are necessary from the bond
to complete repairs or cleanup of the affected area. In
addition, in the event that the bond posted hereunder is
insufficient to complete repairs to damage to streets or public
improvements or public lands, or to pay for all cleanup costs
incurred, then, in such event, any occupancy permit may be
withheld by the Building Inspector in connection with the
construction until such time as all repairs or cleanup of the
affected area have been completed.
(c) Fee. The fee for a street privilege permit shall
be One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars.
(d) Conditions of Occupancy. The permission to occupy
or obstruct the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds is
intended only for use in connection with the actual erection,
alteration, repair, removal or moving of buildings, or
structures, and shall be given upon the following terms and
conditions and subject to revocation without notice by the
Building Inspector for violation thereof:
(1) Such temporary obstruction shall cover not
more than one-third (1/3) of any street or alley.
(2) Obstructions shall be sufficiently lighted at
night so as to be in full view of the public from
all directions.
(3) Sidewalk traffic shall not be interrupted,
but temporary sidewalks of not less than four (4)
feet in width guarded by a closed fence at least
four (4) feet high on both sides may be maintained
during the period of occupancy.
(4) The process of moving any building or
structure shall be as continuous as practicable
until completed, and if ordered by the Building
Inspector shall continue during all hours of the
day or night.
(5) No building or structure shall be allowed to
remain in an area which would prevent easy access
to any fire hydrant.
(6) Buildings shall be moved only in accordance
with the route prescribed by the Building
Inspector.
(7) Upon termination of the work necessitating
such obstruction, all parts of the streets,
alleys, sidewalks or public grounds occupied under
the permit shall be vacated, cleaned of all
rubbish and obstructions and placed in a safe
condition for public travel at the expense of the
permittee.
6.08 REMOVAL OF STREET ENCROACHMENT.
In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the owner
or occupant of the premises adjoining any unlawfully obstructed
sidewalk shall refuse or neglect to remove such obstruction
within 24 hours after notice from the Building Inspector to do
so, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to remove such
obstruction and report the cost and expense to the Village
Clerk/Treasurer. The cost shall then be entered on the next
annual tax roll as a special charge against the property abutting
such obstructed sidewalk, and be collected as other special taxes
against real estate.
6.09 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
(a) Commercial. The owner, occupant or person in
charge of a building or structure or unoccupied lot in the B-1,
B-2, I-1, M-2, M-1, P, RM-1, RD-1 zoning districts, abutting
State Highway 50, State Highway 83 or State Highway 75 or 236th
Avenue, shall clean the pedestrian sidewalk, curb ramps and
handicap accessible curb ramps in front of or adjoining each
building or unoccupied lot of any and all snow and ice which has
fallen or accumulated upon the sidewalk or curb ramps in front of
or adjacent to the premises owned or occupied or cared for no
later than 12:00 noon of each day and shall cause the same to be
kept clear from ice and snow. When the ice has formed on any
sidewalk or curb ramp so that it cannot be immediately removed,
such person shall keep the same treated with deicing material
(salt) or sand.
(b) Residential. The owner, occupant or person in
charge of a building or structure or unoccupied lot in the R-1,
R-2 or R-3 residential zoning districts shall clean the
pedestrian sidewalk, curb ramps and handicap accessible curb
ramps in front of or adjoining each building or unoccupied lot of
any and all snow and ice which has fallen or accumulated upon the
sidewalk or curb ramps in front of or adjacent to the premises
owned or occupied or cared for no later than 12:00 midnight of
the day following each snow event and shall cause the same to be
kept clear from ice and snow. When the ice has formed on any
sidewalk or curb ramp so that it cannot be immediately removed,
such person shall keep the same treated with deicing material
(salt) or sand.
(c) Penalty. Any owner, occupant or person in charge
of a building or structure or unoccupied lot in the Village
fronting or abutting any street who fails to remove snow and/or
ice as required by subsections (a) or (b), above, shall be liable
to the Village for the costs of removal of the same, which costs
shall be at the rate of One Hundred Fifty ($150.00) Dollars for
the first hour or any fraction thereof, and One Hundred ($100.00)
Dollars per hour thereafter. Such costs shall be payable within
ten (10) days of billing and may be imposed as a lien against the
real property as a special assessment until paid.
6.10 TREES.
(a) Overhanging Street and Located Upon Village
Property and Right-of-Ways. Trees standing in and upon any
public street or place or Village right-of-way shall be the
responsibility of the Village and trees and shrubbery upon any
adjacent lot or land abutting any public street, place or rightof-
way shall be pruned and trimmed by the owners or occupants of
the property on or in front of which such trees are growing. The
lowest ranches projecting over any public street or alley must
provide a clearance of not less than 14 feet and a clearance of
not less than 10 feet over any right-of-way or other public
place. Any dead, broken, or otherwise hazardous branches likely
to fall and do injury to the public or which might create a
nuisance must be trimmed. Any tree or shrubbery not trimmed as
herein provided shall be deemed hazardous.
(b) Hazardous and Infected Trees. Any tree which the
Weed Commissioner shall find to be infected, hazardous or a
nuisance so as to endanger the public or other trees, plants or
shrubs growing within the Village, or to be injurious to sewers,
sidewalks or other public improvements whether growing upon
public or private premises, shall be removed, trimmed or treated
by the owner of the property upon or adjacent to which such tree
or part thereof is located. The Weed Commissioner shall give
written notice to the owner to remedy the situation. Such notice
shall be served personally or posted upon the affected tree, and
specifically state the period of time within which the action
must be taken, which shall be within not less than 24 hours nor
more than 14 days, as determined by the Weed Commissioner. If
the owner shall fail to remove, treat or trim the tree within the
time limited, the Weed Commissioner shall cause the tree to be
removed, treated or trimmed and shall report the full cost to the
Village Clerk/Treasurer who shall then enter such cost as a
special charge against the property.
(c) Cottonwood and Box Elder Trees Prohibited. No
person shall plant or maintain within the Village of Paddock Lake
any female tree of the species Populus Deltiodes, commonly called
the Cottonwood, or any tree commonly called the seed-bearing Box
Elder or Acer Negundo, which may now or hereafter become infested
with Box Elder bugs, and such trees are hereby declared a
nuisance. Any person having any such trees on his premises shall
cause the same to be removed. If any owner shall fail to remove
any such tree within 30 days after receiving written notice from
the Weed Commissioner, the Weed Commissioner shall cause the
removal of such tree and report the full cost thereof to the
Village Clerk/Treasurer who shall place such charge upon the next
tax roll as a special charge against the premises.
(d) Planting of Certain Trees Restricted. No person
shall hereafter plant any Catalpa, Chinese Elm, White Poplar,
Lombardy Poplar, or any fruit or nut trees in or upon any public
street, parkway, boulevard or other public place within the
Village of Paddock Lake unless he shall first secure written
permission from the Weed Commissioner, who shall not approve any
such planting if in his opinion the tree will constitute a
nuisance to the public or adjoining property owners or interfere
with the safety of the public or the operation of any sewer or
water system. The Weed Commissioner shall cause the removal of
any tree planted in violation of this subsection.
6.11 DAMAGES TO OR OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS.
(a) Prohibitions. No person, whether natural or
corporate, shall be any of the following:
(1) Litter or deposit any foreign matter on any
street, highway, sidewalk, park or public place,
except building materials and merchandise as
permitted under this ordinance or as otherwise may
be permitted by the Village Board or the Village
Building Inspector.
(2) No person shall damage or deface any street,
highway, sidewalk, public way, park or other
public property, or any post, wire, lamp, street
sign, traffic sign, tree, grass, vegetation,
gutter, drain, manhole or any other appurtenance
thereon, except as may be authorized by the
Village Board or Village Building Inspector.
(3) No person shall obstruct or endanger the free
passage or proper use of the public of any street,
sidewalk, highway or public place, except as may
be permitted by the Village Board or the Village
Building Inspector.
(4) No person shall commence or continue any
construction, place construction vehicles or
equipment on any Village road or road right-ofway,
or otherwise take any action which will, in
the opinion of the Village Building Inspector,
adversely impact the condition or proper use of
any public street, sidewalk, highway, right-of-way
or other public property without first posting a
street bond and obtaining a building permit from
the Village Building Inspector.
(b) Permits. When, upon reviewing applications for
building permits under Chapter 12 of these ordinances that it
will be necessary for the applicant to obtain a street and/or
sidewalk permit then the applicant shall be required to comply
with §6.05 or §6.07 of these ordinances prior to the issuance of
any building or zoning permit. In addition to any other
conditions which may be imposed by the Village Building Inspector
for the issuance of a building or zoning permit, or a street or
sidewalk permit under §6.05 or §6.07, the Village Building
Inspector may consider and impose other conditions precedent to
the issuance of any such permit(s) including, but not limited to,
the following:
(1) Prohibiting any tracked vehicles on the
public roadway or road right-of-way unless steel
mats or other provisions which meet with the
satisfaction of the Village Building Inspector are
utilized so as to prevent damage to Village roads
and road right-of-way.
(2) Provision for adequate off right-of-way
parking during periods of construction and
prohibition of overnight parking of construction
equipment and trucks on any portion of the road
right-of-way.
(3) Twenty-four (24) hours advance notice of
working on any street right-of-way with a plan
submitted and approved in advance for the erection
of barricades, detour signs, cones or other
markers pursuant to subsection (c) of this
ordinance.
(4) The prohibition of the use of a sewer lateral
for draining any foundation during the
construction phase, with appropriate measures or
additional bonding to enforce such sanction.
(5) Withholding the issuance of final occupancy
permit(s) until such time as all permit conditions
and/or ordinance provisions have been met.
(c) Protection of Work in Streets. Any person doing
work in any street, highway, sidewalk or other public place shall
maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or
vehicles by reason of the work. Barricades shall be protected by
suitable lights at night. Any defect in any pavement shall be
barricaded to prevent injury. Any person maintaining any opening
or excavation in any such place shall guard such opening or
excavation while the same remains open, by proper barricades or
lights. No person shall interfere with or disturb any barricades
or lights lawfully placed to prevent or to make new pavement or
excavation or opening in any street highway or sidewalk.
(d) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of
this ordinance, in addition to such other remedies as may be
available to the Village, shall forfeit a sum of not less than
Fifty ($50.00) Dollars nor more than One Thousand ($1,000.00)
Dollars for such violation and shall be liable to the Village for
all costs of prosecution of such action and for all consequential
damages incurred by the Village in repairing or restoring Village
property or removing equipment, obstructions or other matter from
Village property. For purposes of this section, each day in
which a condition violative of this ordinance shall constitute a
separate offense.
6.12 RESERVED.
6.13 RESERVED.
6.14 RESERVED.
6.15 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING SEPTIC OR HOLDING TANK WASTE
Pursuant to Section 349.16 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
no person shall operate any vehicle where the primary purpose of
such vehicle is to pump and/or haul septic or holding tank waste
on any village street, highway or roadway except on state
highways and county trunk roads and except on 234th Avenue and
235th Avenue north of 62nd Street and on 62nd Street between
234th Avenue and 235th Avenue. The Village Board shall
determine, from time to time, such amounts as the Board deems
necessary to be segregated from fees received by the Village
under contract with sanitary waste disposal firms to be utilized
for the repair, maintenance and replacement of village roadways
damaged by the vehicles of this type.
Chapter 8
PLUMBING REGULATIONS
8.01 Definitions
8.02 Wisconsin State Plumbing Code
8.03 Permits
8.04 Bond Required
8.05 Water Pipes and Water Pumps
8.01 DEFINITIONS.
“Plumbing” for the purpose of this Chapter means and
includes:
(a) The meanings as set forth in sub-sections
145.01(1)(a)(c)(d) and (e) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) The construction, connection to or alteration of
any drain, soil or waste pipe to carry domestic sewage, storm
water or industrial waste from a point 3 feet outside of the
foundation walls of any building to the sewer lateral at the curb
or other disposal terminal including the private sewage disposal
or treatment plant. This definition does not include minor
repairs to faucets and the removal of stoppages in soil or waste
pipes.
8.02 WISCONSIN STATE PLUMBING CODE.
The provisions of the Wisconsin State Plumbing Code as
set forth in Chapter H62 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code,
are hereby made a part of this Chapter by reference, and shall
govern the design, constructions, installation, supervision and
inspection of plumbing.
8.03 PERMITS.
(a) Required. No plumbing or water pumps shall be
installed in the Village without a permit. Each application must
be approved by the Building Inspector before a permit may be
issued. A permit must also be received before excavating in any
street, alley or other public way to repair, alter or install
plumbing.
(b) Permit Fees. The permit fees to be paid shall be
as set forth in Chapter 12 of these Ordinances.
8.04 BOND REQUIRED.
Before a permit may be issued for plumbing excavation
in any street, the person applying for such permit shall execute
unto the Village of Paddock Lake and deposit with the Village
Clerk/Treasurer a corporate surety to be approved by the Village
Board in the sum of $1,000 conditioned that he will faithfully
perform all work with due care and skill, and in accordance with
this Code. The bond shall state that the person will indemnify
and save harmless the Village of Paddock Lake and the owner of
the premises against all damages, costs, expenses, outlays and
claims of every nature and kind arising out of unskillfulness or
negligence on his part in connection with plumbing or excavating
for plumbing as prescribed in this Chapter. Such bond shall
remain in force and must be executed for a period of one year
except that on such expiration it shall remain in force as to all
penalties, claims and demands that may have accrued thereunder
prior to such expiration.
8.05 WATER PIPES AND WATER PUMPS.
(a) Pipe Materials. All water pipes laid underground
shall be of type K copper tubing, type C extra heavy lead cast
iron water main pipe, or other approved materials, provided that
in any event, the requirements of this section shall at least
meet the minimum requirements set forth in Chapter H62 of the
Wis. Admin. Code.
(b) Pump Installations. All water pumps shall be
installed in compliance with the Wisconsin Well Construction and
Pump Installation Code, Chapter NR112 of Wisconsin Administrative
Code, which Chapter is hereby made part of this Code by
reference.
Chapter 9
BUILDING PERMIT AND STREET FEES
9.01 Building Permit and Street Fees
9.01 BUILDING PERMIT AND STREET FEES.
In determining fees under this section, the cubic
content is defined as that volume of building enclosed by the
outer surface of the exterior walls from the top of the building
to the roof and in determining costs, all construction shall be
included with the exception of heating, air conditioning,
electrical or plumbing work.
(a) New Residential Structures and Accessory
Buildings.
(1) All single-family residential buildings
including attached garages, basements, crawl
spaces, apartments and condominiums 26¢ per square
foot.
(2) New detached garages, accessory, or utility
buildings not in excess of 150 square feet -
minimum $30.00; in excess of 150 square feet but
less than 600 sq. ft.- $75.00; over 600 feet -
minimum $100.00.
(3) Permit to start construction of footings and
foundations - minimum $75.00.
(4) Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC) seal - $35.00.
(b) Remodel, Alteration and Repair to Existing Single-
Family Structures and Accessory Buildings.
(1) Additions, alterations, remodel and major
repairs to existing residential structure the
greater of 26¢ per square foot or $5.00 per 1,000
of valuation - minimum $30.00.
(2) Residing, re-roofing and minor repairs -
minimum $30.00.
(c) New Commercial, Industrial and Institutional
Structures.
(1) Inspection only.
(a) General construction - $7.00 per $1,000
of value
(b) Electrical - $7.00 per $1,000 of value
(c) Plumbing - $7.00 per $1,000 of value
(d) HVAC - $7.00 per $1,000 of value
(2) Plan review - $250.00
(d) Commercial, Industrial and Institutional
Alterations.
(1) Inspection only.
(a) General construction - $7.00 per $1,000
of value
(b) Electrical - $7.00 per $1,000 of value
(c) Plumbing - $7.00 per $1,000 of value
(d) HVAC - $7.00 per $1,000 of value
(2) Plan review - $250.00
(e) New Agricultural Buildings (not dwellings or
garages). Not in excess of 15,000 cubic feet - minimum $15.00.
In excess of 15,000 cubic feet - $1.00 per 1,000 cubic feet.
(f) New Multi-Family.
(1) Inspection only.
(a) General construction - $.22 per sq. ft.
(b) Electrical - $.04 per sq. ft.
(c) Plumbing - $125.00 per unit.
(d) HVAC - $.07 per sq. ft.
(e) Fireplace - $100.00 per fireplace unit.
(2) Plan review - $250.00 per building.
(3) Early start permit - $125.00 per building.
(g) Multi-Family Alterations.
(1) Inspection only.
(a) General construction - $7.00 per $1,000
of value
(b) Electrical - $7.00 per $1,000 of value
(c) Plumbing - $7.00 per $1,000 of value
(d) HVAC - $7.00 per $1,000 of value
(2) Plan review - $250.00 per building.
(h) In addition to the above schedule of structural
inspection fees, there is hereby established a schedule of
plumbing, electrical, heating and ventilating fees as follows:
(1) Plumbing.
(a) Sewer connection - $35.00.
(b) Water connection from well - $20.00.
(c) Water connection from municipal system -
no charge.
(d) Inspection for sewer service lateral
from building to street connection and for
inspection of sewer service lateral relay
from Public Service "Y" connection to
inspection tee - $35.00.
(e) Yard drain - the greater of $55.00 or
.015/sq. ft.
(f) Residential Irrigation - $300.00
(g) Manhole Tap - $300.00
(h) Private Interceptor - $500.00
(i) Individual connections -
Schedule
(1) Automatic washer - $10.00 ea.
(2) Sinks - $10.00 ea.
(3) Dishwasher - $10.00 ea.
(4) Grease traps - $10.00 ea.
(5) Garbage grinders - $10.00 ea.
(6) Water closets - $10.00 ea.
(7) Showers - $10.00 ea.
(8) Wash basins - $10.00 ea.
(9) Laundry tubs - $10.00 ea.
(10) Urinals - $10.00 ea.
(11) Bath tubs - $10.00 ea.
(12) Bubblers - $10.00 ea.
(13) Floor drains - $10.00 ea.
(14) Grease interceptor - $60.00 ea.
(15) Sillcocks - $8.00 ea.
(16) Water heaters - $10.00 ea.
(17) Wash fountains - $10.00 ea.
(18) Storm sewer conductor - $10.00 ea.
(19) Sump pumps - $10.00 ea.
(20) Catch basins - com. $60.00 ea.
(21) Ejectors or pumps - $25.00 ea.
(22) Water softners - $10.00 ea.
(23) Inside sewers - $25.00 ea.
(24) Pump - $20.00 ea.
(25) High pressure boiler - $50.00 ea.
(26) Manholes - $100.00 ea.
(27) Sewer tap - $100.00 ea.
(28) Storm sewer and san. sewer -
$100.00 ea.
(29) Commercial storm sewer - 10¢/foot.
(30) Lateral connections -
(a) 100 ft. or less - $50.00 ea.
(b) over 100 ft outside - 50¢ per
foot.
(c) over 100 ft inside - 50¢ per
foot.
(31) Extension of house drain where
fixtures already installed - $40.00
minimum.
(32) Failure to call for inspection -
$50.00 ea.
(33) Reinspection - $40.00 ea.
(34) Road cut repair (when req.) - See
Ordinance.
(35) Other fixtures not listed above -
$10.00 ea.
(36) Minimum permit fee - $40.00
(2) Electrical.
(a) Light, switch & convenience outlets -
75¢ ea.
(b) Light fixtures - 75¢ ea.
(c) Fluorescent lighting tubes - 75¢ ea.
(d) Electric range, dishwasher, water heater
& clothes dryer - $8.00 ea.
(e) Garbage grinding & disposal unit - $8.00
ea.
(f) Gas burner, oil burner, or stoker 25¢
per HP - $3.00 min.
(g) Refrigerating, air cooling or similar
25¢ per HP - $3.00 min.
(h) Feeder or subfeeder #4 A.W.G. or larger
- $3.00 ea.
(i) Temporary service permits - $30.00 ea.
(j) Service.
(1) Each service switch _____ amps.
(2) 0 through 100 amps - $50.00 ea.
(3) 101 through 400 amps - $75.00 ea.
(4) 401 through 600 amps - $60.00 ea.
(5) 601 through 1000 amps - $70.00 ea.
(6) Ea. add'l 1000 amp or fraction -
$8.00 ea.
(k) Motors - No. of motors _____ total H.P.
_____ - $.50/HP.
(l) Fuel dispensing pumps - $75.00 ea.
(m) Rectifiers, transformers, generators,
capacitors, welders, converters, reactors,
electric melting furnaces, etc. - 25¢/Kw.
(n) Space heating systems per circuit -
$5.00 ea.
(o) Heating devices, miscellaneous - $5.00
ea.
(p) Dimmers per 1000 watts - $1.00 ea.
(q) Power receptacles - 230 volts
(1) 20 through 30 amps - $4.00 ea.
(2) over 30 amps - $5.00 ea.
(r) Wireways, busways, underfloor raceways,
auxiliary gutters - 50¢/ft.
(s) Strip lighting, plug-in strip, trol-educt
or similar systems - 15¢/ft.
(t) Searchlights, arc, mercury, sodium vapor
lights, etc. - $1.00 ea.
(u) Studded lights, festoon lighting, stage
lights, per outlet - 20¢ ea.
(v) X-ray machines, motion picture machine,
etc. - $4.00 ea.
(w) Stage pockets, spot lights & other
apparatus - $3.00 ea.
(x) Electric signs, 10¢ each socket, 50¢ for
each additional transf - $4.00 min.
(y) Swimming pool wiring.
(1) Permanent pool - $75.00.
(2) Storable pool - $40.00.
(z) Electrical to detached garages,
accessory or utility buildings - $10.00.
(aa) Fire alarm system (required) - $5.00.
(bb) Smoke detectors (required) - $2.00.
(cc) Re-inspection - $30.00.
(dd) Minimum charge for any one permit -
$30.00.
(ee) Failure to call for inspection -
$150.00.
(3) Heating and Air Conditioning.
(a) Energy code computations - minimum
$30.00 per hour.
(b) Gas, oil or solid fuel heating unit to
include duct work .05 per square foot, all
heated areas - minimum $35.00.
(c) Each additional unit - $30.00.
(d) Fireplace to include free standing units
- $75.00.
(e) Air conditioning other than wall units
5¢ per square foot. Permanently installed
wall units - per unit $3.00.
(f) Additions or alterations to existing
heating or air conditioning units, to include
replacement of units - $30.00.
(g) Gas or oil hot water heater, to include
replacement - $30.00.
(i) Occupancy Permit.
(1) Only issued after completion -
(a) Single family home - $75.00
(b) Multi-family Residential - per living
unit, fee - $100.00.
(c) Commercial & industrial - per unit -
$100.00.
(2) Change of use permit - $30.00.
(j) Moving.
(1) House or commercial building 3¢ per square
foot - minimum $30.00 and road bond.
(2) Garage, utility or accessory - $30.00 and
road bond.
(3) Inspection of house or commercial building
before moving (in advance) - $30.00.
(4) Inspection of garage or utility before moving
(in advance) - $30.00.
(5) Plumbing, electrical, heating and ventilating
inspection fees are as set forth above in Sections
(e), (f) and (g).
(k) Miscellaneous.
(1) A razing or wrecking fee - $30.00.
(2) Residential fire suppression system -
$150.00.
(3) Other inspection/services not listed - $50.00
per hour.
(4) Signs - $3.75 per sq. ft. for all signs.
(5) Research fees - $25.00 per hour.
(6) Ordinance enforcement administration fees -
$25.00 per hour.
(7) Certified mail - prevailing rate.
(8) Process servicing fees - prevailing rate.
(9) Boating pier permit - $35.00.
(10) Shoreline restoration - $50.00.
(11) Zoning verification letter - $35.00.
(12) FEMA lomr letter application processing -
$200.00.
(13) Flood plain review letter - $40.00.
(14) Liquor license life safety inspection -
$25.00 per building.
(15) Amusement machine inspection - $25.00 per
building.
(16) Fireworks vendor site inspection fee -
$50.00.
(17) Fire alarm system review fee - $50.00 and
consultants fee schedule.
(18) Fire alarm inspection fee - $200.00.
(19) Burning permit - $10.00.
(20) Fire sprinkler review fee - $50.00 and
consultants fee schedule.
(21) Fire sprinkler inspection fee - $200.00.
(22) Irrigation system review fee - $200.00.
(l) Swimming Pools, Decorative Fountain Pools, Decks
and Gazebos.
(1) Decks and Gazebos - 26¢ per sq. ft. - minimum
$30.00.
(2) Plan review of decks - $25.00.
(3) Fences - $30.00.
(4) Pool plan review - $25.00.
(5) Pools and hot tubs - $75.00.
(1) Alter or remodel - $30.00.
(m) Signs.
(1) Up to 50 square feet - $3.75/sq. ft.
(n) Renewal.
(1) When a building permit is renewed for any
cause, the renewal fee shall be the percentage of
the original permit fee not inspected at time of
renewal - minimum $30.00.
(2) Street and sidewalk excavations - $50.00.
(3) Sidewalk new construction and repair -
$50.00.
(4) NEW driveway or culvert - $35.00.
(5) Repair to existing driveway-permit required -
NO FEE.
(6) Street opening - $100.00.
(o) Plan Examination.
(1) One and two family residence - $30.00.
(2) Apartments, three family residence, row
housing, multiple family dwelling - $200.00.
NOTE: Heating plans submitted separately -
$50.00.
(3) Commercial - industrial & additions -
$200.00.
(p) Special Inspections.
(1) $30.00/hour (one hour minimum).
(2) Permit to start early - $100.00.
(3) Abandon sewer inspection - $300.00.
(4) Change in sewer service from active to
inactive - $200.00.
(5) Change in sewer service from inactive to
active - $200.00.
(q) Erosion Control Plan Review -
(1) $150.00 minimum and $.02 per sq. ft. of area
disturbed.
(r) Stormwater Drainage Plan Review -
(1) $100.00 minimum and $.02 per sq. ft. of
affected area.
(s) Site Plan Review - (does not include erosion or
stormwater review
(1) 0 - 10,000 sq. ft. - $500.00.
(2) 10,001 - 50,000 sq. ft. - $750.00.
(3) 50,001 - 100,000 sq. ft. - $1,000.00.
(4) over 100,000 sq. ft. - $1,200.00.
(t) Zoning Permits.
(1) New.
(a) Single family house - $50.00.
(b) Commercial - $200.00 per building.
(c) Multi-family - $100.00 per unit.
(d) Institutional - $150.00 per building.
(e) Athletic facility - $150.00 per feature.
(2) Accessories.
(a) Detached Accessory - Garage, deck, pool,
etc. - $25.00 per improvement.
(b) Fence - $35.00.
(3) Additions.
(a) Single family house - $35.00.
(b) Commercial and multiple family house -
$100.00.
(c) Institutional - $100.00.
(4) Signs - $20.00.
(5) Towers/Antennas - $50.00/foot.
(6) Zoning information letter response - $35.00
per parcel.
(7) Requests for facsimile copies - $2.00 per
page.
(8) Parcel revised letter - $25.00.
(u) N.S.F.H. Building Permit - $50.00. Electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilation & air conditioning Note #1 -
permits may be obtained individually or on one form in the
categories of construction, heating, ventilating & air
conditioning, electrical & plumbing. Note #2 - An additional fee
for plan review may be assessed at the time of application for
renewal of the permit.
(v) The permit fee stated herein shall be tripled if
the work is commenced before a permit is issued.
Chapter 10
VILLAGE TREE COMMISSION
10.01 Intent and Purpose
10.02 Definitions
10.03 Tree Commission
10.04 Permits
10.05 Rights and Regulations Regarding Trees and
Shrubs in or upon Public Rights of Way and
Areas
10.06 Injury to Trees or Shrubs Prohibited
10.07 Moving Buildings and Structures
10.08 Sidewalks
10.09 Barricades
10.10 Cost of Planting, Removal and Protection of
Trees and Shrubs
10.11 Village Master Tree Plan
10.12 Notices-City Parkways
10.13 Public Nuisance-Private Premises
10.14 License or Permit Revocation
10.15 Appeal
10.16 No Guarantee, Warranty or Causes of Action
Created
10.17 Severability
10.18 Penalty
10.01 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
(a) Public Areas. It is hereby declared to be the
policy of the Village of Paddock Lake, Wisconsin, to regulate and
control the planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees
and shrubs in or upon all public areas of the Village in order to:
(1) Eliminate and guard against dangerous
conditions which may result in injury to persons
using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public
areas.
(2) Promote and enhance the aesthetic and general
welfare of the Village.
(3) Prohibit the undesirable and unsafe planting,
removal, treatment and maintenance of trees and
shrubs located in public areas.
(b) Public Areas and Private Premises. It is hereby
declared to be the policy of the Village to guard all trees, shrubs
and other plantings both public and private, within the Village,
against the spread of disease, insects or pests. The Village shall
take action to protect the public against trees and shrubs which
threaten the public health, safety and welfare.
10.02 DEFINITIONS.
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this
ordinance, they shall be construed to have the following meanings:
(a) "Person" shall mean persons, firm, association or
corporation.
(b) "Village" shall mean the Village of Paddock Lake,
Wisconsin.
(c) "Commission" shall mean the Tree Commission or its
designee as constituted under the Code of Ordinances of the Village
of Paddock Lake.
(d) "Public Rights of Way" shall include the part of
every street and alley between the lot line and the curb or
pavement and shall include sidewalks and lawn parkways between the
sidewalk and the curb or curbline, or the street right of way.
(e) "Public Areas" shall include all public rights of
way, parkways, boulevards, parks and other lands owned, controlled
or leased by the Village.
(f) "Public Trees and Shrubs" shall mean any trees and
shrubs located or to be planted in or upon public areas.
(g) "Private Premises" refers to all lands not owned,
controlled or leased by the Village of Paddock Lake.
(h) "Private Trees and Shrubs" shall mean any trees and
shrubs located or to be planted in or upon any lands not owned,
controlled or leased by the Village.
(i) "Public Nuisance" shall mean any tree or shrub or
part thereof which by reason of its condition, location, size or
species interferes with the use of any public area; or which is
infected with a plant disease; or which is infested with injurious
insects or pests which threaten public or private property; or
which endangers the public health, safety and welfare.
(j) "Forestry Program" shall mean a comprehensive plan
including maintenance, inventory and new planting with budget
projections for annual and long range implementation.
(k) "Village Parkway" shall mean that area between the
curb, or proposed location of curb and sidewalk or proposed
location of sidewalk or the street right of way not covered by
pavement in all areas which do not have sidewalks or proposed
sidewalks, which is owned, controlled or leased by the Village.
(l) "Emergency" shall mean any occurrence or anticipated
occurrence which requires action to eliminate danger to the public
health, safety and welfare.
10.03 TREE COMMISSION.
The Village may employ a forester or designate a
municipal employee, who, under the supervision of the Commission,
may exercise the following powers and duties:
(a) The Commission shall have jurisdiction, authority,
control, supervision and direction over all public trees and shrubs
planted or growing in or upon public areas, or as a part of a
Village-approved forestry program, as well as the planting,
removal, maintenance and protection thereof.
(b) The Commission shall cause the provisions of this
ordinance to be enforced.
(c) The Commission shall prepare and submit an annual
Forestry Report to the Village Board of Trustees.
(d) The Commission shall direct and implement a Master
Tree Plan as approved by the Village Board.
(e) The Commission shall attempt to prevent the spread
of disease, insects or pests in public or private trees and shrubs,
and shall conduct inspections of trees located on private property,
with prior notice, following complaints of third parties or under
its own volition, if there is reasonable cause to believe that
diseased, hazardous or pestiferous trees or shrubs, injurious to
the public and/or to the tree population exists. The Commission is
authorized to take samples for examination by a competent
entomologist, plant pathologist or forester to determine action
necessary.
In the event the Commission is denied entry upon any
private premises, it is authorized by Wisconsin Statutes to make
application to the property court for an inspection warrant.
10.04 PERMITS.
(a) Permit Required. No person shall plant, remove,
prune branches or roots, disturb, alter or do surgery on a tree or
shrub in any public area, or cause such act to be done by others,
without first obtaining a written permit for such work from the
Commission. The Commission may authorize the Village Building
Inspector for issuance of such permits.
(b) Permit Exemptions. No permit shall be required to
fertilize or water trees or shrubs in public areas.
(c) Permits to Public Utilities and Contractors Working
Within any Public Areas.
(1) A public utility is required to notify the
Commission within 48 hours of doing any work near,
on or adjacent to any tree or shrub upon Village
property. The Commission shall inspect trees or
shrubs to be affected and notify the utility of
modifications, if any. The utility shall not
proceed until notice by the Commission is served to
the utility in writing.
(2) Any public utility or contractor planning to
excavate the soil near trees or shrubs is required
to apply for a permit with the Village. Upon
inspection, the Commission may require the utility
or its agents to submit a plan specifying the work
to be done and showing the trees and shrubs within
the work project site within a minimum distance of
forty feet.
The Commission shall modify the plan if needed
to provide protection to the trees and shrubs.
Construction damage or death to trees or shrubs
shall be evaluated and become subject to penalties
as specified herein. In addition, damaged or dead
trees or shrubs shall be assessed by separate
appraisal, according to the extent of damage or
death, and the utility will be subject to the loss
in value of the plant(s), including replacement
diameter inch for diameter inch and/or size.
10.05 RULES AND REGULATIONS REGARDING TREES AND SHRUBS IN OR
UPON PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY AND AREAS.
(a) Planting.
(1) No tree or shrub may be planted on Village
lands without the written permission of the
Commission. A permit shall be issued provided
trees and shrubs are acceptable to the Commission.
(2) Size of trees and shrubs. Trees must be a
minimum diameter (measured six inches above the
ground or natural grade) of 1.5 inches. All trees
must be a minimum height of 6.5 feet, measured at
the ground level of the site to the tip of the
tree. Shrubs shall be of a size acceptable to the
Commission.
(3) Spacing. No street trees or shrubs shall be
planted within twenty (20) feet from any street
corner, street light or traffic signal. The
Commission may set other planting standards to
accommodate the public health, safety and welfare.
(4) Illegal trees. The following trees shall not
be planted on public roadways or areas: Boxelder,
Cottonwood, American, red or slippery elms,
Mountain Ash and Tree of Heaven. Other species may
not be compatible on public roadways as determined
by the Commission.
(b) Pruning.
(1) Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any
public areas or upon any private premises shall be
kept trimmed so that the lowest branches or
foliage projecting over any public area subjected
to vehicular traffic provides a clearance of not
less than thirteen and one-half (13½) feet. The
Commission may waive the provisions of this
section for newly planted trees if they do not
interfere with vehicular traffic, obstruct the
light of any street light, obstruct any traffic
control sign or device, or otherwise endanger the
public health, safety or welfare.
(2) Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any
public area or upon any private premises adjacent
to a public area and subjected to pedestrian
traffic shall be kept trimmed so that the lowest
branches or foliage provide a clearance for
pedestrian traffic of not less than eight (8)
feet, unless waived in writing by the Commission.
(c) Removal of Trees and Shrubs. No tree or shrub
shall be removed from public areas of the Village without a
permit issued by the Commission. Once removed, the stump must be
ground out or pulled out of the ground to a minimum depth of nine
(9) inches below normal grade. Surface roots shall be removed to
a depth of at least six (6) inches below normal grade. All wood
and debris shall be removed from the street prior to the end of
each working day and all holes shall be filled to the normal
grade with topsoil.
10.06 INJURY TO TREES OR SHRUBS PROHIBITED.
No person, without the consent of the owner in care of
a private tree or shrub or without a written permit from the
Commission in the case of a public tree or shrub, shall do any of
the following acts:
(a) Secure, attach, fasten or run through any rope,
cable, wire or fixture to, around or through a tree or shrub.
(b) Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy
any tree or shrub or part thereof or permit any fire to burn
where it will injure any tree or shrub.
(c) Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, salt brine,
oil, or other injurious substance to seep, drain or be emptied
upon or about any tree or shrub.
(d) Excavate any ditch, tunnel or trench or lay
footings, pavement, stone or manmade material within a radius of
the tree or shrubs crown (branches and leaves) unless authorized
in writing by the Commission.
(e) Erect, alter, repair, raze or excavate, without
placing suitable guards as approved by the Commission, around all
public trees or shrubs which may be injured by such operations
within the construction zone.
(f) Remove any guard, stake or other device or other
material intended for the protection of a public tree or shrub or
close or obstruct any open space about the base of a public tree
or shrub designed to permit the unimpeded access of air, water or
fertilizer.
10.07 MOVING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
When a permit is obtained from any public authority to
move over-height or over-width structures or objects, the
Commission shall designate routes which will result in minimal
damage to trees and shrubs.
10.08 SIDEWALKS.
No person shall place or maintain upon any public
street stone, cement or device of any kind that will prevent the
free passage of air and water to a tree, plant or shrub unless
authorized by the Commission. No sidewalk shall be constructed
in such a manner that any tree growing in a public area shall be
enclosed unless a space of eight (8) feet by four (4) feet is
left open beneath the tree.
10.09 BARRICADES.
Barricades shall be erected to protect the public
health, safety and welfare before, during and after construction
and during planting, pruning and removal of trees and shrubs in
all public areas. The American National Standards Institute
safety standards shall be used as a guide to insure adequate
protection to the public. All roads and sidewalks shall be
blocked when planting, pruning and removing trees and a flagman
shall be posted to warn passerby and redirect traffic into a safe
direction.
10.10 COST OF PLANTING, REMOVAL AND PROTECTION OF TREES AND
SHRUBS.
When a permit is issued by the Commission to plant,
prune, remove, maintain or protect trees and shrubs, the entire
cost of the materials, equipment and labor shall be paid by the
permittee. The cost of all work in public areas directed by the
Commission and the Village shall be paid by the Village except in
those situations herein described.
10.11 VILLAGE MASTER TREE PLAN.
The Commission shall prepare and submit to the Village
Board a Master Tree Plan which shall include the following
programs:
(a) A Village Beautification Program to be set up on a
land division basis covering a ten year period.
(b) A Village Street Improvement Program to provide
that whenever a bond issue is passed for the purpose of creating,
replacing and/or widening of any Village street, that there be
included within such bond issue sufficient monies to carry out a
tree planting program to replace any trees destroyed or damaged
or to add trees not previously on a street, in the course of
making the principal improvement.
(c) A New Subdivision Tree Planting Program that will
require a developer to place and plant trees, at the sole expense
of the subdivider, from the approved list of trees within the
public areas of each subdivision.
(d) An Urban Forest Management Plan which includes
recommendations, goals and objectives for tree planting, pruning
and removal of trees and shrubs; tree inventories; an emergency
storm damage plan and; a major street tree plan.
10.12 NOTICES-CITY PARKWAYS.
Whenever the Commission proposes the removal of any
living tree or shrub in any Village parkway, it shall give two
(2) weeks advance written notice to the owner of the lot or
parcel of land adjacent to the parkway on which such tree or
shrub stands. No prior notice is required by the Commission for
the pruning of trees nor is notice required to remove dead or
hazardous trees or shrubs located on the parkway.
10.13 PUBLIC NUISANCE-PRIVATE PREMISES.
(a) Notice to Abate Public Nuisance. Whenever the
Commission shall find that any tree or shrub or part thereof
growing or located upon private premises is a public nuisance, it
shall notify the owner, or his agent, in writing, that the
nuisance must be treated, removed or otherwise abated as directed
within thirty (30) days, unless the Commission determines
immediate action is necessary for public health, safety and
welfare.
However, when emergency action is required, the
Commission need only attempt to contact the owner of said private
premises or the owner's agent and attempt to provide notice. If
the owner or owner's agent cannot be contacted and notified of
the emergency, the Commission may abate said nuisance without
actual notice to owner or owner's agent, at the expense of the
owner, charged as a special assessment against the owner's
property. Contacting the owner shall mean - reviewing such
public information as is maintained at the Village Hall by
Village Clerk/Treasurer, and attempting to contact the owner
personally at the premises or by phone or attempting to contact
non-resident by phone.
(b) Abatement by Village. If the owner of such
premises or his agent shall refuse or neglect to comply with the
notice within the time specified, the Commission shall cause the
nuisance to be abated and a special assessment charged against
the owner's property.
10.14 LICENSE OR PERMIT REVOCATION.
In addition to any other penalties or court proceedings
authorized to be taken hereunder, any permittee, violating the
permit or license terms shall have such permit or license revoked
by the Commission.
10.15 APPEAL.
Any person receiving a determination, order, notice or
revocation from the Commission may appeal from all or any part
thereof within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of such
notification. The Commission shall hear such an appeal within
thirty (30) days of their receipt of written notice thereof.
After such hearing, the Commission may revise, modify or affirm
the determination or order appealed and the grounds for its
decision shall be stated in writing. The Commission shall file
its written decision with the Village Clerk/Treasurer and shall
mail a copy thereof to the appellant within ten (10) days
following the conclusion of said hearing.
10.16 NO GUARANTEE, WARRANTY OR CAUSES OF ACTION CREATED.
This ordinance is not intended to guarantee or to
expressly or impliedly warrant to anyone that it will accomplish
its intended purpose, especially in regard to private trees and
shrubs, and no causes of action are intended to be created or
vested in anyone either against the Village or against any other
party.
10.17 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this ordinance shall be declared
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such declaration shall not invalidate any other
provision of this ordinance.
10.18 PENALTY.
Any person who by himself or by his agent or employee,
shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon
conviction, pay a forfeiture of not less than Twenty-five
($25.00) Dollars and up to One Thousand ($1,000.00) Dollars.
Each tree or shrub damaged or removed shall be deemed a separate
offense.
Chapter 11
ROAD NAMING AND BUILDING NUMBERING
11.01 Regulation of Road Naming and Building Number
11.02 Road Naming
11.03 Road Name Signs
11.04 Building Numbering
11.05 Building Numbering Signs
11.06 Damage to Signs
11.01 REGULATION OF ROAD NAMING AND BUILDING NUMBER.
(a) Authority. This section is created pursuant to
Sections 59.01, 59.07(64) 59.07(65) and 236.45, Wis. Stats.
(b) Jurisdiction. The Village Board of Trustees shall
have jurisdiction over Village road naming and building numbering
in the Village of Paddock Lake.
(c) Administration. The road naming and building
numbering system established by this section shall be
administered by the Village Building Inspector with the advice of
the Planning and Zoning Committee. The system herein established
shall be erected, developed and maintained pursuant to the
provisions of this ordinance.
11.02 ROAD NAMING.
A uniform system of numbers for all public roads in the
Village of Paddock Lake is established as follows:
(a) All roads and streets running easterly and
westerly shall be designed as streets with the Kenosha-Racine
County line road numbered as First street, each succeeding street
or road south of First Street shall be Second Street, etc., with
the designation “lace” to be used wherever necessary and
desirable. The streets and places shall be numbered south to the
Wisconsin-Illinois state line, and are to be integrated with the
City of Kenosha and County of Kenosha numbering system.
(b) All roads and streets running northerly and
southerly shall be designated avenues with the First Avenue to be
the first through street more or less just west of the shore of
Lake Michigan and each succeeding street west of First Avenue to
be designated as Second Avenue, Third Avenue, etc., with
designation “Court” to be used wherever necessary and desirable.
The avenues and courts shall be numbered west to the Kenosha-
Walworth County line and are to be integrated with the City of
Kenosha and County of Kenosha numbering system.
(c) All roads and streets remaining, not running in a
northerly, southerly, easterly or westerly direction, but on a
northwesterly, northeasterly, southwesterly, southeasterly
direction may be named by the Village Building Inspector after
consultation with and the approval of the Village Board, as other
than streets and places and avenues and courts.
(d) As new roads and streets are dedicated, the
Village Building Inspector shall assign street numbers for roads
and streets running easterly and westerly and for streets and
roads running northerly and southerly. Before the Village Board
approves any new plats pursuant to the provisions of the
Subdivision Control Ordinance, the plats will be referred to the
Village Building Inspector for the assignment of street names.
(e) The initial cost of erecting and developing street
signs on newly dedicated roads and streets shall be borne by the
developer and the Village Board shall require a developer to post
a surety bond or other approved means of security with the
Village Clerk to cover the cost of procuring and erecting the
appropriate street signs before granting approval to any plan.
(f) Once the signs are erected, the maintenance of the
signs will be the responsibility of and the actual maintenance of
all new signs and any existing signs will be carried out by the
Village of Paddock Lake Public Works Department under the
direction of the Village Administrator.
11.03 ROAD NAME SIGNS.
(a) General Requirements. Road name signs may be
erected at the intersections of all public roads within the scope
of this ordinance showing the names of all roads in accordance
with the official road naming map. All intersection signs shall
be a four-way sign, unless a multiple intersection requires a
larger sign.
(b) Specifications. The type of lettering,
composition, material, color, mounting posts, and accessories
shall be determined by the Village Board or a committee thereof
in accordance with the standards established pursuant to Section
349.065, Wis. Stats. The Village Streets and Roads shall be
responsible for procuring all materials necessary to assemble the
complete road name signs.
(c) Procurement. The Village shall be the exclusive
purchaser for all signs erected pursuant to the terms of this
ordinance and the Village of Paddock Lake Public Works Department
shall be the exclusive installer, subject to budget limitations
and manpower. The fees established for the cost and erection of
any signs by the Village of Paddock Lake Public Works Department
shall be set by the Village Board. The amount of the fee shall
reflect the actual cost of procurement and installation and shall
be subject to annual review.
(d) Restrictions. No other signs except those
specified above shall be erected or used under the road naming
plan established by this chapter.
11.04 BUILDING NUMBERING.
(a) The owner or occupant of every building or subunit
thereof within the Village to which an occupancy permit has been
issued by the Building Inspector shall comply with the
requirements contained in this section 11.04 and the provisions
of 11.05 of these ordinances.
(b) A uniform system of building numbering for all
residences (year-round or seasonal), places of business, farms
and public buildings in the incorporated areas of the Village is
hereby established.
(c) The numbering designation shall be as follows:
(1) On all streets and roads which run in a
generally easterly and westerly direction, the
numbers on the north side of such streets an
roads, shall end with an even number. The numbers
on the south side of such streets and roads shall
end with odd numbers.
(2) On all streets and roads which run in a
generally northerly and southerly direction, the
numbers on the west side of such streets and
roads, shall end with an even number. The numbers
on the east side of such streets and roads shall
end with odd numbers.
(3) The numbers on all roads or streets shall be
multiples of the lowest numbered street and shall
not exceed the next full number. Example: the
building numbers between First Street and Second
Street or Avenue must be 100-101-102-103-104,
etc., but may not be more than 199.
11.05 BUILDING NUMBERING SIGNS.
(a) General Requirements. Building number signs shall
consist of a plat of identical numbers with the numbers being not
less than three (3") inches high, mounted so as to be horizontal
to the streets or road abutting. The signs may be attached to a
building within six (6') feet of the front door or over the
overhead garage door. In all other instances, the signs shall be
mounted on posts set at the right-of-way lines of the road at a
point not more than three (3') feet to the right or left of the
private driveway or walkway leading from the road to the building
or property. The signs shall be far enough above the ground to
be readily visible. As new buildings are constructed, the
Village Building Inspector shall assign numbers prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
(b) Restrictions. No other signs except those
specified above shall be erected or used under the building
numbering plan established by this chapter.
11.06 DAMAGE TO SIGNS.
(a) No person shall willfully disturb, remove, deface
or damage any sign erected or maintained under the provisions of
this chapter.
(b) Any person violating this chapter shall forfeit
not more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars or, in default of
payment, be confined to the county jail for not more than six (6)
months, or until such forfeiture is paid and in addition to
penalties imposed by statutes.
(c) Any person who accidentally causes any of the
damage described in subparagraph (a) shall immediately report the
same to the county sheriff’s department or the Village
Administrator.
(d) Willful failure to so report such damage shall be
a violation of this chapter and such person shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not more than One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars, or in
default of payment, be confined to the county jail for not more
than thirty (30) days or until such forfeiture is paid.
Chapter 13
SWIMMING POOLS
13.01 Definitions
13.02 Permit Required
13.03 Location of Outdoor Swimming Pools
13.04 Fencing Required
13.05 Electrical Service and Wiring
13.06 Periodical Inspection
13.01 DEFINITIONS.
"Swimming pool" shall mean any body of water 24 inches
or more in depth, contained in an artificial or semi-artificial
receptacle or other container, above or below the surrounding
grade, intended to be used for swimming by adults or children,
whether or not any charge or fee is imposed upon such adults or
children, operated and maintained by any person whether he be
owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, and shall
include all structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances and
other facilities appurtenant to and intended for the operation
and maintenance of a swimming pool.
13.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(a) No person shall construct a swimming pool in the
Village without a permit. Before work is commenced on the
construction of a new swimming pool or any alteration or
addition, remodeling or other improvement to an existing swimming
pool, an application for a period to construct containing the
pertinent explanatory data shall be submitted to the Building
Inspector who shall review such application and pertinent data
and determine whether the proposed pool complies with the
provisions of this Chapter, Chapter 12, and with reasonable
standards of swimming pool construction for the protection of
public safety and health as prescribed in the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Village Board of Trustees pursuant
to this Chapter and to Chapter 12 of these Ordinances.
(b) The application for a permit to construct a
swimming pool or to alter or remodel any existing swimming pool
shall be submitted on such forms as are prescribed by the
Building Inspector pursuant to Chapter 12 of these Ordinances.
The fee for the permit shall be that established under Section
12.03(6) for these Ordinances.
13.03 LOCATION OF OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOLS.
Except as hereinafter provided, no swimming pool shall
be located so that any portion of the pool or any appurtenances
thereto shall be within 6 feet of any side yard or rear property
line, nor within 8 feet from any neighboring residence or from
any side street property line, nor within 60 feet from any front
property line, nor within 10 feet of any overhead electrical
service or power transmission line.
13.04 FENCING REQUIRED.
Except as herein provided, every outdoor swimming pool
shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than 4
feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to have
openings, holes, or gaps larger than 4 inches in any dimension
except for doors and gates. Picket fences are permitted provided
there is not more than a 4 inch horizontal gap. A dwelling house
or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. All
gates or doors opening through such enclosures shall be equipped
with self-closing and self-latching devices for keeping the gate
or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use.
Swimming pools which are so constructed so as to extend
a minimum of 4 feet above the surrounding grade and are equipped
with a removable safety ladder shall be exempt from required
fencing. The area surrounding said pools shall be kept free of
any chairs, tables, or other equipment which may provide access
to the pool by unsupervised children. Pools equipped with a
safety cover which will support a minimum of 150 pounds and which
is securely locked in place when the pool is not in use shall
also be exempt from required fencing.
These requirements shall be applicable to all swimming
pools, other than indoor pools, and shall apply to all existing
pools which have a minimum depth of 24 inches of water. No
person in possession of land within the Village either as owner,
purchaser, lessee, tenant, or licensee, upon which is situated a
swimming pool having a minimum depth of 24 inches shall fail to
provide and maintain such fence or wall except in such cases as
are specifically exempt above.
The Building Inspector may permit other protection
devices or structures to be used so long as the degree of
protection afforded by the substitute devices or structures is
not less than the protection afforded by the devices described
herein.
13.05 ELECTRICAL SERVICE AND WIRING.
The provisions of Article 680 of the National
Electrical Code 1981 defining the minimum requirements necessary
in regard to the construction and installation of electrical
wiring for equipment in or adjacent to swimming pools is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein and compliance with said Article 680 shall be
required for every swimming pool whether moveable or permanent.
A copy of the Electrical Code shall be maintained by the Building
Inspector at his office at the Village Hall.
13.06 PERIODICAL INSPECTION.
The Building Inspector shall inspect or cause to be
inspected all swimming pools within the Village at such times as
he may deem necessary to carry out the intent of this Chapter.
The Health Officer is authorized to enter upon any premises,
private or public, at such times as he may deem necessary and to
require the owner, proprietor or operator to comply with the
rules and regulations pertaining to swimming pools promulgated by
the Building Inspector and the Health Officer in accordance with
this Chapter.
Chapter 14
FENCES
14.01 Definitions
14.02 Residential Districts
14.03 Commercial and Industrial Districts
14.04 Security Fences
14.05 Agricultural District
14.06 Nuisance Abatement
14.07 Permits
14.08 Dilapidated Fences
14.01 DEFINITIONS.
Terms used in this Chapter mean as follows:
(a) "Residential District", "Commercial District",
"Industrial District" and "Agricultural District" as used in this
Chapter shall be defined herein in the same manner and form as
such definitions are used in the Zoning Code of the Village of
Paddock Lake.
(b) "Security fence": A fence enclosing commercial or
industrial property to protect the property.
(c) "Hedges": Bushes, shrubs or small trees planted
or maintained in such a manner to serve as a fence or barrier.
14.02 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
(a) No person shall install, construct or erect in a
residential district a solid fence greater than 3 feet in height
along the front street or any side street of their property.
However, a chain link fence or an open, woven wire fence may be 4
feet in height along the street side of a residential property.
Side yard fences not adjacent to a street shall not exceed a
height of 3 feet in th case of a solid fence or 4 feet in the
case of a chain link or open, woven wire fence in front of the
setback line for the residential district as set forth in the
Zoning Code. Fences to the rear of such setback lines may upon
written approval of adjoining landowners be erected to a height
of 6 feet provided such fence is constructed of chain link or
open woven wire fence and the written approval of adjoining
landowners is on file with the building inspector prior to
issuance of a permit under Section 14.07 of this Code.
(b) No person shall plant or maintain a hedge row,
shrubs or other plantings which serve as a fence or barrier in
excess of those heights set forth in subsection (a) of this
section.
(c) No person shall install, erect or maintain an
electrically charged fence or a fence made of barbed wire or of
any sharp pointed material as a fence or fencing materials in a
residential district.
14.03 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
No person shall install, construct or erect a fence or
plant a hedge row in a commercial or industrial district in
excess of 6 feet in height. Fences may be solid, chain link or
open woven wire. The use of electrically charged fences is
prohibited and the use of barbed wire is prohibited except as
permitted by the Village Board as set forth in Section 14.04,
below.
14.04 SECURITY FENCES.
Upon approval of the Village Board, a security fence
may be erected in a commercial or industrial district which
exceeds the height limitation set forth in Section 14.03, above.
The use of barbed wire along the top of a security fence may also
be permitted where the fence exceeds a height of 8 feet.
Approval of a security fence shall be on the same form as that
required for other fences, addressed to the Building Inspector
who shall forward the application to the Village Board with his
recommendations as to approval or denial. The Village Board
shall act upon such application within 30 days after filing with
the Building Inspector or at its next regular meeting, whichever
shall occur first.
14.05 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
All legal fences, as defined by Section 90.02, Wis.
Stats., in an agricultural district (including an agricultural
holding district) may be installed and maintained without a
permit. Any fence that does not comply with the requirements and
specifications of fences as set forth in Section 90.02, Wis.
Stats., shall require a permit and shall comply with all other
provisions of this Chapter.
14.06 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
No person shall install, plant or maintain a fence or
hedge on any lot which creates an unsafe condition for pedestrian
or vehicular traffic. Any fence or hedge in violation of this
section shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be subject to
the abatement of public nuisances as set forth in Chapter 18 of
this Code.
14.07 PERMITS.
No fence shall be erected without obtaining a permit
pursuant to Chapter 12 of these Ordinances. The fee for a permit
to erect a fence shall be that prescribed under Section 2.03(6)
and shall be paid to the Building Inspector at the time the
application is made.
14.08 DILAPIDATED FENCES.
Any fence within the Village of Paddock Lake which has
become so deteriorated, dilapidated or broken as to be unsightly
and a detriment to the neighborhood or area, or shall no longer
fulfill its purpose as a fence because of its condition, shall be
removed by the owner within 10 days after notice by the Building
Inspector. In the event that the owner fails to comply with the
Inspector’s order, the Inspector shall declare the fence a public
nuisance and proceed under Chapter 18 of this Code to abate the
nuisance.
Chapter 16
REGULATION OF HOOKER LAKE
16.01 Intent
16.02 Applicability and Enforcement
16.03 State Boating and Water Safety Laws Adopted
16.04 Definitions
16.05 Speed Restrictions
16.06 Capacity Restrictions
16.07 Buoys, Piers and Rafts
16.08 Swimming Regulations
16.09 Water Skiing
16.10 Littering Waterways Prohibited
16.11 Races, Regattas, Sporting Events and
Exhibitions
16.12 Driving Automobiles or Other Vehicles on the
Ice
16.13 Penalties
16.14 Jurisdiction
16.15 Use of Hooker Lake Boat Launch
16.01 INTENT.
The intent of this Chapter is to provide safe and
healthful conditions for the enjoyment of aquatic recreation
consistent with public needs on the waters of Hooker Lake.
16.02 APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to Hooker
Lake and shall be compatible with Chapter 29 of the Ordinances of
the Town of Salem, passed the 13th day of July, 1978, as said
Town Ordinances relates to the waters of Hooker Lake. This
Chapter shall be enforced jointly by the Water Patrol officers of
the Town of Salem and the Village of Paddock Lake.
16.03 STATE BOATING AND WATER SAFETY LAWS ADOPTED.
The statutory provisions describing and defining
regulations with respect to water traffic, boats, boating and
related water activities in the following enumerated sections of
the Wisconsin Statutes, exclusive of any provisions therein
relating to the penalties to be imposed or the punishment for
violation of said Statutes, are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this Chapter:
30.50 Definitions.
30.51 Operation of unnumbered boats prohibited;
exemptions.
30.52 Certificates of number; applications;
issuance; renewals; fees.
30.53 Identification number to be displayed on
boats; certificate to be carried.
30.54 Transfer of ownership of numbered boat.
30.55 Notice of abandonment or destruction of boat
or change of address.
30.60 Classification of motorboats.
30.61 Lighting equipment.
30.62 Other equipment.
30.635 Motorboat prohibition.
30.64 Patrol boats exempt from certain traffic
regulations.
30.65 Traffic rules.
30.66 Speed restrictions.
30.67 Accidents and accident reports.
30.675 Distress signal flag.
30.68 Prohibited operation.
30.69 Water skiing.
30.70 Skin diving.
30.71 Boats equipped with toilets.
16.04 DEFINITIONS.
(a) "Shore Zone" shall mean the water area within 200
feet of the lake shore.
(b) "Swimming Zone" shall mean an authorized area
marked by official buoys to designate a swimming area.
(c) "Moorage" shall mean an area where continuous
mooring of boats for more than twenty-four (24) hours is
permitted.
(d) "Public Access" shall mean a marina or landing
facility and the adjoining public shoreline under the ownership
of the state, county or municipality.
(e) "Slow No Wake Speed" shall mean the slowest
possible speed needed to maintain steerage.
(f) "Traffic Lane" shall mean the area beyond two
hundred feet (200') of the shoreline.
16.05 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
In addition to speed restrictions set forth in Sec.
16.03 of this Chapter adopting Sec. 30.66, Wis. Stats., no person
shall operate in excess of the "slow no wake speed":
(a) Within a defined shoreline zone, or
(b) Between sunset and 10:00 a.m. in either the shore
zone or the traffic lane.
(c) In the event that the Village Board declares a
state of emergency because of high water or other reason, such
speed limit to remain in effect until such time as the emergency
situation no longer exists as determined by the Board of
Trustees.
16.06 CAPACITY RESTRICTIONS.
No person shall operate, loan, rent or permit a boat to
leave the place where it is customarily kept for operation on the
waters covered by this Chapter with more passengers or cargo than
shall be stated on the Capacity Information Plate as required by
Sec. 30.501, Wis. Stats.
16.07 BUOYS, PIERS, AND RAFTS.
(a) The Village of Paddock Lake or the Town of Salem
may remove all buoys, markers, piers and their supports,
privately owned or placed, which are not removed by December 1st
of each year, and charge the cost and expense of such removal to
the riparian owner. If such charge is not paid within thirty
(30) days after request therefore, a penalty of ten percent (10%)
shall be added to such charge and the same shall constitute a
lien on the property of the riparian owner and be inserted on the
Village of Paddock Lake tax roll by the Village Clerk/Treasurer
upon order of the Village Board and after notice to the riparian
owner.
(b) All navigation aids must comply to Sec. 30.74(2),
Wis. Stats., and shall also have affixed to them any numbers
issued by their permit pursuant to subsection (f) below. Such
number shall be located at least twelve inches (12") above the
water line, and shall not be less than three inches (3") in
height.
(c) No person shall erect nor maintain any wharf or
pier contrary to the Statutes and regulations of the State of
Wisconsin, nor which extends more than one hundred (100') from
the shore unless prior written approval is obtained from the
Village of Paddock Lake and the Town of Salem.
(d) No pier or mooring buoy shall be placed in the
waters located within the boundary of a designated fire lane
(extended into the water) unless so authorized in writing by the
Village Board of the Village of Paddock Lake and by the Town
Board of the Town of Salem.
(e) Rafts and Platforms. No person shall place or
maintain any raft or platform more than one hundred feet (100')
from the shore. Rafts and platforms shall be anchored, have at
least eighteen inches (18") of free board above the water line,
be painted white, and have attached thereto, not more than twelve
inches (12") from each corner or projection a red reflector at
least three inches (3") in diameter.
(f) Buoy Permits. No bathing beach marker, speed zone
marker, information marker, mooring buoy, fishing buoy or other
marker shall be anchored or placed on Hooker Lake, unless a
written application is approved by both the Village Board of the
Village of Paddock Lake and the Town Board of the Town of Salem.
As to such markers and buoys located on Hooker Lake, an
application must be made jointly to the Village of Paddock Lake
and to the Town of Salem and approved by both bodies. The Town
of Salem shall issue numbers for such markers and buoys.
(g) Placement of Authorized Markers. The Chief of
Water Safety Patrol is authorized and directed to place
authorized markers, navigation aids and signs in such water areas
as shall be appropriate to advise the public of the provisions of
this Chapter and to post and maintain a copy of this Chapter at
all public access points within the jurisdiction of the Village
of Paddock Lake.
16.08 SWIMMING REGULATIONS.
(a) Swimming from Boats Prohibited. No person shall
swim from any unmanned boat unless such boat is anchored.
(b) Distance from Shore or Boats. No person shall
swim beyond the shore zone or more than fifty feet (50') from any
pier (unless within marked authorized areas) or more than twentyfive
feet (25') from anchored rafts or boats unless he is
accompanied by a boat manned by a competent person and having
readily available a ring buoy. Such boat shall stay reasonably
close to and guard such swimmer, and there must be at least one
(1) boat for each two (2) swimmers.
(c) Hours Limited. No person shall swim more than two
hundred feet (200') from the shoreline between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
16.09 WATER SKIING.
(a) Hours. No person shall operate a boat for the
purpose of towing a water skier, aquaplane or similar device
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. tats.
(b) Traffic Lane. Any boat engaged in towing a person
on water skis, aquaplane or similar device must conform to all
sections of this Chapter and in addition, must operate in a
counter-clockwise pattern on the lake in the traffic lane. There
shall be no water skiing, aquaplaning or similar activity within
the shore zone.
(c) Towing. There shall be not more than two (2)
persons being towed by one (1) boat and each shall have an
individual tow line. Persons being towed must wear personal
flotation devices as defined in Sec. 30.62(3), Wis. Stats.
(d) Exceptions. The limitations of this section shall
not apply to participants in ski meets or exhibitions authorized
and conducted as provided in Section 16.11 of this Code.
16.10 LITTERING WATERWAYS PROHIBITED.
(a) Any boat or craft which is designed for living,
sleeping or camping activities (commonly referred to as a "House
Boat") shall be equipped with suitable sanitation facilities and
comply with Sec. 30.71, Wis. Stats.
(b) No person shall leave, deposit, place or throw on
the waterways, ice, shores or waterways or upon any other public
or private property adjacent to waterways, any cans, bottles,
debris, refuse or other solid waste materials of any kind.
16.11 RACES, REGATTAS, SPORTING EVENTS AND EXHIBITIONS.
(a) Permit Required. No person shall direct or
participate in any boat race, regatta, waterski meet or other
water sporting event or exhibitions on Hooker Lake unless such
event has been authorized by the Village Board of the Village of
Paddock Lake and the Town Board of the Town of Salem.
(b) Permit. A permit issued under this section shall
specify the course or area of water to be used by participants
and require the permittee to place markers, flags or buoys
approved by the Chief of the Water Safety Patrol designating the
specified area. Permits shall be issued only when the proposed
use of the water can be carried out safely and without danger to
or substantial obstruction of other watercraft or persons using
the lake.
(c) Right-of-way of Participants. Boats and
participants in any such permitted event shall have the right-ofway
on the marked area and no other persons shall obstruct such
area during the race or event or interfere therewith.
16.12 DRIVING AUTOMOBILES OR OTHER VEHICLES ON THE ICE.
(a) Speed. No person shall use or operate any
automobile at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour on the
ice.
(b) Hours. No person shall use or operate any
automobile on the ice after 9:00 p.m.
(c) Definitions.
(1) "Automobile" as used in this Chapter shall be
construed to mean all motor vehicles of the type
and kind permitted to be operated on the highways
in the State of Wisconsin.
(2) "Other Vehicles" includes, but is not limited
to, snowmobiles, go-carts, bicycles and
motorcycles not permitted on state highways.
(d) Risk and Liability. All traffic on the icebound
waters shall be at the risk of the travelers as set forth in
Section 30.18(3) of the Wisconsin Statutes. Nothing in this
Chapter shall be construed as rendering the Village of Paddock
Lake or the Town of Salem liable for any accident to those
engaged in permitted traffic.
16.13 PENALTIES.
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not more
than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, and not more
than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), for each subsequent offense
with one (1) year. Any person violating Section 30.67(1) or (2),
Wis. Stats., or 30.68(1) or (2), Wis. Stats., shall be referred
to State authorities for prosecution.
Citations for violations of this Chapter shall be
drafted on forms prepared by the Department of Natural Resources.
Bonds may be posted for violations pursuant to Section 23.66,
Wis. Stats.
16.14 JURISDICTION.
Recognizing the joint jurisdiction of the Village of
Paddock Lake and the Town of Salem over the waters of Hooker
Lake, it is the intent of this Chapter that the Village of
Paddock Lake and the Town of Salem shall cooperate and coordinate
ordinances, rules and regulations and shall have joint
jurisdiction for enforcement purposes. However, violations
occurring in the jurisdiction of the Town of Salem shall be
brought before the Municipal Court of the Town of Salem and those
violations under the jurisdiction of the Village of Paddock Lake
shall be brought in the Municipal Court of the Village of Paddock
Lake.
16.15 USE OF HOOKER LAKE BOAT LAUNCH.
(a) Policy. It is the declared policy of the Village
to encourage the use of the facilities constructed by the Village
for access to Hooker Lake in a fashion so as to allow equal
access to all who wish to use this facility.
(b) Prohibitions. No operator of any vehicle shall
park or stop or leave standing such vehicle on any street or
highway or public way or in any parking space at or adjacent to
the Hooker Lake boat launch, except in conformance with the
permitting provisions of this ordinance. For purposes of this
ordinance, vehicles shall include all motor vehicles as well as
trailers, boats, motor homes or any other device which is defined
as a vehicle under the Wisconsin Statutes, which are incorporated
herein by reference.
(1) Presumption. Ownership of a vehicle is
sufficiently related to causing, allowing,
permitting or suffering a vehicle parked so as to
require the owner to be responsible for the
parking of said vehicle. It shall be presumed,
upon a showing by the Village, that a parking
violation occurred and upon a showing that the
party charged pursuant to this ordinance, was the
registered owner of the unlawfully parked vehicle
on the date of the violation that said registered
owner is responsible for and guilty of the
violation charged.
(2) Overcoming Presumption. The presumption
stated in the preceding subparagraph, when
established as therein specified, shall constitute
a prima facie case and a basis for judgment,
except where the person or other legal entity to
which the vehicle is registered overcomes said
presumption by the submission of proof of any of
the following:
(a) The vehicle is stolen at the time the
violation occurred, and reported as such to
law enforcement authorities within a
reasonable time thereafter.
(b) The vehicle was lawfully parked.
(c) The ownership of the vehicle was
lawfully transferred to another prior to the
violation.
(c) Parking Passes. Parking passes are printed passes
issued by the Village for a designated period of time, to an
individual for the purpose of allowing such individual to legally
park in a properly marked parking stall at the Hooker Lake boat
launch for the period of time specified on the pass. Parking
passes shall be of two (2) types as follows: Daily and seasonal.
(d) Fees. Fees for parking passes shall be as
follows:
(1) Seasonal (May 1 through October 31)
(a) Wisconsin resident - $35.00
(b) Non-resident - $40.00
(2) Daily - $7.00
(3) Seasonal (May 1 through October 31) good for
both Paddock Lake and Hooker Lake
(a) Wisconsin resident - $45.00
(b) Non-resident - $55.00
(e) Properly Displayed Passes. A properly displayed
parking pass means that the parking pass must be displayed in the
inside lower left hand corner of the front windshield. Operators
of vehicles lawfully possessing and displaying valid parking
passes, shall be permitted the privilege of parking in a lawful
and orderly manner in a properly marked parking stall at the
Hooker Lake boat launch without incurring the issuance of legal
process and the imposition of forfeiture or penalty for failure
to pay said fee.
(f) Form. Parking passes shall be obtained from the
office of the Village Clerk/Treasurer and shall contain the
date(s) for which the pass is valid and the name and address of
the parking pass holder.
(g) Fine. Violation of this section shall result in
the imposition of a fine of Twenty-five ($25.00) Dollars for a
first offense and Fifty ($50.00) Dollars for a second and any
subsequent offense.
Chapter 17
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
17.01 Lawn Fertilizer Application Control
17.02 Animals, Birds and Fowl
17.03 Penalties
17.01 LAWN FERTILIZER APPLICATION CONTROL.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to
define regulations which will aid the Village in managing and
protecting its water resources which are enjoyed by its residents
and other users.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this section,
certain terms and words are defined as follows:
(1) “Commercial Applicator” is a person who is
engaged in the business of applying fertilizer for
hire.
(2) “Fertilizer” means a substance containing one
or more recognized plant nutrients that is used
for its plant nutrient content and designed for
use or claimed to have value in promoting plant
growth. Fertilizer does not include animal or
vegetable manures that are not manipulated, marl,
lime, limestone, and other products, which may be
exempted by State Law.
(3) “Noncommercial Applicator” is a person who
applies fertilizer but who is not a commercial law
fertilizer applicator.
(c) Phosphorous Containing Fertilizer Prohibited. No
person, firm, corporation, franchise, or commercial or
noncommercial applicator, including homeowners or renters, shall
apply any lawn fertilizer, liquid or granular, within the Village
of Paddock Lake which contains any amount of phosphorous or other
compound containing phosphorous, such as phosphate, except:
(1) The naturally occurring phosphorous in
unadulterated natural or organic fertilizing
products such as yard waste compost.
(2) As otherwise provided in paragraph (F) of
this section.
(d) Impervious Surfaces and Drainage Ways. No person
shall apply any fertilizer to impervious surfaces, areas within
drainage ditches or waterways.
(e) Buffer Zone. Fertilizers shall not be applied:
(1) To any established natural buffer zones or
delineated wetland.
(2) Below the ordinary high water mark as
established by the Department of Natural Resources
or other state regulation.
(3) Within ten (10) feet of any wetland or water
resource.
17.02 ANIMALS, BIRDS AND FOWL.
(a) Prohibited Areas. Except as otherwise provided in
an agricultural district or agricultural holding district, no
person shall keep, feed, harbor or breed any horses, mules,
jackasses, ducks, foxes, beavers, minks, otters, martins,
raccoons, skunks, goats, cows, chickens, turkeys, sheep, geese,
pigeons or swine within the Village without a permit issued by
the Village Board of Trustees, which permit must be reissued
annually.
(b) Chicks and Ducklings. No person shall display or
sell dyed, colored or in any way artificially treated chicks or
ducklings as pets or novelties. This subsection shall not be
construed to prohibit the sale of natural chicks or ducklings in
the usual and regular course of agricultural pursuits within the
agricultural zoning districts of the Village.
(c) Pigeons and Rabbits. No person shall maintain or
permit to be maintained on any property within the Village an
open loft for pigeons. Nor shall any person keep, feed, harbor,
or breed rabbits within the Village.
(d) Sanitary Requirements. All places and structures
where any animal, bird or fowl is kept, fed or harbored shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free of rodents,
vermin and objectionable odors. Interior walls, ceilings,
floors, partitions and appurtenances of such structures, except
structures or houses occupied by no more than one dog, cat,
rabbit, skunk or similar animal kept as a pet, shall be
whitewashed or painted annually or oftener as the Health Officer
shall direct.
(e) Animals in Food Handling Establishments. No
person shall take or permit to remain any dog, cat or other live
animal on or upon any premises where food is sold, offered for
sale or processed for consumption by the general public, except a
seeing eye dog assisting a blind person.
17.03 PENALTIES.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than Fifty ($50.00) Dollars and not more than One Hundred
($100.00) Dollars for the first offense, and not more than Two
Hundred Fifty ($250.00) Dollars for each subsequent offense
within one (1) year.
Chapter 18
NUISANCES
18.01 Public Nuisances Prohibited
18.02 Definitions
18.03 REPEALED
18.04 Cost of Abatement
18.05 Weeds
18.06 Vehicles-Nuisances-Repair Work
18.07 REPEALED
18.08 Junk or Debris Accumulation
18.01 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
No person shall erect, maintain, or permit to exist any
public nuisance within the Village.
18.02 DEFINITIONS.
(a) Public Nuisance. A public nuisance is an act
condition or use of property which shall continue for such length
of time as to:
(1) Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the
comfort, health, or safety of the public; or
(2) In any way renders the public insecure in
life or in the use of property; or
(3) Greatly offends the public morals or decency;
or
(4) Unlawfully and substantially interferes with,
obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage any
public way, navigable body of water, or the use of
public property.
(b) Public Nuisances Affecting Health. The following
situations are specifically declared to be public health
nuisances. Such enumeration, however, shall not be construed to
exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of
subsection (a) of this section.
(1) Any decayed, harmfully adulterated or
unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale
to the public.
(2) The carcass of any animal, bird or fowl not
intended for human consumption or food which is
not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary
manner within 24 hours after death.
(3) Any accumulation of decayed animal or
vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber,
bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any
material in which flies, mosquitoes, diseasecarrying
insects, rats or other vermin may breed.
(4) Any stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies
or other insects can reproduce.
(5) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not
fly-tight.
(6) All noxious weeds and other rank growth of
vegetation.
(7) Any animal running at large.
(8) The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious
acids, fumes, gases, fly ash, industrial dust or
other emissions within the Village limits, or
within one mile therefrom, in such quantities as
to endanger the health of persons of ordinary
sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial
injury to property in the Village.
(9) The pollution of any public well or cistern,
stream, lake, canal or other body of water by
sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other
substances.
(10) Any use of property or substances within the
Village causing any noxious or disagreeable odors,
or emissions repulsive to the physical senses of
ordinary persons which annoys, injures or
inconveniences the health of any appreciable
number of persons within the Village.
(11) Any abandoned well not securely covered or
secured from public use.
(12) Any obstruction to any water course, culvert,
drainage ditch, swale, or ravine.
(13) Any open and insecurely guarded cistern, well
or other dangerous excavation.
(14) Treehouses, foxholes, trenches or abandoned
wells not securely covered or secure from public
use.
(15) The deposit of garbage or refuse on any
street or public or private property except as may
be permitted by this Code.
(16) Any use of property which shall cause any
nauseous or unwholesome liquid or substance to
flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley,
sidewalk or public place.
(c) Public Nuisances Offending Morals and Decency.
The following situations specifically declared to be public
nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances
offending public morals and decency coming within the definition
of subsection (a) of this section:
(1) Any disorderly house, bawdy house, house of
ill fame, gambling house and any building or
structure kept or resorted to for the purpose of
prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or
gambling.
(2) Any gambling device or slot machine.
(3) Any place where intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed,
stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified
without a permit or license as provided for by
this Code.
(4) Any place or premises within the Village
where Village ordinances or state laws relating to
public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare
are openly, repeatedly and intentionally violated.
(5) Any place or premises resorted to for the
purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws
of the State or ordinances of the Village.
(d) Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety. The
following situations are declared to be public nuisances
affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall_ not be
construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or
safety coming within the provisions of subsection (a) of this
section:
(1) Any sign, billboard, awning or other similar
structure over or near a public place so situated
or constructed as to endanger the public safety.
(2) Any building erected, repaired or altered
within the fire limits of the Village of Paddock
Lake in violation of the building regulations of
the Village.
(3) Any unauthorized sign, signal or marking
device placed in view of any public highway or
railway crossing which may be mistaken for an
official traffic control device.
(4) Any tree, hedge, billboard or other
obstruction which prevents persons driving
vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways
from obtaining a clear view of traffic when
approaching an intersection or pedestrian
crosswalk. A 35-foot vision clearance shall be
maintained on corner lots. This area shall be open
from the ground to the sky, except that ornamental
fences and hedges are permitted if maintained at a
height of not more than 3-1/2 feet above the
adjacent street level.
(5) Any limb of a tree which projects over and
less than 14 feet above the surface of a public
sidewalk or street or less than 10 feet above any
other public place.
(6) Any use or display of fireworks except as
provided by the laws of the State and ordinances
of the Village.
(7) Any building or structure so old or out of
repair as to be unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise
unfit for human use.
(8) Any wire over a street, alley or public
ground which is strung less than 18 feet above the
surface.
(9) Any loud, discordant or unnecessary noise or
vibrations of any kind.
(10) The keeping or harboring of any animal or
fowl which by frequent or habitual howling,
yelping, barking, crowing or making of other
noises shall greatly annoy or disturb a
neighborhood or any considerable number of persons
within the Village.
(11) Any obstruction of a public way and any
excavation in or under the same, except as
permitted by this Code or any such obstruction,
although made in accordance with this Code which
is kept or maintained for any unreasonable or
illegal length of time after its purpose has been
accomplished.
(12) Any open or unguarded pit, well, excavation
or unused basement freely accessible from any
public premise.
(13) Any abandoned refrigerator or icebox from
which the doors and other covers have not been
removed or which cannot be opened from the inside
by pushing only with the strength of a small
child.
(14) Any unauthorized use of property on or
abutting a public premise which causes large
crowds of people to gather and obstructs traffic
or the free use of the streets or sidewalks.
(15) Repeated or continuous violations of the
ordinances of the Village or laws of the state
relating to the storage of flammable liquids.
(16) Any snow and ice not removed or sprinkled
with ashes, sawdust or sand as provided in this
Code.
(17) Signs affixed to any public or private
property without the permission of the owner.
(18) Maintenance and operation of any premises for
the running or exhibition of go-karts or other
similar small motor vehicles that have exhaust
noises which are audible at over 300 feet distance
from the source of the noise.
18.03 REPEALED.
18.04 COST OF ABATEMENT.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Code
for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or
maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public
nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt from the
owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to
the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as
a special charge in the following amounts:
(a) The use of Village personnel, in which case the
Village shall bill the property owner One Hundred Fifty ($150.00)
Dollars for the first hour or fraction thereof plus an additional
One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars for each additional hour or
fraction thereof, or;
(b) The Village may have engage a private contractor,
in which case the Village will bill the property owner for all
costs incurred plus ten (10%) percent for administrative
purposes.
18.05 WEEDS.
(a) Mowing Required. No person owning property within
the Village shall permit to grow or pollinate upon his premises
any weeds or grasses at a height exceeding ten (10) inches. It
shall be the duty of every property owner to mow the premises,
and to maintain it at a height less than ten (10) inches.
(b) Mowing by the Village. It shall be the duty of
the Weed Commissioner to enforce this section. If any person
shall fail to comply herewith, the Commissioner shall give notice
by U.S. Mail to the owner of record of the property that such
notice exists, and that the owner of record shall have ten (10)
days from the date of the notice to abate the nuisance. Should
the owner fail to abate the nuisance within ten (10) days from
the date of the notice, the Village shall have the option of:
(1) Mowing the property using Village personnel,
in which case the Village shall bill the property
owner One Hundred Fifty ($150.00) Dollars for the
first hour or fraction thereof plus an additional
One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars for each additional
hour or fraction thereof, or;
(2) The Village may have the property mowed by a
contractor, in which case the Village will bill
the property owner for all costs incurred plus ten
(10%) percent for administrative purposes.
For purposes of this section, a “lot” shall be deemed any lot
which is of record in a plat on file with the Office of the
Register of Deeds for Kenosha County, Wisconsin. Such charges
shall be placed on the tax roll as a special tax to be collected
in the manner of other taxes unless such lands are exempt form
taxation.
(c) Notice Requirement. The Village shall only be
required to notify a property owner of violation of this section
one time annually. Should it be necessary for the Village to
abate the nuisance additional times during any calendar year,
additional notice will not be required.
18.06 VEHICLES-NUISANCES-REPAIR WORK.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to
prevent blight, to secure health and humane living conditions, to
protect the integrity of investments in real property, to prevent
the decline of real estate values, to improve aesthetics and to
protect the public health, safety and welfare. In order to
secure this goal, activities contrary to this ordinance are
deemed to constitute a matter of public concern which must be
regulated or prescribed through the exercise of the Village’s
police powers.
(b) Definitions.
(1) “Vehicles” shall include mobile home, moped,
motorbicycle, motorbus, motorcycle, motor-driven
cycle, motorhome, motortruck, automobile, trailer,
boat trailer, camping trailer, recreational
vehicle or any vehicle as defined in Chapter 340,
Wisconsin Statutes as may be amended from time to
time.
(2) “Nuisance Vehicles” shall include any
inoperable, unlicensed, unroadworthy, disassembled
or wrecked vehicle. A vehicle for which a license
has been applied for shall be herein deemed a
licensed vehicle if proof of application is
prominently displayed on the front windshield.
Indication of a nuisance vehicle may include, but
shall not be limited to, the following:
(a) A vehicle without a window or windows.
(b) A vehicle with broken windows.
(c) A vehicle with flat tires.
(d) A vehicle without a motor, if a motor
vehicle as defined in Chapter 340 of the
Wisconsin Statutes as may be amended from
time to time.
(e) A vehicle in such a condition that it
cannot be operated without being repaired.
(3) "Repair work" shall include mechanical,
electrical and body work, maintenance,
construction, reconstruction, assembly,
disassembly, restoration, painting, upholstering
or any similar or related work performed on any
vehicle.
(4) "Street Repairs" shall mean "temporary repair
work" performed on a vehicle in a manner and place
which will not create a danger or hazard to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(5) "Temporary Repair Work" shall mean repair
work which is performed within twenty-four (24)
hours of a vehicle becoming unexpectedly
unroadworthy on a street, highway, or
thoroughfare, which work will make or attempts to
make said vehicle roadworthy.
(c) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person,
party, firm or corporation to keep, place or store any "nuisance
vehicle" or to perform "repair work" or "street repairs" upon any
public thoroughfare, street or highway or upon any private or
public property within the Village in a manner inconsistent with
this ordinance.
(d) Repair work-Limitations. "Repair work" may be
performed upon observance of the following conditions and
restrictions:
(1) "Repair work" upon residentially zoned
private property cannot be performed for financial
gain or profit obtained through fees, barter, work
is performed, if such repair work is performed on
a repeated basis to a vehicle or vehicles, will be
deemed to be repair or service work on a
commercial basis and there will be a presumption
that such repair work is done for fees, barter,
charges or appreciation in value to a vehicle
purchased for the purpose of resale. "Repair work"
upon other than residentially zoned property shall
be in accordance with the Village's zoning
ordinances and in compliance with the applicable
state, county and village laws, rules and
regulations, licenses and permits.
(2) Except for authorized street repairs, "repair
work" which renders a vehicle inoperable for a
period of more than three (3) working days, must
be performed in a garage or fenced in area which
screens repair work from the view of the owners,
users and occupiers of abutting and neighboring
properties and from the view of passerbys using
public thoroughfares, streets and highways. All
"repair work" performed in a fenced in area shall
be completed within seven (7) days of the day
"repair work" was begun on the vehicle.
(3) "Street repairs" may be performed only within
the scope of the definition thereof.
(e) Nuisance Vehicles-Limitations. "Nuisance
Vehicles" may be kept, placed or stored outside of a garage or
enclosed structure only in conjunction with a duly authorized and
licensed auto sales, repair or salvage business lawfully operated
within a property zoned and in compliance with all state and
local laws, rules, regulations, licenses and permits.
(f) Nuisance Vehicles - Removal. Subject to the
procedures herein set forth, nuisance vehicles may be moved to a
storage lot designated by motion of the Village Board of
Trustees, such removal to be made by an authorized tow agency as
designated by the Village Board at the direction of the Sheriff’s
Department and at the cost and expense of the owner of said
vehicle or the owner of the real estate upon which the vehicle
was located when towed. Any vehicle so removed may be disposed
of by the tow agency, if unclaimed, through procedures provided
for in state and local law. Owners of nuisance vehicles or
persons who are in the possession of property upon which a
nuisance vehicle is located shall be provided with a ten (10) day
written notice by the Village, served personally or by registered
or certified mail, stating that they must abate the nuisance
therein specified within ten (10) days or in the alternative the
vehicle will be moved to a proper vehicle storage lot by a tow as
authorized herein and that the vehicle owner or owner of the real
estate shall be responsible for the payment of the cost of
removal, plus storage charges and will be subject to a forfeiture
as herein provided. The ten (10) days herein provided for shall
continue to run even if the vehicle is temporarily removed for a
period of time or no action is taken to permanently abate the
specified nuisance. If at the end of the ten (10) days the
nuisance has not been permanently abated, the owner or bailee
shall be in violation of this ordinance and shall be liable for a
daily forfeiture commencing with the eleventh (11 ) day th
following the date of notice by personal service or the
thirteenth (13 ) day following the date of notice sent by th
registered or certified mail. Unlicensed vehicles, except
vehicles for which a license has been applied for, and a record
of application conspicuously displayed on the front windshield,
which are upon public throughfares, rights-of-way, streets and
highways may be removed without advanced notice. However, within
twenty-four (24) hours of the tow of an unlicensed vehicle, there
shall be an attempt made by the Sheriff’s Department to determine
the name of the owner and to serve the owner with a notice as to
the location of the vehicle and of the appropriate claim
procedures which will permit the owner to recover the vehicle.
In the event that a vehicle owner has been issued one or more
notices of a violation of this section within one (1) calendar
year, no further notice shall be necessary for similar violations
within the same calendar year, and in such an event, the
investigating officer may, in his sole discretion, forgo the
issuance of the previously described ten (10) day notice and
immediately issue a citation for the violation of this ordinance
and/or immediately remove the vehicle to a proper vehicle storage
lot by a tow as authorized herein and in such an event the
vehicle owner or owner of the real estate shall be responsible
for the payment of the cost of removal, plus storage charges and
will be subject to the forefeitures provided herein, including
imposition of a special assessment against the real property upon
which the vehicle was located before being towed.
(g) Abandoned Vehicles. Whenever any vehicle, whether
licensed or unlicensed, has been left unattended on any public
highway or private or public property for such time and under
such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear
to have been abandoned or in the event that a vehicle has been
left unattended for more than 24 hours on a public highway or
street or in the event that a vehicle has been left unattended
without the permission of the private property owner, the vehicle
is deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance and shall
be removed pursuant to the procedures in subsection (f) above.
18.07 JUNK VEHICLES. (Repealed by Ordinance #272 9/19/84).
18.08 JUNK OR DEBRIS ACCUMULATION.
(a) Accumulation of Junk, Debris, etc. Prohibited.
The accumulation or storage of automobiles, trucks, tractors,
refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery, or
parts thereof, or any other unsightly debris such as wood,
bricks, or cement blocks, which may tend to depreciate property
values in the area or create any nuisance, is prohibited in the
Village except as may be allowed by permit issued by the Village
Board.
(b) Repealed per Ordinance No. 554 passed 4/20/05.
(c) Penalty for Violation. If the premises are not
brought in compliance with this section within the time so
specified in the order, the person in charge of the property
shall be penalized as provided in Sections 18.04 and 1.07 of this
Code.
(d) Violation, Separate Offense. Each day of
continued violation constitutes a separate violation.
Chapter 19
ANIMALS, BIRDS AND FOWL
19.01 Definitions
19.02 Dogs
19.03 Limitation on Number of Dogs and Cats per
Residentially Zoned Premises
19.04 Maintenance of Sanitary Conditions
19.05 Kennels and Pet Shops
19.06 Certain Animals Prohibited; Fowls Regulated
19.07 Dangerous Exotic Animals
19.08 Vietnamese Potbellied Pig License
19.09 Cruelty to Animals
19.10 Trapping
19.11 Rabies Control
19.12 Vicious Animals
19.13 Enforcement of This Chapter and Certain State
Statutes
19.14 Penalties
19.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following
definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this Chapter.
(a) Animal. The term "animal" shall apply to any
living thing that is not human or a plant, and generally capable
of voluntary motion or sensation.
(b) Bitten. The term "bitten" shall mean seizure of
any portion of a human being or another animal’s anatomy by the
teeth or jaws of an animal or contact of saliva from an animal
with any break or abrasion of the skin of another animal or
person.
(c) Cat. The term "cat" shall apply to any feline
animal, male or female, sexed or neutered.
(d) Dog. The term "dog" shall apply to any canine
animal, male or female, sexed or neutered.
(e) Own. The term "own", unless otherwise specified,
shall be deemed to mean keep, harbor, or have control, charge or
custody of an animal, or permit to be kept, harbored or fed upon
or within premises owned, leased, rented or occupied by a person
and does not require actual legal title or right to the animal.
(f) Owner. The term "owner" shall mean any person
keeping, harboring or having charge or control of, or permitting
any animal to habitually be or remain on, or be lodged or fed
within buildings or land owned, leased, used or occupied by such
person, irrespective of whether such person has legal title or
claim to the animal. This term shall not apply to veterinarians
or kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their premises
animals owned by others.
(g) Person. The term “person” shall mean any natural
person, partnership or corporation.
(h) Scratched. The term "scratched" shall mean the
scraping or clawing of any portion of another animal or a human
being’s anatomy by an animal.
(i) Veterinarian. The term "veterinarian" shall mean a
natural person duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in
the State of Wisconsin and possessing a doctor’s degree in
veterinary medicine.
19.02 DOGS.
(a) Dog License Tax. Every person who owns, harbors or
keeps a dog within the limits of the Village of Paddock Lake,
which is more than five (5) months of age on January 1 of any
year or which becomes five (5) months of age within the license
year, shall annually, or on or before the date the dog becomes
five (5) months of age, pay to the Clerk/Treasurer his/her dog
license tax and obtain a license.
(b) Collar Tag. Following issuance of a license, the
Clerk/Treasurer shall deliver to the owner a tag bearing the same
serial number as designated on the license, the name of the
County in which license was issued, and the license year. The
owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar which shall be
kept on the licensed dog at all times. This requirement to wear a
tag and collar does not apply to a dog during competition or
training, a dog securely confined indoors, or to a dog while
hunting.
(c) Fee. Effective January 1, 2011 the dog license tax
shall be Five ($5.00) Dollars for a neutered male dog or spayed
female dog, upon presentation of evidence that the dog is
neutered or spayed, and Eleven ($11.00) Dollars for an unneutered
male dog or unspayed female dog, or one-half (1/2) of these
amounts if the dog became five (5) months of age after July 1 of
the license year.
(d) Late Fee. A late fee of Ten ($10.00) Dollars shall
be paid to the Clerk/Treasurer by every owner of a dog five (5)
months of age or over, if the owner failed to obtain a license
prior to April 1st of each year, or within thirty (30) days of
acquiring ownership of a licensable dog or if the owner failed to
obtain a license on or before the dog reached licensable age.
(e) Nuisance. No person shall keep or harbor within
the Village any dog which by loud or frequent or habitual
barking, yelping, or howling shall cause serious annoyance to the
neighborhood or to persons passing to and from upon the streets.
No owner or a person harboring a fierce or vicious dog shall
suffer the same to run at large at any time within the Village.
(f) Run at Large. It shall be unlawful for any person
owning or possessing any dog or cat to permit it to run at large.
"Run at Large" shall mean the presence of an animal which is not
on a secured leash of six (6) feet or less on any public property
or thoroughfare or on any private property without the permission
of the property owner or occupier. Dogs and cats which are not
leashed in vehicles are not deemed to "run at large" if they are
secured in a manner as will prevent their escape therefrom. This
requirement does not apply to dogs utilized for law enforcement
purposes.
(g) Impounding. Whenever a Village Humane Agent or any
law enforcement officer shall find any dog or cat running at
large as defined, he/she shall, if possible, pick up and impound
such animal in such place as the Village Board may direct;
provided, however, that if any such dog or cat is fierce or
dangerous, it may be disposed of forthwith. Whenever the owner of
any impounded animal shall be identifiable through a collar or
license tag, the owner shall be notified by the impoundment
facility.
Any animal impounded shall be held for a period of
seven (7) days to permit the owner to reclaim it. At the end of
such period, the animal may be disposed of in the manner as
provided by Wisconsin Statutes.
19.03 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS PER RESIDENTIALLY
ZONED PREMISES.
(a) Purpose. The owning, harboring and keeping by any
person(s) of a large number of dogs, cats or combination thereof
within a residentially zoned premises within the Village for an
extended period of time, detracts from the quality of life within
the entire residential district due to various noise, odor,
health and safety problems which constitute a public nuisance.
The Village Board of the Village of Paddock Lake, Wisconsin, has
deemed it necessary to abate such public nuisance by the creation
of the following limitation. For purposes of this Ordinance, a
residential premises is a lot or lots contiguous to one or more
lots which have common ownership shall collectively be considered
a “residentially zoned premises” subject to the limitations of
subsection (b) below.
(b) Limitation. No person may own, harbor or keep in
their possession, within the Village, more than three (3) dogs
and no more than two (2) cats over the age of five (5) months on
a residentially zoned premises.
19.04 MAINTENANCE OF SANITARY CONDITIONS.
(a) Any premises, whether indoors or outdoors, upon
which any animal is harbored, shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition, and all animal feces must be removed and sanitarily
disposed of within twenty-four (24) hours.
(b) No manure shall be stored in the Village, except
in a fly proof and impervious container or covered with six (6)
inches of earth, except in the A-A Agricultural Zoning District
where manure may be stored in the open, conditioned upon it being
intended for use as a fertilizer upon the land upon which stored,
it being stored for no more than six (6) months, and it being
stored in such manner so as to not constitute a public nuisance
or a health hazard.
19.05 KENNELS AND PET SHOPS.
(a) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply
to the terms and words used in this Chapter:
(1) Kennels means and includes:
(a) Commercial Kennels. A for profit
business establishment engaged in offering
boarding, training and/or breeding services
and/or the sale of dogs and/or cats, with the
exclusion of veterinary hospitals.
Commercial kennels shall include the boarding
of dogs for racing purposes.
(b) Humane Societies. An impoundment
facility under §174.046, Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) Pet animal means any domesticated or wild
animal, including dogs, cats, birds, small rodents
or small nonpoisonous reptiles, which is fed,
watered, harbored or allowed, by Village
Ordinances, to be or remain in the Village,
excluding:
(a) Any hoofed animal.
(b) Any animal in a zoo, exhibition or fair
authorized by Village Ordinances.
(c) Any animal which is held for use in bona
fide scientific research.
(3) Pet shop means a retail or wholesale business
offering for sale pet animals, excluding
commercial kennels.
(4) Enclosure(s) means a separate enclosure or
cage which segregates one animal from another
animal or animals.
(5) Veterinary hospital means any establishment
in which the practice of veterinary medicine is
the primary business.
(b) License Required/Fee. It is unlawful for any
person, party, firm or corporation to operate, keep or maintain
within the Village limits a kennel or pet shop without first
having obtained a license from the Village Board and being in
compliance with all provisions of this Ordinance. License
applications shall be reviewed, prior to action by the Village
Board, by the Committee on Judiciary and Licenses. The
Clerk/Treasurer, or designee thereof, shall issue licenses which
have been granted by the Village Board. The fee for a license
issued hereunder or renewal thereof shall be Two Hundred
($200.00) Dollars per calendar year or fraction thereof.
(c) License/Application.
(1) Any applicant for a license or renewal
thereof under this Ordinance shall file with the
Clerk/Treasurer a fully executed application on a
form prescribed by the Clerk/Treasurer,
accompanied by the annual license fee. The
application shall state the maximum number of dogs
and/or cats sought to be permitted upon the
licensed premises.
(2) No licenses or renewal thereof shall issue
hereunder until:
(a) There has been an inspection by a
Sanitarian of the premises being licensed and
a determination by said Building Inspector
that all requirements of this Ordinance, and
other applicable General and Zoning
Ordinances, have been met.
(b) There is an adequate means of
restraining animals from running at large or
disturbing the peace.
(c) The proposed facilities are located in
an appropriate zone under the Village Zoning
Ordinance and are the subject of an Occupancy
Permit, as verified by the Building
Inspector.
(d) The proposed facilities are in
compliance with the Building Code and Fire
Code, as verified by authorized by the
Building Inspector.
(3) Any license or renewal thereof issued
hereunder shall be for a calendar year or portion
thereof. Licenses must be renewed each calendar
year on or before the 1 day of January. st
Licenses shall not be assignable or transferable
either to another person, party, firm or
corporation or for another location.
(4) When issued, a license shall be displayed in
a manner and at a location so as to be readily
visible by the public.
(5) The Village Board shall license the premises
only for such number of dogs and/or cats as the
premises to be licensed will reasonably
accommodate based upon inspection reports.
(d) License and Rabies Tags. Upon issuing a license
hereunder, the Clerk/Treasurer shall issue a number of tags equal
to the number of dogs and/or cats authorized to be kept on the
licensed premises. License tags shall be made in a form so that
they may be readily distinguishable from the individual license
tags for the same year. The licensee shall, at all times, keep
one of such tags, plus a Rabies Tag obtained from a veterinarian,
attached to the collar of each dog or cat over five (5) months
old kept on the licensed premises. This requirement to wear a tag
and collar does not apply to a dog during competition or
training, a dog securely confined indoors, to a dog while
hunting, or to a dog securely confined in a fenced area. License
tags may be transferred from one dog or cat to another. No dog or
cat bearing any such license tag shall be permitted to stray or
to be taken anywhere outside the limits of the licensed premises
unless it is in leash, except where temporarily unleashed for the
purposes of hunting, breeding, trial or show. Humane Societies
shall follow the provisions of §174.046, Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) Records. The Clerk/Treasurer shall make a
duplicate list of the names of licensees and the number of dogs
kept upon each licensed premises and shall deliver one (1) copy
of said list to the County Clerk, retaining the other copy for
his/her files.
(f) Chapter 174, Wisconsin Statutes. Unless clearly
inapplicable, all the provisions of Chapter 174, Wisconsin
Statutes, relating to the individual dog license tax, license and
tag, shall apply to license tags issued hereunder.
(g) Other Licenses and Permits. The issuance of a
license hereunder does not exempt licensee from obtaining and
complying with all other applicable State and Village licenses
and permits, including required Zoning Permits. Licensees who
engage in commercial pesticide application must be licensed,
certified and at all times maintain compliance with §94.704 and
§94.705, Wisconsin Statutes, and §Ag 29.11 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(h) General Facility Standards. All licensed premises
shall provide the following:
(1) Water and food. Adequate and potable water
shall be available at all times to pet animals.
Watering and feeding receptacles shall be cleaned
at least once daily.
(2) Storage. Supplies of food and bedding shall
be stored and adequately protected against
infestation or contamination by vermin.
Refrigeration shall be provided for perishable
food.
(3) Waste Disposal. Provisions shall be made for
the removal and disposal of animal and food
wastes, bedding, dead animals and debris. Disposal
facilities shall also be provided and operated as
to minimize vermin infestation, odors and disease
hazards.
(4) Washrooms and Sinks. Facilities such as
washrooms, basins or sinks shall be provided to
maintain cleanliness among caretakers.
(5) Communicable Diseases. Pet animals with
potential communicable diseases shall be housed in
separate rooms from healthy, boarding animals. Pet
animals which have a communicable disease shall
not be sold or provided for adoption until
receiving a clean bill of health from a
veterinarian.
(6) Vicious Animals. Vicious animals, as defined
in §19.12 of the Code of General Ordinances, shall
not be kept on licensed premises.
(i) Indoor Facility Standards. In addition to the
requirements of subsection (h), indoor facilities licensed
hereunder shall provide the following:
(1) Ventilation. Indoor housing for pet animals
shall be adequately ventilated to provide for
health and comfort of said animals at all times.
They shall be provided with fresh air, either by
means of windows, doors, vents or air
conditioning. Ventilation shall minimize drafts,
odors and moisture condensation. Auxiliary
ventilation such as exhaust fans and vents or air
conditioning shall be provided when the ambient
temperature is eighty-five (85°) degrees
Fahrenheit or higher, except where the ambient
temperature requirements of the specific
requirements of the specific species differs.
(2) Lighting. Indoor housing for pet animals
shall have ample artificial light which is of good
quality and is well-distributed. Such lighting
shall provide uniformly distributed illumination
of sufficient intensity to permit routine
inspection and cleaning during the entire working
period.
(3) Interior Surfaces. The interior building
surfaces of indoor housing facilities for pet
animals shall be constructed and maintained so
that they are impervious to moisture and may be
readily cleaned.
(4) Drainage. A suitable method shall be provided
to rapidly eliminate excess water from indoor
housing facilities. If drains are used, they shall
be properly constructed and kept in good repair to
avoid foul odors therefrom. If closed drainage
systems are used, they shall be equipped with
traps and so installed as to prevent any backup of
sewage and odors.
(5) Dogs Five (5) Months or Older. Dogs five (5)
months or older which are housed longer than a
twenty-four (24) hour period shall be provided
with adequate, separate, cleanable enclosures and
shall be permitted exercise periods at least twice
each day for a minimum of five (5) minutes each
period, unless an exercise run is provided. An
exercise run must have an area of twenty (20)
square feet for a dog of thirty (30) pounds or
less, and a minimum of thirty-six (36) square feet
for a dog over thirty (30) pounds in weight.
Subsection (3) shall not apply to noncommercial
kennels.
(j) Outdoor Facility Standards. In addition to the
standards required under subsection (h), outdoor facilities
licensed hereunder shall provide the following:
(1) Shelter from sunlight. When sunlight is
likely to cause overheating or discomfort,
sufficient shade shall be provided to allow all
pet animals kept outdoors to protect themselves
from the direct rays of the sun.
(2) Shelter from rain or snow. Pet animals kept
outdoors shall be provided with access to shelter
to allow them to remain dry during rain or snow.
(3) Shelter from cold winter. Shelter shall be
provided for all pet animals kept outdoors when
the atmospheric temperature falls below fifty
(50°) degrees Fahrenheit. Sufficient clean bedding
material or other means of protection form the
weather elements shall be provided when the
ambient temperature fall below that temperature to
which any such animal is acclimated.
(4) Drainage. A suitable method shall be provided
to rapidly eliminate excess water.
(5) Dogs five (5) months or older. Dogs five (5)
months or older which are housed longer than a
twenty-four (24) hour period shall be provided
with adequate, separate, cleanable enclosures and
shall be permitted exercise periods at least twice
each day for a minimum of five (5) minutes each
period, unless an exercise run is provided. An
exercise run must have an area of twenty (20)
square feet for a dog of thirty (30) pounds or
less, and a minimum of thirty-six (36) square feet
for a dog over thirty (30) pounds in weight.
(6) Individual enclosures. Individual enclosures
shall not be required for noncommercial kennels.
(k) Enclosures. Enclosures shall:
(1) Not be required for noncommercial kennels.
(2) Be structurally sound and maintained in good
repair to protect the pet animals from injury, to
contain them, and to keep predators out. They
shall be constructed of a material that is easily
cleanable and maintained so as to enable the pet
animals to remain dry and clean and provide
convenient access to clean food and water.
(3) Be constructed and maintained so as to
provide sufficient space to allow each pet animal
to turn about freely and to easily stand, sit and
lie in a comfortable, natural position.
(4) Be used for housing not more than one (1) pet
animal unless requested by the owners of each pet
animal housed therein.
(5) Subsections (3) and (4) above shall not apply
to pet animals being housed for medical or
grooming purposes, or for less than seventy-two
(72) hours.
(l) Sanitation/Cleaning of Enclosures.
(1) Excreta shall be removed from enclosures as
often as necessary to prevent contamination of the
pet animals contained therein and to reduce
disease, hazards and odors. When a hosing or
flushing method is used for cleaning and
enclosure, the pet animals shall be removed during
the cleaning process and adequate measures shall
be taken to protect the pet animals in other
enclosures from being contaminated with water and
other wastes.
(2) Enclosures, rooms, hard-surfaced pens and
runs shall be cleaned by washing all soiled
surfaces with a safe and effective disinfectant.
(3) Pens and runs shall be constructed of
concrete, asphalt or impervious material, or other
material approved by the Building Inspector.
(4) An effective program for the control of
insects, ectoparasites, avian and mammalian pests
shall be established and maintained where a
problem.
(m) Feeding.
(1) Pet animals which are housed for more than
twenty-four (24) hours shall be fed at least once
a day, except as otherwise might be required to
provide adequate veterinary care. The food shall
be free from contamination, wholesome, palatable
and of sufficient quality and nutritive value to
meet the normal daily requirements for the
condition and size of each pet animal.
(2) Food receptacles shall be accessible to the
pet animal and shall be located so as to minimize
contamination by excreta. Feeding pans shall be
durable and kept clean. The food receptacles shall
be cleaned daily. Disposable food receptacles may
be used, but must be discarded after each feeding.
Self-feeders may be used for the feeding of dry
food and they shall be sanitized as needed, but at
least once per week, to prevent molding,
deterioration or caking of feed.
(n) Enforcement.
(1) Any person, party, firm, or corporation who
violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance,
or shall hinder, impede or obstruct an enforcing
officer in the performance of his/her duty of
enforcement shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not more than Three Hundred ($300.00)
Dollars, plus the cost of prosecution.
(2) The Building Inspector shall be responsible
for the enforcement of this Ordinance, and shall
have the authority and duty to enter any licensed
premises during regular business hours to inspect
the same, with respect to businesses open at least
forty (40) hours per week. In the absence of
regular business hours, inspections shall be made
at any reasonable hour. In the event of an
emergency, an inspection may be made at any time.
(3) The provisions of this Ordinance which are
enforceable against a licensee shall be equally
enforceable against a non-licensee who is required
to be licensed hereunder.
(o) Suspension, Revocation or Denial of Renewal of
License.
(1) The Village Board shall have the right to
suspend or revoke any license once granted or deny
annual renewal thereof when it appears that any
operator or licensee has violated any of the
provisions of this Ordinance, or any Ordinance of
the Village, or law, rule or regulation of the
State of Wisconsin or the United States, involving
cruelty or mistreatment of pet or other animals,
or the unlawful possession of any animal. Prior to
the suspension or revocation of any license or the
denial of an application for a renewal thereof,
written notice of the reason for such action shall
be given to the applicant or licensee by the
Clerk/Treasurer. Such notice shall state that the
applicant or licensee may request a hearing on
such decision by the Village Board within ten (10)
days of receiving the notice.
(2) Should the applicant or licensee request a
hearing within such ten (10) day period, the
applicant or licensee shall be notified in writing
by the Clerk/Treasurer of the time and place of
the hearing, and the license shall remain in
effect until the Village Board determines that
grounds exist for such action.
(3) Disciplinary hearings, including nonrenewal,
suspension and revocation hearings, shall be held
before the Village Board.
19.06 CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED; FOWLS REGULATED.
(a) Any traveling circus or similar business having
suitable structures or facilities for the safeguard of such
animals as determined by the Village Building Inspector are
exempted from the provisions of this subsection.
Also excepted from this Ordinance is any bona fide,
accredited school having structures or facilities for the
safekeeping of such animals, as deemed appropriate by the Village
Building Inspector, or designee thereof, and offering protection
to persons who may come in contact therewith, providing the head
of the school or school system authorizes the keeping or
maintaining of designated animals, for educational purposes.
(b) Fowls.
(1) Prohibition. No person, firm, or corporation
shall keep, feed, or harbor any chickens, turkeys,
ducks, or geese without first obtaining a license
so to do from the Village Board, which shall first
be reviewed by the Committee on Judiciary and
Licenses, as hereinafter provided.
(2) License. Application to operate a poultry
ranch shall be made to the Clerk/Treasurer and
subject to the approval of the Village Board
accompanied by a fee of Two Hundred ($200.00)
Dollars. Such application shall state the location
of the ranch, its size, approximate acreage and
number of fowl maintained per day. The license
term shall be the calendar year. No license shall
be granted for any premises not in conformity to
the Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Regulations.
(a) The licensee shall not knowingly permit
any live fowl within one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet of the boundaries of the premises.
(b) The licensee shall maintain the premises
in a sanitary condition such as to prevent
obnoxious odors from escaping to any private
or public property and such as to not
jeopardize the public health, safety and
welfare.
(c) The licensee shall permit the inspection
of the premises by the Building Inspector,
and obey any reasonable Building Inspector.
(4) Revocation of License. Upon recommendation of
the Building Inspector, the Village Board may
revoke any license after a hearing has been
afforded to the licensee.
19.07 DANGEROUS EXOTIC ANIMALS.
(a) No person shall keep, harbor, own or knowingly
allow to be in or upon the person's premises any dangerous exotic
animal including any lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar,
cheetah, margay, mountain lion, Canada lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi,
bear, hyena, wolf, coyote, any deadly, dangerous or venomous
reptile or any other exotic animal declared by the director of
public health to be dangerous. Provided, that the provisions of
this section shall not apply to a properly maintained and
licensed zoological park, circus, scientific or educational
institution, research laboratory or veterinary hospital.
(b) Any animal that is determined by an animal control
officer to be a dangerous exotic animal shall be immediately
impounded. Except for exigent circumstances, if the owner of the
dangerous exotic animal does not consent to removal of the animal
or if the owner of the property on which the animal is located
does not consent to entry onto the property, the animal control
officer shall enter the property and remove the animal only
pursuant to a warrant issued by a judge. The dangerous exotic
animal shall remain impounded until:
(1) The director of public health determines that
the animal is not an exotic dangerous animal; or
(2) The owner satisfies an animal control officer
that the animal will be kept in a lawful manner;
or
(3) The owner relinquishes ownership of the
animal and the animal is either humanely destroyed
or placed with a person who shall keep the animal
in a lawful manner; or
(4) A person charged with a violation of this
section has been found not guilty and the
municipal judge orders the animal released; or
(5) A court determines that the animal is not a
dangerous exotic animal.
(c) The owner of the dangerous exotic animal shall pay
the boarding fee and impoundment fee provided for in these
Ordinances plus any additional cost incurred by the Village in
feeding and caring for the animal. The owner shall be billed
periodically by the Village for such fees and expenses. If the
owner fails to pay such a bill within ten (10) days after it was
mailed, ownership of the animal shall be deemed relinquished and,
after the procedures of this section have been followed, the
animal may either be humanely destroyed or placed with a person
who shall keep the animal in a lawful manner. Bills for fees and
costs under this section shall notify the animal owner that if
the bill is not paid within ten (10) days, the animal will be
destroyed or placed with some person who shall keep the animal in
a lawful manner. The bill shall also state that the animal owner
may meet with the Village President to dispute whether the animal
is a dangerous exotic animal or the amount of the bill before the
animal is destroyed or placed with another person. If the animal
owner wishes to meet, the owner must request a meeting in
writing. The request must be delivered to the Village President
at the address given for this purpose on the bill. The request
must be delivered before the deadline for disposition of the
animal indicated on the bill.
19.08 VIETNAMESE POTBELLIED PIG LICENSE.
(a) Definitions.
(1) Vietnamese Potbellied Pig shall mean purebred
Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs registered through a
North American Vietnamese Potbellied Pig Registry
which do not exceed one hundred (100) pounds in
weight.
(b) License Required/Fee. It is unlawful for any
person, party, firm or corporation to keep or maintain within the
Village limits a Vietnamese Potbellied Pig without first having
obtained a license from the Village Board and being in compliance
with all provisions of this Ordinance. License applications shall
be reviewed, prior to action by the Village Board, by the
Committee on Judiciary and Licenses. The Clerk/Treasurer, or
designee thereof, shall issue licenses which have been granted by
the Village Board. The fee for a license issued hereunder or
renewal thereof shall be One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars per
calendar year or fraction thereof. Excepted from the license
requirement is any law enforcement agency or agency under
contract with the Village to care for stray or unwanted animals.
(c) License/Application.
(1) Any applicant for a license or renewal
thereof under this Ordinance shall file with the
Clerk/Treasurer a fully executed application on a
form prescribed by the Clerk/Treasurer,
accompanied by the annual license fee.
(2) No licenses or renewal thereof shall issue
hereunder until:
(a) A Certificate of Purebred registration
is filed with the Clerk/Treasurer.
(b) There has been an inspection by a
Building Inspector of the premises being
licensed and a determination by said Building
Inspector that all requirements of this
Ordinance, and other applicable General and
Zoning Ordinances, have been met.
(c) There is an adequate means of
restraining animals from running at large or
disturbing the peace.
(d) The proposed facilities are located in
an appropriate zone under the Village Zoning
Ordinance and are the subject of an Occupancy
Permit, as verified by the Building
Inspector.
(e) The proposed facilities are in
compliance with the Building Code and Fire
Code, as verified by the Building Inspector.
(3) Any license or renewal thereof issued
hereunder shall be for a calendar year or portion
thereof. Licenses must be renewed each calendar
year on or before the 31 day of January. st
Licenses shall not be assignable or transferable
either to another person, party, firm or
corporation or for another location.
(4) When issued, a license shall be kept upon the
licensed premises and exhibited, upon request, to
any Village personnel requesting to examine it and
having authority to enforce this Ordinance.
(5) The Village Board shall license the premises
only for one (1) Vietnamese Potbellied Pig.
(d) License Tags. Upon issuing a license hereunder,
the Clerk/Treasurer shall issue a license tag. The licensee
shall, at all times, keep such tag attached to the collar of said
Vietnamese Potbellied Pig kept on the licensed premises. No
Vietnamese Potbellied Pig shall be permitted to stray or to be
taken anywhere outside the limits of the licensed premises unless
it is in leash, except where temporarily unleashed for the
purpose of show.
(e) Records. The Clerk/Treasurer shall retain a copy
of the application and license for his/her files.
(f) Other Licenses and Permits. The issuance of a
license hereunder does not exempt licensee from obtaining and
complying with all other applicable State and Village licenses
and permits, including required Zoning Permits.
(g) License Requirement. Licensee shall comply with
the following as a condition of obtaining and maintaining a
license:
(1) Animal feces to be collected on a daily basis
and stored in a sanitary receptacle. Animals shall
not be brought, or permitted to be, on property,
public or private, not owned or possessed by the
owner or person in charge of the animal, unless
such person has in his/her immediate possession an
appropriate device for scooping excrement and an
appropriate depository for the transmission of
excrement to a receptacle located upon property
owned or possessed by such person.
(2) When sunlight is likely to cause overheating
or discomfort, sufficient shade shall be provided
to allow an animal kept outdoors to protect itself
from the direct rays of the sun.
(3) An animal kept outdoors shall be provided
with access to shelter to allow it to remain dry
during rain or snow. Animals may be kept outdoors
only if contained in a fenced enclosure sufficient
for purposes of restraint.
(4) When the atmospheric temperature is less than
fifty (50°) degrees Fahrenheit, an animal shall be
kept indoors at a temperature no less than fifty
(50°) degrees Fahrenheit, except for temporary
ventures which do not endanger the animals health.
(5) An effective program for the control of
insects, ectoparasites, avian and mammalian pests
shall be established and maintained where a
problem.
(6) Animals shall be fed and watered at least
once a day, except as otherwise might be required
to provide adequate veterinary care. The food
shall be free from contamination, wholesome,
palatable and of sufficient quality and nutritive
value to meet the normal daily requirements for
the condition and size of the animal. Food
receptacles shall be accessible to the animal and
shall be located so as to minimize contamination
by excreta. Feeding pans shall be durable and kept
clean. The food receptacles shall be cleaned
daily. Disposable food receptacles may be used,
but must be discarded after each feeding. Selffeeders
may be used for the feeding of dry food
and they shall be sanitized as needed, but at
least once per week, to prevent molding,
deterioration or caking of feed.
(7) Animals may not be permitted to exceed one
hundred (100) pounds in weight.
(8) Animals shall be examined by a veterinarian
within a period of sixty (60) days prior to a new
or renewal license application being filed. The
animal may be licensed only upon a written
statement from a veterinarian as to:
(a) The animal’s weight.
(b) The animal has received all recommended
vaccinations and boosters.
(c) The animal is asymptomatic respecting
disease or has a disease which is not
contagious and is receiving appropriate
treatment.
(d) The animal’s tusks, if any, have been
removed or trimmed so as not to endanger any
person or animal.
(e) The animal has been spayed or neutered.
(f) The animal has passed a pseudorabies
test administered in accordance with Ag10,
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(9) The animal shall not be permitted to "Run at
Large". "Run at Large" shall mean the presence of
an animal which is not on a leash of six (6) feet
or less on any public property or thoroughfare or
on any private property without the permission of
the property owner or occupier. Animals which are
not "Run at Large" if secured in a manner as will
prevent their escape therefrom.
(10) Animals shall not be kept in a manner as to
disturb the peace of the neighborhood or of
persons passing to and from upon the streets.
(11) License holder shall be responsible for all
costs of impounding the animal, if taken into
custody as a stray, and for all costs of providing
any necessary medical treatment which may be
required for the animal under any circumstances.
To guarantee the payment of said cost, a bond,
cash bond or other assurance approved by the
Village Attorney is required to be posted with the
Clerk/Treasurer in the amount of One Thousand
($1,000.00) Dollars.
(12) Animals may be imported, sold and exhibited
only in accordance with Ag11, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(h) Enforcement.
(1) Any person, party, firm, or corporation who
violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance,
or shall hinder, impede or obstruct an enforcing
officer in the performance of his/her duty of
enforcement shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not more than Three Hundred ($300.00)
Dollars, plus the cost of prosecution.
(2) Sanitarians shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this Ordinance, and shall have the
authority and duty to enter any licensed premises
to inspect the same. Inspections may be made at
any reasonable hour. In the event of an emergency,
an inspection may be made at any time.
(3) The provisions of this Ordinance which are
enforceable against a licensee shall be equally
enforceable against a non-licensee who is required
to be licensed hereunder.
(i) Suspension, Revocation or Denial of Renewal of
License.
(1) The Village Board shall have the right to
suspend or revoke any license once granted or deny
annual renewal thereof when it appears that any
licensee has violated any of the provisions of
this Ordinance, or any Ordinance of the Village,
or law, rule or regulation of the State of
Wisconsin or the United States, involving cruelty
or mistreatment of the animal, or the unlawful
possession of the animal. Prior to the suspension
or revocation of any license or the denial of an
application for a renewal thereof, written notice
of the reason for such action shall be given to
the applicant or licensee by the Clerk/Treasurer.
Such notice shall state that the applicant or
licensee may request a hearing on such decision by
the Village Board within ten (10) days of
receiving the notice.
(2) Should the applicant or licensee request a
hearing within such ten (10) day period, the
applicant or licensee shall be notified in writing
by the Clerk/Treasurer of the time and place of
the hearing, and the license shall remain in
effect until the Village Board determines that
grounds exist for such action.
(3) Disciplinary hearings, including nonrenewal,
suspension and revocation hearings, shall be held
before the Village Board.
19.09 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
(a) It shall be unlawful to willfully or maliciously
inflict unnecessary or needless cruelty, torture, abuse or
cruelly beat any animal, including every act or omission or
neglect whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering or
death shall be caused, whether belonging to himself or another
except that reasonable force may be employed to drive off vicious
or trespassing animals.
(b) It shall be unlawful to fail or refuse or neglect
to provide any animal in his charge with food, potable water,
shade or shelter, or cruelly expose any animal in hot, stormy,
cold or inclement weather or to carry any animal in or upon any
vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner.
(1) In this Section, "shade" shall mean
protection from the direct rays of the sun, during
the months of June to September, inclusive, shall
be provided.
(2) In this Section, "shelter" shall mean a
moisture proof structure of suitable size to
accommodate the dog and allow retention of body
heat, made of durable material with a solid floor
raised at least two (2) inches from the ground and
with the entrance covered by a flexible windproof
material. Such structure shall be provided with a
sufficient quantity of suitable bedding to provide
insulation and protection against cold and
dampness.
19.10 TRAPPING.
(a) No person shall, within the corporate limits of
the Village of Paddock Lake, Wisconsin, set or operate any trap,
device, or mechanism that is designed, built or made to close
upon, hold fast or otherwise capture an animal, other than
vermin.
(b) This Ordinance shall not proscribe the use of
"live" traps authorized under §29.24, Wisconsin Statutes,
relating to the live trapping of certain animals by owners or
occupants of land; use of live traps under §29.425 and §29.427,
Wisconsin Statutes, relating to relocation of live, wild animals;
and the use of live traps under §29.59, Wisconsin Statutes,
relating to the removal of wild animals causing damage.
19.11 RABIES CONTROL.
(a) Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the
following definitions shall apply:
(1) Animal. The term “Animal” shall mean dog or
cat.
(2) Rabies Control Authority. The term "Rabies
Control Authority" shall mean the Health
Department of the County of Kenosha, Wisconsin.
(3) Vaccination Against Rabies. The term
“Vaccination Against Rabies" shall mean the
inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine
licensed by the United States Department of
Agriculture administered by a veterinarian.
(4) Veterinarian. The term "Veterinarian" shall
mean a practitioner of veterinary medicine who is
duly licensed by the State of Wisconsin.
(b) Rabies Vaccination Required.
(1) Rabies Vaccination Required. The owner of a
dog or cat shall have the dog or cat vaccinated
against rabies by a veterinarian, or if a
veterinarian is physically present at the location
where the vaccine is administered, by a veterinary
technician, at no later than five (5) months of
age and revaccinated within one (1) year after the
initial vaccination. If the owner obtains the dog
or cat, or brings the dog or cat into the Village
after the dog or cat has reached five (5) months
of age, the owner shall have the dog or cat
vaccinated against rabies within thirty (30) days
after the dog or cat is obtained or brought into
the Village, unless the dog or cat has been
vaccinated as evidenced by a current Certificate
of Rabies Vaccination from the State of Wisconsin
or another state. The owner of a dog or cat shall
have the dog or cat revaccinated against rabies by
a veterinarian, or if a veterinarian is physically
present at the location where the vaccine is
administered, by a veterinary technician, before
the date that the immunization expires as stated
on the certificate of vaccination, or if no date
is specified, within three (3) years after the
previous vaccination.
(2) Exemption. The owner of a dog or cat may be
exempt from the requirement to have the dog or cat
vaccinated against rabies for a license year based
on a letter from a veterinarian stating that
vaccination is inadvisable because of a reaction
to a previous vaccination, a physical condition,
or a regimen of therapy that the dog or cat is
undergoing. The owner shall provide a new letter
for each year in which the owner seeks an
exemption under this paragraph.
(c) Duties of Veterinarian.
(1) Issuance of Certificate of Rabies
Vaccination. The person who administers the rabies
vaccine under this Section shall complete and
issue to the owner a Certificate of Rabies
Vaccination bearing a serial number stating the
owner's name and address, the name, sex, spayed or
unspayed, neutered or unneutered, breed and color
of the dog or cat, the date of vaccination, the
type of rabies vaccine administered and the
manufacturer's serial number, the date that the
immunization expires as specified for that type of
vaccine by the Center for Disease Control of the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and
the city, village or town where the dog or cat is
required to be licensed.
(2) Veterinarian Copies. The veterinarian shall
keep a copy of each Certificate of Rabies
Vaccination in a file maintained for this purpose
until the date that the immunization expires or
until the dog or cat is revaccinated, whichever
occurs first.
(3) Rabies Control Copy. Upon request of the
Rabies Control Authority, the veterinarian shall
forward a copy of each Certificate of Rabies
Vaccination to the Rabies Control Authority within
ten (10) days of the request.
(4) Rabies Vaccination Tag. After issuing the
Certificate of Rabies Vaccination, the person who
administers the vaccine under this Section shall
deliver to the owner a rabies vaccination tag of
durable material bearing the same serial number as
the certificate, the year the vaccination was
given and the name, address and telephone number
of the supervising veterinarian.
(5) Tag To Be Attached. The owner shall attach
the rabies vaccination tag or a substitute tag to
a collar, and a collar with the tag attached shall
be kept on the dog at all times, but this
requirement does not apply to a dog during
competition or training, to a dog while hunting,
to a dog securely confined indoors, to a dog
securely confined in a fenced area or to a dog
while actively involved in herding or controlling
livestock if the dog is under the control of its
owner. The substitute tag shall be of a durable
material and contain the same information as the
rabies vaccination tag. The requirements of this
Section do not apply to a dog which is not
required to be vaccinated under (b)(2). No collar
or harness shall be required for cats.
(6) Duplicate Tag. The person who administers the
vaccine under Section (b)(1) may furnish a new
rabies vaccination tag with a new serial number to
an owner in place of the original tag upon
presentation of the Certificate of Rabies
Vaccination. The person who administers the
vaccine under Section (b)(1) shall then indicate
the new tag number on the certificate and keep a
record in the file.
(d) Vaccination Cost. The cost of rabies vaccination
shall be borne by the owner of the dog or cat.
(e) Exception of Vaccination Requirement - Transient
Dog or Cats. The provisions of this Ordinance with respect to
vaccination shall not apply to any dog or cat owned by a person
temporarily remaining within the Village of Paddock Lake for less
than thirty (30) days, or any dog or cat brought into the Village
for field trial or show purposes, nor for hunting dogs in the
State for less than thirty (30) days. Such dogs shall be kept
under strict supervision of the owner. However, it shall be
unlawful to bring any dog into the Village of Paddock Lake which
does not comply with the animal health laws and import
regulations of the State of Wisconsin, which are applicable to
dogs.
(f) Duty Upon Animal Biting or Scratching a Natural
Person.
(1) Within three (3) days after being notified as
provided in §19.11(f)(2), the owner of an animal
that has bitten or scratched any natural person,
shall cause such animal to be examined by a
veterinarian.
(2) Notice, as used in this subsection (f), shall
be complete either:
(a) Upon 1st class mailing of a notice; or,
(b) Upon actual delivery of a notice to the
owner,
(c) By leaving a copy of the notice at the
owner’s usual place of abode within the State
in the presence of some competent member of
the family at least fourteen (14) years of
age, who shall be informed of the contents
thereof.
The notice herein shall be sufficient if it
identifies: the animal, the name of the natural
person bitten or scratched, the location at which
the person was bitten or scratched, and the name
of the owner (as defined in §19.01(f)) of the
animal. Notice by mail shall be complete upon
deposit with the Post Office.
(3) In not less than ten (10) nor more than
twelve (12) days after the date the animal bit or
scratched any natural person, the owner shall
secure a release of the animal from a
veterinarian; on a form approved and supplied by
the Rabies Control Authority and delivered by the
owner to the Rabies Control Authority in not less
than ten (10) nor more than twelve (12) days after
the date the animal bit or scratched any natural
person.
(4) The owner of the animal shall cause the
animal to be confined in the custody and care of a
veterinarian for such period of time, not to
exceed ten (10) days, as is deemed necessary by
the veterinarian to determine whether the animal
is rabid if:
(a) Pursuant to the examination in
§19.11(f)(1) above, the veterinarian
determines that the animal exhibits abnormal
symptoms, signs or behavior; or,
(b) If the animal was not vaccinated
pursuant to §19.11(b). The cost of such
confinement shall be paid by the owner.
(5) If pursuant to the examination in subsection
(1) above, and subject to the conditions in
subsection (4), above, the veterinarian determines
that the animal may be released to the owner, the
owner shall continuously confine the animal within
the owner’s house or a locked pen or building
completely inaccessible to children and from which
the animal cannot escape, for a period of ten (10)
days, commencing immediately after the bite or
scratch.
(6) If the owner fails to comply with the
requirements of Section 19.11(f)(1), (3), (4),
(5), (8), or (10), the animal, or its carcass,
shall be impounded by order of the Rabies Control
Authority, for such period as shall be deemed
necessary by the Rabies Control Authority, to
determine whether or not the animal is rabid.
After the animal has been impounded for such
period as is necessary to determine whether or not
the animal is rabid, the Rabies Control Authority,
may cause such impounded animal to be returned to
its owner. The return of the animal shall in no
manner affect or diminish the liability of the
owner for the costs of impounding and transporting
the animal or relieve the owner of any duties or
liabilities under this Chapter.
(7) The owner shall comply with all the
requirements of this section each and every time
an animal owned by him/her bites or scratches any
natural person.
(8) In the event the Rabies Control Authority
notifies the owner later than ten (10) days after
the animal has scratched or bitten a natural
person, the owner shall have the animal examined
by a veterinarian within three (3) days of the
notice. The veterinarian may also release the
animal pursuant to §19.11(f)(3) at the same time
the veterinarian makes the initial examination. If
the veterinarian releases the animal immediately,
it must be done on the same forms as required by
§19.11(f)(1) and §19.11(f)(3) and delivered by the
owner to the Rabies Control Authority within five
(5) days after being notified. If the veterinarian
determines that the animal is suspected of having
rabies, the veterinarian shall confine the animal
in the veterinarian’s care for a period of not
less than ten (10) days. The cost of such
confinement shall be paid by the owner.
(9) The owner of an animal shall not be relieved
from any duty under this Section by reason of the
animal’s disappearance or by the transfer of its
custody to another.
(10) The owner shall not destroy or permit to be
destroyed an animal that has bitten or scratched a
natural person, unless it has been released
pursuant to §19.11(f)(3) or §19.11(f)(8), or with
the prior written permission of the Rabies Control
Authority, or fifteen (15) days have passed since
the date of the last time the animal bit or
scratched a natural person.
(11) The Village of Paddock Lake, upon failure of
the owner to reimburse the veterinarian, shall
reimburse veterinarian who confines an animal
pursuant to a request for such confinement by the
Rabies Control Authority, under §19.11(f)(4)(b),
§19.11(f)(6) or §19.11(f)(8). Such reimbursement
shall be limited to the average normal customary
charge in Kenosha County for boarding an animal by
a veterinarian and up to two (2) rabies tests. The
veterinarian, upon accepting reimbursement from
the Village under this Section, shall execute and
deliver to the Village an assignment of his/her
claim against the owner for the costs of
confinement. The Village Attorney is authorized to
take any and all actions he/she deems appropriate
to collect the costs of confinement and care from
the owner, pursuant to any assignment given by a
veterinarian, including imposition of special
assessments or special charges against real
property.
(12) The Rabies Control Authority may cause any
dog impounded pursuant to §19.11(f)(5) or
§19.11(f)(6) to be vaccinated against rabies while
such dog is impounded if such dog has not been and
is required to be vaccinated under §19.11(b).
(g) Handling of Dogs or Cats Bitten or Scratched by
Rabid Animals. In the case of dogs or cats known to have been
bitten or scratched by a rabid animal, the following shall apply:
(1) Unvaccinated Dogs or Cats.
(a) In the case of dogs or cats which are
not vaccinated in accordance with §19.11(b)
and which have been bitten or scratched by a
known rabid animal, said bitten or scratched
(exposed) dog or cat may be immediately
destroyed, with the owner’s consent, or as a
last resort, if the cat or dog cannot be
captured.
(b) If the owner is unwilling to destroy the
bitten or scratched (exposed) dog or cat,
strict isolation of the dog or cat in a
kennel under veterinary supervision for a
minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days, and
compliance with the vaccination requirement
of §95.21(5)(c), Wisconsin Statutes, shall be
required.
(2) If the bitten or scratched (exposed) dog or
cat is vaccinated in accordance with the provision
of §19.11(b) of this Ordinance, the dog or cat
shall be handled as follows:
(a) Immediately revaccinated and confined
for a period of sixty (60) days following
revaccination; or,
(b) If the dog or cat is not immediately
revaccinated, the dog or cat shall be
confined in strict isolation in a kennel for
six (6) months under the supervision of a
veterinarian; or,
(c) The dog or cat shall be destroyed if the
owner does not comply with subsection (a) or
(b) above of this subsection (2).
(h) Impoundment of Dogs Without a Valid Rabies
Vaccination Tag.
(1) Any dog found off the owner’s premises and
not wearing a valid rabies vaccination tag shall
be impounded. All impounded dogs shall be given
proper care and maintenance. Each impounded dog
shall be kept and maintained at the pound in
accordance with §19.01.
(2) Notice of impoundment of all animals,
including any significant marks of identification,
shall be posted at the pound as public
notification of impoundment. Any unvaccinated dog
or cat may be reclaimed by its owners during the
period of impoundment by payment of prescribed
pound fees and complying with rabies vaccination
requirement of this Ordinance within seventy-two
(72) hours of release. Any vaccinated dog
impounded because of lack of a rabies vaccination
tag may be reclaimed by its owner by furnishing
proof of rabies vaccination and payment of all
impoundment fees prior to release.
(i) Enforcement.
(1) The Village Administrator, and his or her
designees, shall be responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of this Section. The
Humane Officer, or his or her designees, shall
make themselves available to and follow the
directions of the Rabies Control Authority, or his
designees to enforce this Section.
(2) Upon a proper showing to the Village
Administrator that a scratch of a natural person
by an animal poses no threat of rabies to the
person scratched due to the nature of the scratch,
the Village Administrator may, upon a written
finding, exempt the owner from the provisions of
§19.11(f), except that the animal may not be
destroyed for a period of not less than fourteen
(14) days after the scratch was inflicted.
(3) The Village Administrator is authorized to
prepare and promulgate such forms as are necessary
for the administration of §19.11, and is
authorized to designate such persons as he/she
deems appropriate to enforce §19.11. The Village
Administrator shall be responsible for making any
payments under §19.11(f)(11).
19.12 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
(a) Definitions.
(1) "Vicious Animal" shall mean:
(a) Any animal that, when unprovoked,
inflicts bites, injures, kills, damages or
attacks a human being or domestic animal on
either public or private property;
(b) Any animal that has a propensity,
tendency or disposition, known to the owner
thereof, to attack, without provocation, in a
manner which may cause death, injury, damage
or which may otherwise endanger the safety of
any human being or domestic animal; or,
(c) Any animal trained or used for fighting
against another animal.
Notwithstanding the definition of a "Vicious
Animal" above, no animal may be declared vicious
if death, injury or damage is sustained by a
person who, at the time such was sustained, was
committing a criminal trespass upon premises
occupied by the owner of the animal, or was
teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the
animal, or was committing or attempting to commit
a crime or violating or attempting to violate an
Ordinance which protects person or property.
No animal may be declared vicious if death, injury
or damage was sustained by a domestic animal
which, at the time such was sustained, was
teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the
animal.
No animal may be declared vicious if the animal
was protecting or defending a human being within
the immediate vicinity of the animal from an
unjustified attack or assault.
No dog may be declared vicious for acts committed
by said dog while being utilized by a law
enforcement agency for law enforcement purposes
while under the control and direction of a law
enforcement officer.
(2) "Public Property" shall mean any property
owned or controlled by any unit of government and
open to the public, including streets, highways,
sidewalks, right-of-ways, public ways and malls.
(3) "Owner" shall include any person who may own,
possess, harbor, keep or maintain a "Vicious
Animal".
(b) Prohibition. No person shall own, possess, harbor,
keep or maintain a "Vicious Animal" within the Village of Paddock
Lake, Wisconsin. Vicious Animals previously licensed within the
Village of Paddock Lake shall be removed from the Village of
Paddock Lake at the conclusion of the licensing period, and the
location where said animal will be kept, harbored or maintained
shall be disclosed to the Village Clerk/Treasurer.
(c) Impoundment and Destruction. A "Vicious Animal"
which is owned, possessed, harbored, kept or maintained in
violation of this Ordinance may be impounded and destroyed by the
Village, or its agents at the expense of the owner, following
notice and an opportunity to be heard by the Village
Administrator. Any person or party aggrieved by such decision of
the Village Administrator may appeal such decision to the Village
Board by filing a written notice of appeal with the
Clerk/Treasurer within five (5) Village business days of receipt
of a written order from the Village Administrator. The "Vicious
Animal" shall be impounded, but not destroyed, until the time for
appeal has expired and until any timely appeal has been heard. A
“Vicious Animal” shall not be released without identifying the
location where said “Vicious Animal” will be kept upon release.
The Village elects not to be bound by Chapter 68, Wisconsin
Statutes, with respect to administrative procedure.
(d) Sale Or Transfer Of Possession.
(1) No person may sell or transfer possession of
a "Vicious Animal" to another person without first
notifying the person to whom the "Vicious Animal"
is being sold or transferred, of the fact that
such is a "Vicious Animal", and of any
requirements imposed upon the selling or
transferring party by this Ordinance.
(2) No person may sell or transfer possession of
a "Vicious Animal" to another person without first
notifying the Clerk/Treasurer thereof, in writing,
at least three (3) days in advance of the sale or
transfer of possession.
(e) Separate Offense. Each day of violation of any
provision of this Ordinance and each violation of each provision
of this Ordinance shall be deemed a separate offense.
19.13 ENFORCEMENT OF THIS CHAPTER AND CERTAIN STATE STATUTES.
(a) Statutes Incorporated By Reference. The following
Wisconsin Statutes are incorporated herein by reference: Section
95.21, Chapter 173, Chapter 174, and Chapter 951.
(b) Humane Officers; Appointment. The Village Board
may appoint Village employees or independent contractors or
officers or employees of an independent contractor as Humane
Officers under Section 173.03, Wisconsin Statutes, to perform
Animal Control Services for the Village .
(c) Abatement of Violations Under Section 173.11,
Wisconsin Statutes.
(1) Issuance of Order. If a Humane Officer or law
enforcement officer, after investigation, has
reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of
a Statute or Ordinance is occurring and the
violation is causing or has the potential to cause
injury to an animal, the Humane Officer or law
enforcement officer may issue and serve an Order
of Abatement directed to named persons. An
official designated under subsection (3) below to
hold a hearing may not participate in the decision
to issue the order or in any activity leading to
that decision.
(2) Content of Order. An Abatement Order issued
under subsection (1) above shall contain all of
the following:
(a) The name and address of the person to
whom directed.
(b) The statute or ordinance alleged to be
violated.
(c) A prohibition on further violations.
(d) A description of measures necessary to
correct the alleged violation.
(e) A description of the hearing and appeal
provisions under subsections (3) and (4)
below.
(3) Hearing. Any person named in an Abatement
Order issued under subsection (1) above may,
within the ten (10) day period following service
of the order, request a hearing before the
Chairperson of the Village of Paddock Lake
Committee on Judiciary and Licensing by filing a
request for hearing with the Village
Clerk/Treasurer. The hearing shall be held within
ten (10) days after the request is made, unless
the requestor agrees to a later date. The hearing
shall be informal in nature.
(4) Decision. Within ten (10) days after a
hearing under subsection (3) above, the
Chairperson of the Committee who conducts the
hearing shall affirm the order, modify and affirm
the order, or withdraw the order.
(5) Appeal. Any person adversely affected by a
decision under subsection (4) above may seek
judicial review by commencing an action in Circuit
Court within thirty (30) days after the day that
the decision is issued.
19.14 PENALTIES.
(a) Any person violating §19.02(a) shall forfeit
Thirty ($30.00) Dollars, together with the costs of the action,
and in default of the payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall
be committed to the County Jail for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days.
(b) Any person violating §19.02(c) shall forfeit not
less than Fifty ($50.00) Dollars nor more than Two Hundred
($200.00) Dollars, together with the costs of the action, and in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be
committed to the County Jail for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days.
(c) Any person convicted of violating §19.02(d)(1) or
§19.02(d)(3), shall forfeit not more than Two Hundred ($200.00)
Dollars, together with the costs of the action, and in default of
payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be committed to the
County Jail for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(d) Any person violating §19.06 shall forfeit One
Hundred ($100.00) Dollars, together with the costs of forfeiture
and costs, shall be committed to the County Jail for a period not
to exceed thirty (30) days.
(e) Any person violating §19.09 shall forfeit not less
than One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars nor more than Five Hundred
($500.00) Dollars, together with the costs of the action, and in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be
committed to the County Jail for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days.
(f) Any person violating §19.11(b) shall forfeit Fifty
($50.00) Dollars, together with the costs of the action, and in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be
committed to the County Jail for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days.
(g) Any person violating §19.11(f)(1), §19.11(f)(5),
§19.11(f)(8) or §19.11(f)(10), shall forfeit not less than Two
Hundred ($200.00) Dollars, nor more than Five Hundred ($500.00)
Dollars, together with the costs of the action, and in default of
payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be committed to the
County Jail for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(h) Any person violating §19.03 or §19.04 of this
Chapter or any other provision of Chapter 19 for which there is
no separately listed penalty, shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not more than One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars, plus the
costs of prosecution, and in default of such payment of
forfeiture and costs, shall be committed to the County Jail for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(i) Any person violating §19.03(d) of this Chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than Three
Hundred Fifty ($350.00) Dollars and not more than Five Hundred
($500.00) Dollars, together with the costs of the action, and in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be
committed to the County Jail for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days.
(j) Any person who violates any provision of §19.12 of
this Chapter shall, upon conviction forfeit not more than Five
Hundred ($500.00) Dollars plus the cost of prosecution and, in
default of the timely payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall
be committed to the County Jail for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days.
(k) Any person who violates §19.10(a) shall, upon
conviction, forfeit not more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars,
plus the costs of prosecution; and, in default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs, shall be committed to the County Jail for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(l) Any person who violates §19.13 of this Chapter or
Section 95.21, Chapter 173, Chapter 174, or Chapter 951,
Wisconsin Statutes, shall, upon conviction, forfeit not more than
Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars, together with the costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and
costs, shall be committed to the County Jail for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days.
Chapter 20
BUSINESS LICENSES AND PERMITS
20.01 Licenses and Permits Required
20.02 Application
20.03 Payment of Fee
20.04 Bond and Insurance
20.05 Approval or Denial of License
20.06 Certificates
20.07 License and Permit Term
20.08 Exhibition of Certificate
20.09 Transfer
20.10 Renewal
20.11 Revocation
20.12 Hearing
20.13 Inspections
20.01 LICENSE AND PERMITS REQUIRED.
No person shall engage in any trade, profession,
business or activity in the Village for which a license or permit
is required by any provision of this Code without first obtaining
such license or permit from the Village in the manner provided in
this Chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided.
20.02 APPLICATION.
Unless otherwise provided, an application for a license
or permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk/Treasurer upon
forms provided by the Village, and shall state the location of
the proposed activity and any other facts pertinent to the
granting of the license or permit.
20.03 PAYMENT OF FEE.
The fees required for any license or permit shall be
paid at the office of the Clerk/Treasurer before the granting of
the license or permit. No fee paid shall be refunded unless the
license or permit is denied. When over half the license period
has expired, the license fee for the remainder of the license
period shall be one-half of the license fee.
20.04 BOND AND INSURANCE.
All required bonds shall be executed by two sureties,
or a surety company, and be subject to the approval of the
Village Attorney. Where policies of insurance are required, such
policies shall be approved as to substance and form by the
Village Attorney. Satisfactory evidence of coverage by bond or
insurance shall be filed with the Village before the license or
permit is issued.
20.05 APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF LICENSES.
(a) Where the approval of any Village Officer or state
officer is required prior to the issuance of any license or
permit, such approval must be presented to the Village
Clerk/Treasurer before any license or permit is issued.
(b) No license or permit shall be issued by the
Village if it appears that the conduct of the activity for which
the license or permit is sought will be contrary to the health,
safety or welfare of the public or any regulation, law or
ordinance applicable to such activity.
20.06 CERTIFICATES.
License and permit certificates shall show the name of
the licensee or permitee, the date of issue, the activity
licensed, and the term of the license or permit. The certificate
shall be signed in the name of the Village by the Village
President, and be impressed with the Village seal. The
Clerk/Treasurer shall keep a record of all licenses and permits
issued.
20.07 LICENSE AND PERMIT TERM.
(a) Unless otherwise provided, the term of a license
or permit shall end on May 1 of each year.
(b) Where the issuance of a license for a period of
less than one year is allowed, the effective date of such license
shall commence with the date of issuance.
(c) Permits shall be issued for the term set forth in
the permit.
20.08 EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATE
Every licensee or permittee shall carry his license or
permit certificate upon his person at all times when engaged in
the activity for which the license or permit was granted, except
that where such activity is conducted at a fixed place or
establishment, the license or permit certificate shall be
exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in his place of
business. The licensee or permittee shall exhibit the license
certificate when applying for a renewal and upon demand of any
sheriff or person representing the issuing authority.
20.09 TRANSFER.
Unless otherwise provided, no license or permit shall
be transferable or assignable.
20.10 RENEWAL.
Unless otherwise provided, license or permit renewals
shall be issued in the same manner and be subject to the same
conditions as original licenses or permits.
20.11 REVOCATION.
Any license or permit may be suspended or revoked by
the Village President or Village Board for any of the following
causes:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement
contained in the application or made in carrying on the licensed
or permitted activity.
(b) Conducting such activity in such manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace, or a menace to the health,
safety or welfare of the public, or a disturbance of the peace or
comfort of residents of the Village, upon recommendation of the
appropriate Village official.
(c) Expiration or cancellation of any required bond or
insurance.
(d) Actions unauthorized or beyond the scope of the
license or permit granted.
(e) Violation of any regulation or provision of this
Code applicable to the activity for which the license or permit
has been granted, or any regulation or law of the state so
applicable.
(f) Failure to continuously comply with all conditions
required as precedent to the approval of the license or permit.
20.12 HEARINGS.
Any person aggrieved by the action of any Village
official in denying or revoking a license or permit shall have
the right to a hearing before the Village Board on any such
action, provided a written request is filed with the
Clerk/Treasurer within 10 days after receipt of the notice of
such suspension or revocation of any such license or permit. The
action taken by the Board after a hearing shall be final.
20.13 INSPECTIONS.
Village officials may enter, at any reasonable time,
upon the premises where any licensed or permitted activity is
being conducted for the purpose of inspecting and determining
whether such activity is in accordance with its respective
license or permit.
Chapter 21
DIRECT SELLERS
21.01 Registration Required
21.02 Definitions
21.03 Exemptions
21.04 Registration
21.05 Investigation
21.06 Appeal
21.07 Regulation of Direct Sellers
21.08 Records
21.09 Revocation of Registration
21.10 Penalty
21.01 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to engage in
direct sales within the Village without being first registered
for that purpose as herein provided.
21.02 DEFINITIONS.
(a) "Charitable Organization" shall include any
benevolent, philanthropic, or patriotic person, partnership,
association or corporation, or one purporting to be such.
(b) "Clerk/Treasurer" shall mean the Village
Clerk/Treasurer.
(c) "Direct Seller" means any person who, as an
individual, or for a partnership, association or corporation,
sells goods, or takes sales orders for the later delivery of
goods, at any location other than the permanent business place or
residence of said individual, partnership, association or
corporation. "Direct Seller" shall include, but not be limited
to, peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. The sale of
goods includes donations required by the direct seller for the
retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
(d) "Goods" shall include personal property of any
kind, and shall include goods provided incidental to services
offered or sold.
(e) "Permanent Merchant" means a direct seller who,
for at least one year has continuously operated an established
place of business in the Village, or has continuously resided
within the Village and now does business from his/her residence.
21.03 EXEMPTIONS.
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of
this Chapter:
(a) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy
products or bakery goods to regular customers on established
routes.
(b) Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers
in such goods.
(c) Any person selling agricultural products which
such person has grown.
(d) Any permanent merchant or employee who delivers
orders away from the established place of business for goods
regularly offered for sale by such merchant within this county
and who delivers such goods in their regular course of business.
(e) Any person who has an established place of
business where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a
regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact with,
and specifically requested a home visit by, said person.
(f) Any person who has had, or one who represents a
company which has had, a prior business transaction such as a
prior sale or credit arrangement, with the prospective customer.
(g) Any person selling or offering for sale a service
unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of goods.
(h) Any person holding a sale required by statute or
by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide
auction sale pursuant to the laws of the Village or of this
State.
(i) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable
organization who engages in direct sales for or on behalf of said
organization, provided that there is submitted to the
Clerk/Treasurer proof that such charitable organization is
registered under Sec. 440.41, Wis. Stats., or which is exempt
from that statute's registration requirements, shall not be
required to register under this ordinance;
(j) Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant
and submits to the Clerk/Treasurer, upon request, proof that he
has leased for at least one year, or purchased, the premises from
which he is conducting business, or proof that he has conducted
such business in this Village for at least one year.
21.04 REGISTRATION.
(a) Required Information. Applicants for registration
must complete and return to the Clerk/Treasurer a registration
form furnished by the Clerk/Treasurer which shall require the
following information:
(1) name, permanent address and telephone number,
and temporary address, if any;
(2) age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;
(3) name, address and telephone number of the
person, firm, association or corporation that the
direct seller represents or is employed by, or
whose merchandise is being sold;
(4) temporary address and telephone number from
which business will be conducted, if any;
(5) nature of business to be conducted and a
brief description of the goods or services
offered;
(6) proposed method of delivery of goods, if
applicable;
(7) make, model and license number of all
vehicles to be used by applicant in the conduct of
applicant’s business in the Village;
(8) last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed
three, where applicant conducted similar business;
(9) place where applicant can be contacted for at
least seven days after leaving this Village; and
(10) a statement as to whether applicant has been
convicted of any crime or ordinance violation
related to applicant’s transient merchant business
within the last five years and, if so, the nature
of the offense and the place of conviction.
(b) Required Certificates. Applicants shall present
to the Clerk/Treasurer for examination:
(1) a driver’s license or some other proof of
identity as may be reasonably required;
(2) a state certificate of examination and
approval from the sealer of weights and measures
where applicant’s business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by state
authorities; and
(3) a state health officer’s certificate where
applicant’s business involves the handling of food
or clothing and is required to be certified under
state law. Such certificate shall state that the
applicant is apparently free from any contagious
or infectious disease, and be dated not more than
90 days prior to the date the application for
license is made.
(c) Required Fees and Statements. At the time the
registration is returned, a fee of Fifty ($50.00) Dollars shall
be paid to the Clerk/Treasurer to cover processing costs. The
applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Clerk/Treasurer
as the applicant’s agent to accept service of process in any
civil action brought against the applicant arising out of any
sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with the
direct sales activities of the applicant, in the event the
applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be personally served.
Upon payment of said fee and signing of said statement, the
Clerk/Treasurer shall register the applicant as a direct seller
and date the entry. The registration shall be valid for a period
of one (1) year from the date of entry, subject to subsequent
refusal as provided in Section 21.05(b), below.
21.05 INVESTIGATION.
(a) Referral to Sheriff. Upon receipt of each
applicant the Clerk/Treasurer may refer it immediately to the
Sheriff's office to make a complete investigation of the
statements made in such registration.
(b) Refusal to Register. The Clerk/Treasurer shall
refuse to register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to
the investigation above, that:
(1) the application contains any material
omission or materially inaccurate statement;
(2) complaints of a material nature have been
received against the applicant by authorities in
the last cities, villages and towns, not exceeding
three, in which the applicant conducted similar
business;
(3) the applicant was convicted of a crime,
statutory violation or ordinance violation within
the last five years, the nature of which is
directly related to the applicant's fitness to
engage in direct selling;
(4) or the applicant failed to comply with any
applicable provision of Sec. 21.04(b) of this
Code.
21.06 APPEAL.
Any person denied registration may appeal the denial
through the appeal procedure provided by ordinance or resolution
of the Village Board, or, if none has been adopted, under the
provisions of Secs. 68.07 through 68.16, Wis. Stats.
21.07 REGULATION OF DIRECT SELLERS.
(a) Prohibited Practices.
(1) A direct seller shall be prohibited from:
calling at any dwelling or other place between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by
appointment; calling at any dwelling or other
place where a sign is displayed bearing the words
"No Peddlers", "No Solicitors" or words of similar
meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling
place; or remaining on any premises after being
asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other
person having authority over such premises.
(2) A direct seller shall not misrepresent or
make false, deceptive or misleading statements
concerning the quality, quantity or character of
any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his
visit, his identity or the identity of the
organization he represents. A charitable
organization direct seller shall specifically
disclose what portion of the sale price of goods
being offered will actually be used for the
charitable purpose for which the organization is
soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as a
percentage of the sale price of the goods.
(3) If the direct seller takes a sales order for
the later delivery of goods, he shall, at the time
the order is taken, provide the buyer with a
written statement containing the terms of the
agreement, the amount paid in advance, the name,
address and telephone number of the seller, the
delivery or performance date, and whether a
guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the
terms thereof.
21.08 RECORDS.
The Sheriff shall report to the Clerk/Treasurer all
convictions for violation of this Chapter and the Clerk/Treasurer
shall note any such violation on the record of the registrant
convicted.
21.09 REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
(a) When Permitted. Registration may be revoked by
the Village Board after notice and hearing, if the registrant
made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in
the application for registration, made any fraudulent, false,
deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course
of engaging in direct sales, violated any provision of this
ordinance or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory
violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness
to engage in direct selling.
(b) Notice. Written notice of the hearing shall be
served personally on the registrant at least 72 hours prior to
the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain the time
and place of hearing and a statement of the facts upon which the
hearing will be based.
21.10 PENALTY.
Any person convicted of violating any provisions of
this Chapter shall forfeit not less than One Hundred ($100.00)
Dollars nor more than Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for each
violation plus costs of prosecution. Each violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 22
LIQUOR AND BEER LICENSES
22.01 Licensing and Regulation of Sale and
Consumption of Alcohol Beverages
22.02 Provisional Operator's License
22.03 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
22.04 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
22.05 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
22.06 Restrictions on Sale and Consumption
22.07 Penalties
22.01 LICENSING AND REGULATION OF SALE AND CONSUMPTION OF
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES.
(a) State Statutes Adopted. The provisions under
Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 125, as may be amended or renumbered
from time to time, defining and regulating the sale, procurement,
dispensing and transfer of alcohol beverages, including
provisions relating to minors, are adopted and made a part of
this section by reference. A violation of any such provisions
shall constitute a violation of this section.
(b) Licenses, Permits, Authorization Required.
(1) When required. Except as provided by
Wisconsin Statute 125.06, as may be renumbered or
amended, no person shall within the Village of
Paddock Lake, serve, sell, manufacture, rectify,
brew or engage in any other activity for which
this chapter or Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 125,
requires a license, permit or other authorization
without holding the appropriate license, permit or
other authorization as provided in this chapter.
(2) Separate license required for each place of
sale. Except for licensed public warehouses, a
license shall be required for each location or
premises where alcohol beverages are stored, sold
or offered for sale.
(c) Classes of Licenses and Fees. The following
classes and denominations of licenses may be issued by the
Village Clerk/Treasurer under the authority of the Village Board
of Trustees upon compliance with law and payment of the fee
herein specified, which when so issued shall permit the holder to
sell, deal or traffic in alcohol beverages as provided in the
referenced state statute. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, the full license fee shall be charged for the whole or
fraction of any year.
(1) Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's
license. $500.00 per year.
(2) Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's
license. $100.00 per year.
(a) A six (6) month period Class "B" license
may be issued at any time for six (6) months
in any calendar year, for three-fourths (3/4)
of the applicable license fee. Such license
shall not be renewable during the calendar
year in which issued.
(b) Picnic. $10.00 per day.
(3) Wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license.
$25.00 per year, or fraction thereof.
(4) Retail "Class A" liquor license. $500.00 per
year.
(5) Retail "Class B" liquor license. $400.00 per
year. A retail "Class B" liquor license shall
permit its holder to sell liquor in original
packages or containers in multiples not to exceed
four (4) liters to be consumed off the licensed
premises.
(a) A license may be issued after July 1 in
any license year which shall expire on the
following June 30. The fee for the license
shall be prorated according to the number of
months or fractions of months remaining until
the following June 30.
(6) Pharmacist license. $10.00 per year.
(7) Combination license. A combination fermented
malt beverage and intoxicating liquor license
shall be $400.00 per year and shall permit the
holder to deal and sell intoxicating liquors and
malt beverages to be consumed at any time on the
premises and in original packages not to exceed
four (4) liters at any time to be consumed off the
premises. Licenses expire on June 30 of each
year.
(8) Operator’s license. The fee for an operator's
license shall be Twenty-five ($25.00) Dollars per
year plus any fees incurred by the Village for
providing a background check on the applicant.
Fees associated with the background check shall be
paid at the time of application. No operator's
license shall be issued unless the applicant has
successfully completed a responsible beverage
server training course at any location that is
conducted by an accredited vocational, technical
or adult education district, and that conforms to
curriculum guidelines specified by the Board of
Vocational, Technical and Adult Education.
(a) Operator's licenses may be granted to
individuals by the Village Board for the
purposes of complying with Wisconsin Statutes
125.32(2) and 125.68(2).
(b) Operator's licenses shall be valid for
one (1) year and shall expire on June 30 each
year.
(9) Provisional operator's license. Provisional
operator's licenses shall be issued pursuant to
§22.02 of these ordinances.
(10) Reserve "Class B" liquor license. Except as
may be specifically exempted by state statute, any
available reserve "Class B" liquor license
applicant shall pay a one (1) time fee to the
Village in the sum of Ten Thousand ($10,000.00)
Dollars in addition to those annual fees
established under §22.01©)(5), above.
(d) License Application.
(1) Form. Application for a license to sell or
deal in intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverages shall be made in writing on forms
prescribed by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue
and filed with the Village Clerk/Treasurer at
least fifteen (15) days prior to issuance. The
premises shall be physically described, including
every room and storage space to be covered by the
license and including all rooms joined by
connecting entrances or not separated by a
separate wall.
(2) Application to be notarized. The application
shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant as
provided by Wisconsin Statute 887.01.
(3) Publication. Prior to the issuance of a
license under this section, the Village
Clerk/Treasurer shall publish notice of the
application in a newspaper of general publication.
(4) Duplicate. Upon approval, a duplicate copy
of each application shall be forwarded by the
Village Clerk/Treasurer to the Wisconsin
Department of Revenue.
(e) License Restrictions.
(1) Statutory requirements. Licenses shall be
issued only to persons eligible therefore under
Wisconsin Statutes 125.04 and 125.33(3)(b).
(2) Location. No retail "Class A" or "Class B"
license shall be issued for premises the main
entrance of which is less then three hundred (300)
feet from the main entrance of any established
public school, parochial school or church. Such
distance shall be measured by the shortest route
along the highway from the closest point of the
main entrance of such school or church to the main
entrance to the premises covered by the license.
(3) Violators of liquor or beer laws or
ordinances. No retail Class A or B license shall
be issued to any person who has been convicted of
a violation of any federal or state liquor or
fermented malt beverage law or the provisions of
this section or whose license has been revoked
under Wisconsin Statute 125.12 during a one (1)
year period prior to such application.
(4) Health and sanitation requirements. No
retail Class A or B license shall be issued for
any premises which does not conform to the
sanitary, safety and health requirements of the
State Department of Industry, Labor & Human
Relations pertaining to buildings and plumbing, to
the rules and regulations of the State Department
of Health and Social Services applicable to
restaurants and to all such ordinances and
regulations adopted by the Village Board of
Trustees of the Village of Paddock Lake.
(5) License quota. The number of persons and
places that may be granted a retail "Class B"
liquor license under this section is limited as
provided in Wisconsin Statute 125.51(4).
(6) Corporations. No license shall be granted to
any corporation when more than fifty (50%) percent
of the voting stock, legal or beneficial interest
is held by any person or persons not eligible for
a license under this section.
(7) Age requirement. No license shall be granted
to any person who has not attained the legal
drinking age as provided in Chapter 125 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, as may be amended from time to
time.
(8) Effect of revocation of license. Twelve (12)
months shall elapse before another license shall
be granted to the person whose license was
revoked.
(9) Delinquent taxes, assessments and claims. No
license shall be granted or renewed for any
premises for which any real or personal property
taxes, assessments, forfeitures, fines, utility
bills or other claims of the Village are
delinquent and unpaid, or to any person delinquent
in payment of such claims, including unpaid
forfeiture judgments to the Village.
(10) Timely filing of application. Pursuant to
§125.04(3)(f) of the Wisconsin Statutes, no
license shall be granted or renewed unless a fully
executed application is filed with the
Clerk/Treasurer of the Village at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the granting of the license.
All applications for the issuance or renewal of
licenses shall be reviewed by the Village Board at
its regular meeting on the third Wednesday of June
of each year. In the event that an application is
not timely filed such that it cannot be reviewed
by the Board of Trustees at its regular meeting in
June and if the license applicant files its
request, in writing, with the Village Board that
the application be reviewed prior to the Board's
next regularly scheduled meeting, together with a
fee of Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars, to cover the
costs of conducting a special meeting for the
issuance of the license, then the Board may, in
its discretion, hold a special meeting to review
the license application. Nothing in this section
shall require the Board of Trustees to hold a
special meeting prior to the expiration of a
license for which a timely application has not
been filed.
(f) Transfer of Licenses.
(1) As to person. No license shall be
transferable as to the licensee except as is
provided by Wisconsin Statute 125.04(2).
(2) As to place. Licenses issued pursuant to
this section may be transferred to another
premises once during any licensed year as provided
in Wisconsin Statute 125.04(12). Application for
such transfer shall be made on forms furnished by
the Village Clerk/Treasurer. The fee for such
transfer shall be Ten ($10.00) Dollars.
(g) Posting and Care of Licenses. Every license or
permit required under this section shall be framed and posted and
at all times displayed as provided in Wisconsin Statute
125.04(10). No person shall post such license or permit any
other person to post it upon premises other than those mentioned
in the application, or knowingly deface or destroy such license.
(h) Regulation of Licensed Premises and Licenses.
(1) Gambling and disorderly conduct prohibited.
Each licensed and permitted premises shall at all
times be conducted in any orderly manner; and no
disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct or
gambling shall be allowed at any time on any such
premises.
(2) Employment of persons who have not attained
18 years of age. No licensee shall employ any
person who has not attained 18 years of age as
defined by Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statues as
may be amended from time to time to serve, sell,
dispense or give away any alcohol beverage.
(i) Closing Hours. No premises for which an alcohol
beverage license has been issued shall remain open for the sale
of alcohol beverages:
(1) If a wholesale license, between 5 p.m. and 8
a.m., except on Saturday when the closing hours
shall be 9 p.m.
(2) If a retail Class "A" license, between
midnight and 8 a.m.
(3) If a retail "Class A" license, between 9 p.m.
and 8 a.m.
(4) If a retail Class "B" or Class "B" license,
between 2 a.m. and 6 a.m., Monday through Friday,
and 2:30 a.m. and 6 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday,
except on January 1, when there shall be no
closing hours. No package, container or bottle
sales may be made after midnight.
(j) Revocation and Suspension of Licenses. If the
holder of any license under this section violates any portion of
this section, proceedings for the revocation or suspension of
such license may be instituted in the manner and under the
procedure established by Wisconsin Statute 125.12, and the
provisions therein relating to granting a new liquor license
shall likewise be applicable.
(k) Non-renewal of Licenses. Before renewal of any
license issued under this section is refused, the licensee shall
be given written notice of any charges or violations or the
reasons proposed for non-renewal and a copy of any proposed
motion for non-renewal and shall have an opportunity to be heard
before the Village Board.
(l) Violations by Agents and Employees. A violation
of this section by an authorized agent or employee of a licensee
shall constitute a violation by the licensee.
(m) License Investigation.
(1) Review committee. The Village
Clerk/Treasurer shall notify the sheriff, the Fire
Chief, and the Building Inspector of each
application for any alcohol license provided in
this chapter, and these officials shall inspect
each application and the premises as shall be
necessary to determine whether the applicant and
the premises sought to be licensed comply with the
regulations, ordinances and laws applicable
thereto and whether the applicant is a proper
recipient of a license. A report of such
investigation shall be made to the Village Board
of Trustees, at the time the application is
presented to the Village Board, with a
recommendation to grant or deny the license, and
the reasons therefore. Applications for an
operator's license shall be investigated by the
Sheriff, who shall report to the Village Board as
to whether the applicant is a fit and proper
person to have such a license. This section shall
apply to applications for license renewals as well
as to applications for original licenses.
(2) Inspection and Search. Every license
consents upon issuance of the license to the
inspection and search by the Sheriff of the
licensed premises during business hours, and
further consents to the removal of all articles
found in violation of law or ordinance.
(n) Penalty. Any person who has violated subsection
(f) hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
forfeiture not to exceed Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars, plus the
costs of prosecution, and in default of the timely payment
thereof, shall be committed to the county jail until such
forfeiture has been paid, but for a period not to exceed fifteen
(15) days.
22.02 PROVISIONAL OPERATOR'S LICENSE.
Pursuant to Section 125.17(5) of the Wisconsin
Statutes, the Village Board may issue provisional operator's
licenses to qualified applicants subject to the following:
(a) Issuing Official. A provisional operator's
license shall be issued by the Village Clerk/Treasurer to any
applicant satisfying the conditions herein.
(b) Conditions of Issuance. A provisional operator's
license shall be issued to applicants who meet the following
requirements:
(1) The applicant must have applied for, been
granted, and be eligible for issuance of an
operator's license, except for the requirement of
the completion of a responsible beverage server
training course in accordance with §22.01(c)(8)
and relevant portions of Chapter 125 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) The applicant must show proof of enrollment
in a responsible beverage server training course
as required by §125.17(6) of the Wisconsin
Statutes, and §22.01(c)(8) of these ordinances;
further, such proof of enrollment must show the
course commencement date.
(3) The applicant must have paid the provisional
operator's license fee and any fee imposed by the
Kenosha County Sheriff for a records check.
(4) Deposit with the Clerk/Treasurer a bond in
the sum of One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars, in cash,
which bond shall be refunded to the applicant upon
the issuance of a regular license to the
applicant.
(5) Issuance of the provisional operator's
license shall be subject to a preliminary records
check conducted by the Kenosha County Sheriff's
Department and the Clerk/Treasurer shall issue
such license subject to the records check.
(c) Fees. The fee for provisional operator's license
shall be Fifteen ($15.00) Dollars, plus Five ($5.00) Dollars for
a records search fee to be paid to the Kenosha County Sheriff.
(d) Expiration. Provisional operator's licenses shall
have the expiration date conspicuously placed thereon. The
expiration date of provisional operator's license shall be sixty
(60) days from the date of issuance.
(e) Blanket Bond. In lieu of the provisional
operator's license bond required by subsection (b)(4), above, any
business may post a blanket bond in the sum of One Hundred
($100.00) Dollars, in cash, for the purpose of providing a bond
fund for any applicant who is either currently or anticipated to
be an employee of such business. This blanket bond shall be
subject to forfeiture upon revocation of a provisional operator's
license and the Village Clerk/Treasurer may require written
verification from the business posting such bond authorizing the
blanket bond to be subject to the application of a proposed
licensee. In the event that circumstances exist which would
otherwise give rise to the possibility of a forfeiture of an
applicant's bond, the blanket bond shall not be forfeited in the
event (1) if the provisional operator's license is immediately
surrendered to the Village Clerk/Treasurer and (2) if there are
discovered no instant facts and circumstances which are
inconsistent with the continued issuance of the provisional
operator's license in question.
(f) Revocation. Provisional operator's licenses shall
expire and be null and void on the date inserted on the face of
such license, upon issuance of a regular operator's license or
upon revocation for cause, should such event occur. Material
misrepresentation on an applicant's written application shall be
grounds for the immediate revocation of a provisional operator's
license which is issued. In addition, any other ground upon
which a regular operator's license may be revoked shall be
grounds for revocation of a provisional operator's license. Any
revocation of a provisional operator's license may occur by a
majority vote of a duly-convened meeting of the Village Board
Judiciary and License Committee where proof of notice of such
meeting has been first given by first class mail to the
applicant.
(g) Renewal. One (1) provisional operator's license
may be granted subject to one (1) renewal in the event that the
applicant, for good cause, is unable to timely complete the
responsible beverage server training course in which he or she is
enrolled. Any determination of good cause shall be first made by
a review of the Judiciary and License Committee of the Village
Board of Trustees, with any renewal being subject to a majority
vote of the full Board of Trustees.
22.03 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
22.04 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
22.05 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
22.06 RESTRICTIONS ON SALE AND CONSUMPTION.
(a) Restrictions on Keeper. Except as provided in
paragraph (d) of this section, no keeper of any place for the
sale of any intoxicating liquor may either directly or indirectly
suffer or permit an underaged person, unaccompanied by his or her
parent, guardian, or spouse, of whom at least one has attained
the legal drinking age, who is not a resident employee or bona
fide lodger or boarder on the premises of the licensed person, to
enter or be on the licensed premises for any purpose, except as
provided by Paragraph (b) of this section. A person who violates
this Paragraph is subject to a forfeiture of not more than
$500.00.
(b) Restrictions on Underaged Persons. Except as
provided by Paragraph (d) of this section, a person who is an
underaged person as defined by Chapter 125 of the Statutes of the
State of Wisconsin may not enter or remain on the premises of a
place which sells intoxicating liquor for other than a valid
purpose under Paragraph (d) unless the person is a resident,
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or spouse, at least
one of whom has attained the legal drinking age. A person who
violates this paragraph is subject to the forfeiture and
proceedings as provided by the Wisconsin Statutes, as may be
amended from time to time.
(c) Restrictions on Off Premises Consumption.
Intoxicating liquor and ferment malt beverages or any open
containers thereof may not be consumed or possessed by patrons or
others outside of licensed retail Class "B" premises, as those
premises are described in the relevant license application, and
it shall be unlawful for a license holder to permit said
consumption contrary to the terms of this Ordinance.
(d) Exemptions. This section does not apply to
hotels, drugstores, grocery stores, bowling alleys, ski chalets,
golf clubhouses, cars operated on any railroad, public facilities
which are owned by a county or municipality, regularly
established athletic fields or stadiums, nor to premises operated
under both a Class "B" license and a restaurant permit where the
principal business conducted on the premises is that of a
restaurant. It is presumed, however, where the premises are so
operated under both Class "B" license and a restaurant permit,
that the principal business conducted on the premises in that of
the sale of intoxicating liquor, until the presumption is
rebutted by competent evidence.
(e) Inactive Licenses Prohibited. Within ninety (90)
days from the issuance of a “Class A” Intoxicating Liquor
License, “Class B” Intoxicating Liquor License, Class "A"
Fermented Malt Beverage License, Class "B", Fermented Malt
Beverage License, or a Class "C" License, the licensee shall be
open for business with adequate stock and equipment. In the event
of said licensee's failure to commence business within such time,
said license shall be subject to revocation by the Village Board
after a public hearing. The Village Board may, upon application
of the licensee and for good cause shown by the licensee, extend
the time for an additional period of time. Any premises which
shall be issued a “Class A" Intoxicating Liquor or Class “A”
Fermented Malt Beverage License or a “Class B" Intoxicating
Liquor or Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage License, or a Class
"C" License, who, after being issued a license, shall cease doing
business or fail to remain active in said licensed business for a
period of ninety (90) days, shall be subject to revocation as set
forth in this section.
(f) Outside Activity Area. An alcohol beverage
license granted by this ordinance shall not include sales or
activities outside of the principal building unless such outside
area is specifically included as part of the license or unless a
special permit extension is issued by the Village Board. Any such
special permit shall be restricted to such terms and conditions
as the Village Board shall determine after considering the
particular location of the outdoor premises in relation to
neighboring residences, buildings or structures. This section
shall be applicable to gardens, decks and patios. Any special
permits shall include the hours during which the outdoor activity
will be permitted, and any other conditions including fencing,
insurance and quantity and type of artificial lighting. There
shall be no music or entertaining performances to be held on the
outside premises unless specifically permitted as provided
herein. Each permit for outside activity shall be determined on a
case by case basis and with rules, regulations and conditions as
determined by the Village Board for the particular location.
22.07 PENALTIES.
(a) Violation of Wisconsin Statutes. For the
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, which are in
conformity with the Wisconsin Statutes, the persons convicted of
such violation shall be subject to a forfeiture equivalent to the
fine provided by such statute, and to imprisonment only in case
the forfeiture is not paid.
(b) Violation of Other Statutes. For the violation of
any other provision of this Chapter, the person so convicted
thereof shall pay a forfeiture of not more than $500 together
with costs of prosecution. If such forfeiture and costs are not
paid, he shall be imprisoned in the County Jail for not more than
90 days.
Chapter 23
CABARETS
23.01 License Required and Scope of License
23.02 Probationary Cabaret License
23.03 Regular License
23.04 Renewals
23.05 Regulations
23.06 Revocation of License
23.07 Penalty
23.01 LICENSE REQUIRED AND SCOPE OF LICENSE.
(a) No holder of a Class "B" liquor or beer license
within the Village shall provide for his patrons, unless he first
shall have obtained a Cabaret License from the Village
Clerk/Treasurer, any of the following:
(1) The music of one or more musicians and dancing
privileges.
(2) Specifically feature or advertise dancing in
his premises using mechanical devices to produce
music.
(3) Furnish entertainment by, or performance of,
any act, stunt or dance by performers under his
auspices, whether such performers or dancers are
paid or not.
(4) This section shall not apply to holders of
temporary Class "B" retailer licenses to sell
fermented malt beverages at picnics or gatherings.
(5) Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the
use of coin-operated mechanical devices to produce
music provided a license holder does not
specifically feature or advertise dancing in his
premises in conjunction with the use of such coinoperated
mechanical devices for the production of
music.
(b) A probationary or regular cabaret license, as
defined in Section 23.02 and 23.03 of these ordinances, and upon
approval of the Board of Trustees for the issuance thereof, shall
be issued such license for one ore more of the following specific
uses, subject to compliance with further conditions set forth by
the Village Board.
(1) A disc jockey utilizing mechanical devices to
reproduce music.
(2) An unaccompanied individual musician.
(3) Two or more musicians.
(4) Non-musical entertainers, including, but not
limited to dancers, actors, comedians and
magicians.
23.02 PROBATIONARY CABARET LICENSE.
(a) The application for such cabaret license shall be
filed with the Village Clerk/Treasurer and directed by the
Clerk/Treasurer to the Village Board and shall be accompanied by
the application fee.
(b) The application shall contain the name of the
applicant and the location of the place to be licensed.
(c) All such applications shall be accompanied by a fee
of $100.00. If such application for a license is denied, the
$100.00 application fee shall be returned on due demand less any
costs of publication as is hereafter set forth.
(d) Whenever such application is received by the Village
Clerk/Treasurer, the Clerk/Treasurer shall publish a Class 1
notice, as defined by Sec. 985.07, Wis. Stats., of such application
in a newspaper circulated in the Village and forward such
application to the Sheriff of Kenosha County along with a request
that the Sheriff determine whether the place to be licensed will
comply with applicable state and local law. Thereafter, the
Village Board shall then hold a public hearing upon due notice on
the cabaret application, such notice of hearing to be contained in
the Village Clerk/Treasurer's published notice.
(e) After such public hearing and after due deliberation
in open session, the Board shall vote on the application. Upon the
favorable voting for granting of the license, it shall thereupon be
issued by the Village Clerk/Treasurer. In the event the
application is denied, such denial shall be based upon specific
findings of fact.
(f) Each probationary license granted under this section
shall be for a period of six (6) months and each probationary
license shall be subject to revocation as hereinafter provided.
(g) Probationary license may be granted based upon the
written agreement of the applicant to comply with conditions set
forth by the Village Board. Conditions may only be imposed where
findings of fact based upon evidence presented have been made and
which address the safety, health and welfare of the general
population, including noise, crowd disturbances and parking.
(h) The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall be responsible for
drafting and issuing all probationary licenses. All such licenses
shall specify the name of the holder of the license and the dates
for which it is applicable as well as any conditions that may be
imposed by the Village Board. All such licenses shall be posted at
the licensed premises in plain view.
23.03 REGULAR LICENSE.
(a) After an applicant has held a probationary license
for a period of six (6) months, the Village Board shall consider
the issuance of a regular license. Whenever such an application
for regular license is received by the Village Clerk/Treasurer, the
Clerk/Treasurer shall follow those notification procedures provided
for in Section 23.02(d) of this Code. The Village Board shall
request of the Kenosha County Sheriff to report on whether any
complaints have been received by him concerning the holder of the
probationary license during the term of said license. No
application for a regular license shall be taken earlier than sixty
(60) days prior to the expiration of the probationary license.
(b) The Village Board shall either adopt, modify, or
reject the application for regular license. Upon the favorable
voting for granting of the license, it shall thereupon be issued by
the Village Clerk/Treasurer. If such application is denied, the
Village Board shall specify what findings were made in support of
the denial.
(c) Each regular license granted under this section
shall expire on June 30th of each year and each license shall be
subject to revocation as hereinafter provided.
(d) The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall be responsible for
drafting and issuing all such regular licenses. All such licenses
shall specify the name of the holder of the license and the dates
for which it is applicable as well as any conditions that may be
imposed by the Village Board. All such licenses shall be posted at
the licensed premises in plain view.
23.04 RENEWALS.
(a) Any holder of a regular license granted under this
Chapter who wishes to renew that license shall submit his
application for renewal at least sixty (60) days before the present
license expires. Such licenses may be renewed pursuant to the
provision of Section 23.02(d) of the Code as it applies to notice
being given by the Village Clerk/Treasurer and pursuant to the
provisions of Section 23.03 of this Code as it applies to action by
the Village Board.
(b) All such applications for renewal shall be
accompanied by a fee of $100.00. If such renewal is denied, the
$100.00 application fee shall be returned upon due demand less any
costs of publication.
23.05 REGULATIONS.
Every licensee, either personally, through his agent, or
employee, shall comply with the following regulations:
(a) No licensee shall permit any person upon the
licensed premises to perform acts of or acts which simulate:
(1) Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which
are prohibited by law;
(2) The touching, caressing or fondling of the
breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; or
(3) The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva
or genitals.
(b) No licensee shall show or permit the showing of
films, still pictures, electronic reproductions (including
television or cable television) or other visual reproductions
depicting:
(1) Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, flagellation
or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
(2) Any person being touched, caressed or fondled
on the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals;
(3) Scenes wherein a person displays the pubic
hair, anus, vulva or genitals; or
(4) Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate
objects are employed to depict, or drawings are
employed to portray, any of the prohibited
activities described above.
(c) No licensee shall furnish entertainment by, or
permit the performance of, any acts, stunt or dance by dancers,
performers or entertainers, whether such dancers, performers or
entertainers are paid or not, unless such dancers, performers or
entertainers shall meet the following wearing apparel standards
when performing:
(1) That portion of every costume to be worn by
female dancers, performers or entertainers by the
provisions of this subsection, and which relates to
the breast or chest area and/or to the area of the
sex organs and buttocks shall be the nontransparent
material.
(2) At a minimum, the top portion of the costume
worn by a female dancer, performer or entertainer,
or a female impersonator, shall encircle the body
at the breast or chest area. Across the breast or
chest areas, such portion of the costume shall
consist of a band of material at least two (2)
inches in width, and shall be so conformed,
fabricated and affixed to the body so as to keep
the areola of the breast (or its counterpart of the
female impersonator) completely covered at all
times.
(3) At a minimum, the lower portion of the costume
worn by a female dancer, performer or entertainer,
or a female impersonator, shall encircle the body
at the area of the sex organs and the buttocks.
This portion of the costume shall be of such
dimensions and so conformed, fabricated and affixed
to the body so as to completely cover the sex
organs and the mons pubis (or the counterpart of a
female impersonator) and the cleavage of the
buttocks at all times. Under no circumstances
shall any animal fur piece or other device
simulating the hair surrounding the mons pubis area
that is worn in the area of the genitals and/or
mons pubis constitute compliance with the costume
requirements of this section.
(4) At a minimum, the lower portion of the costume
worn by a male dancer, performer or entertainer,
shall encircle the area of the sex organs and the
buttocks. This portion of the costume shall be of
such dimensions and so as to completely cover the
sex organ and the cleavage of the buttocks at all
times.
(d) No licensee shall permit dancing within six (6) feet
of a bar over which patrons are directly served.
(e) No licensee shall permit any patron to participate
in any act, stunt or dance with performers who are under the
auspices of the management.
(f) Pursuant to §944.36, Wis. Stats., no licensee shall
permit the solicitation by any entertainer, employee or musician of
customers on the premises of the licensed establishment in which he
or she is currently performing.
(g) Good order shall be maintained at all times. A lack
of "good order" shall include, but not be limited to, persistent
loud noises to the annoyance or detriment of the surrounding
property owners and patrons, urinating in public, using profane
language or fighting.
(h) The license holder shall comply with all statutes
and regulations and all county and Village ordinances.
(i) The licensee shall obey all reasonable orders or
directions of any law enforcement officer.
23.06 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(a) A recorded hearing shall be held for the purpose of
revoking a license under this Chapter. This hearing shall be
preceded by written notice to the holder of such license at least
ten (10) days prior to said hearing. All hearings for revocation
shall be heard before the Village Board, which hearings shall
afford the holder of such license an opportunity to present
evidence on his or her behalf, to cross-examine witnesses sworn
under oath by the Village President and all such other due process
rights to which the applicant may be entitled. The committee prior
to revoking any such license shall make specific findings of act to
support revocation of the license. In lieu of revoking said
license, conditions set by the Committee to address specific
nuisances, dangers or hazards may be imposed pursuant to Section
23.02(g) of this Chapter.
(b) Conviction for the violation of any provision of the
Wisconsin liquor laws, local zoning and building and sanitary codes
or the cabaret ordinances shall be sufficient for the Board to
revoke such license. In the event such license is revoked, the fee
paid for such license shall be forfeited and not returned to the
holder.
(c) The revocation procedure outlined herein shall be
exclusive not withstanding the provisions of Chapter 20 of this
Code.
23.07 PENALTY.
In addition to any other action taken by the Village
Board, any one who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall forfeit not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 for each
offense, together with the costs of prosecution.
Chapter 24
AMUSEMENT MACHINES AND CIGARETTES
24.01 Amusement Machines
24.02 Sale of Cigarettes
24.03 Possession and Consumption of Tobacco
Products by Minors
24.01 AMUSEMENT MACHINES.
(a) Definitions. "Amusement machines" shall mean any
mechanism, contrivance or device whether mechanical or electronic
for which a person pays consideration in any form and by reason
of which the same is put into operation so as to produce a score
for entertainment purposes, or furnish music, or games, or
present visual types of entertainment. For purposes of
illustration and not by way of limitation, the term
“consideration”, as used in this ordinance, shall include coins,
printed currency, credit or debit cards, prepaid gift cards and
any other instrument in which monetary value or the equivalent is
transferred from one person to another.
(b) License Required. No amusement machine shall be
operated or placed in any premises for use unless the same shall
be licensed and the proposed use is a permitted use under
applicable Village zoning ordinances. Nothing in this subsection
shall prohibit an applicant from requesting conditional use
permit to be issued pursuant to Chapter 12 of these ordinances.
(c) Issuance of License. Licenses shall be issued by
the Village Clerk/Treasurer upon payment of an annual fee of
Twenty-five ($25.00) Dollars per machine to only such applicants
who are either the owner or occupant of the property in which the
machine is to be located. All licenses, regardless of when
issued, shall expire on June 30 of each year.
(d) No More Than Eight Machines. No more than eight
(8) amusement machines shall be operated or placed in any one (1)
tax parcel for use. Violators of this ordinance shall be subject
to Section 1.07 of this Code.
24.02 SALE OF CIGARETTES AND CONSUMPTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
(a) No person shall sell any cigarettes, cigars or any
tobacco products within the Village without a license, whether
sold in a vending machine or an open counter. The license fee
shall be One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars per year.
(b) No person shall sell or distribute cigars,
cigarettes or tobacco to anyone under 18 years of age.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to consume
tobacco products on school premises except as otherwise provided
for by the school administration.
(d) Definitions.
(1) "School" means a public, parochial or private
school which provides an educational program for
one or more grades between grades one and twelve
and which is commonly known as an elementary
school, middle school, junior high school, senior
high school or high school.
(2) "School premises" means premises owned,
rented or under the control of a school.
(3) "Smoking" shall mean and include the carrying
of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or tobacco in
any form.
(e) Penalties. Violators of this subsection shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1.07 of this Code.
24.03 POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY
MINORS.
(a) No person under the age of Eighteen (18) years
shall possess or consume any cigarettes, cigars or any other
tobacco products within the Village.
(b) A person convicted under this ordinance shall
subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1.07 of this Code.
Chapter 25
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY & MORALS
25.01 Disorderly Conduct
25.015 Disorderly Conduct with a Motor Vehicle
25.02 Weapons
25.03 Firearms
25.04 Fireworks
25.045 Repealed
25.05 Littering
25.06 Barbed Wire Fences
25.07 Noise
25.08 Damaging Property
25.09 Regulation of Fires
25.10 Pollution
25.11 Loitering and Obstructing Streets
25.12 Gambling, Lotteries, Fraudulent Devices
25.13 Curfew
25.14 Intoxicating Beverages in Public Places
25.145 Alcohol Beverages
25.15 Possession of Liquor on School Grounds
Prohibited
25.16 Possession of Marijuana
25.17 Concession Permits, Public Places
25.18 Assembly in Public Places - Permit
25.19 Park and Beach Regulations
25.20 Shoplifting
25.21 Theft
25.22 Trespass to Land
25.23 Trespass to Dwellings
25.24 Entry of Locked Vehicles
25.25 Toxic Inhalants
25.26 Penalties
25.27 Obscene Materials
25.28 Drug Paraphernalia
25.29 "Look-alike" Controlled Substances
25.30 Skateboards
25.31 Scrap Salvage, Garbage and Refuse Collectors
25.32 Municipal Truancy Ordinance
25.325 Non-Habitual Truancy
25.33 Restrictions on the Sale of Spray Paint and
Marker Pens to Minors
25.34 Children's Code Adopted
25.35 Prohibition of Erotic Dancing in Licensed
Establishments
25.36 Synthetic Marijuana and Related Compounds
25.37 Synthetic Bath Salts and Related Compounds
25.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
(a) No person shall engage in disorderly conduct in
the Village. Any of the following acts constitute disorderly
conduct;
(1) Making, aiding or assisting in making any
improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of the
peace or diversion tending to breach the peace.
(2) Assaulting, striking or deliberately injuring
another person.
(3) Engaging in or aiding or abetting any fight,
quarrel or other disturbance.
(4) Disturbing any religious service, funeral,
public or private meeting, place of amusement, or
assembly of persons.
(5) Collecting in crowds for unlawful purposes,
or for any purpose to the annoyance or disturbance
of other persons.
(6) Loitering continuously in public places or
being idle or dissolute and going about begging,
(7) Being intoxicated in public places, or in any
place to the annoyance and disturbance of other
persons.
(8) Resisting or obstructing the performance of
one known to be a law officer or any authorized
act within the law officer's official capacity; or
impersonating a law officer.
(9) Assisting any person in official custody of a
peace officer to escape or furnishing any weapon,
drugs, liquor to any such person.
(10) Assembling with two or more other persons for
the purpose of using force or violence to disturb
the public peace.
(11) Failing to obey a lawful order of dispersal
by a person known to be a peace officer, where
three or more persons are committing acts of
disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity,
which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or
serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm.
(12) Lodging in out-houses, sheds, barns, stables
or unoccupied buildings, or being a vagrant.
(13) Engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or
trick to obtain money or other valuable thing, or
the practice of fortune telling, palmistry, card
reading, astrology, clairvoyancy or other scheme
to obtain money or other value.
(14) Giving any false alarm of fire, danger or
disturbance to any person, or false information to
any peace officer or fireman or any Village
officer.
(15) Making a telephone call with intent to annoy
another, whether or not conversation ensues.
(16) Engaging in obscene or indecent activities or
entertainment, or any lewd or lascivious behavior,
or appearing in public in a state of nudity.
(17) Maintaining or being in houses of ill repute
or gaming houses, or engaging in or soliciting
unlawful sexual actions.
(18) Using any obscene, profane, threatening or
inciting language in any public or private place.
(19) Throwing stones or missiles in public places
or at any person or property.
(20) Damaging or defacing trees, bushes, gardens,
fences, windows, signs, buildings, monuments, or
vehicles or engaging in any acts of vandalism.
(21) Abusing, beating or cruelly injuring any
animal, or attempting to kill or wound any bird
other than a sparrow, crow, or blackbird.
(22) Schools. It shall be unlawful for any person
to enter into and remain in any public school
building or on school property within the Village,
except for students attending public schools
within the Village, teachers and other employees
of the Central High School District of Westosha,
without obtaining a written permit from the school
administrator or designee, which permit shall
authorize the holder for a given period of time on
the day designated within the permit. The permit
may be denied where the need for the permit does
not outweigh the disruption of school related
business which may be caused if the permit were to
be granted. This Paragraph 22 shall be applicable
only where the School Board or other governing
body has approved the application of this
Paragraph, and where notice of this Paragraph and
the school system's acceptance of the same has
been posted in a prominent place at all school
entrances intended for the use of the public. Law
enforcement officers shall be authorized to remove
from the school buildings any persons who fail to
comply with the terms of this Paragraph and who
fail to voluntarily leave the premises upon
request. Adult violators shall be subjected to
forfeiture, and imprisonment for non-payment
thereof, pursuant to Section 1.07 of this Code,
and minors shall be prosecuted through the
Juvenile Court system on such charges as may be
applicable.
25.015 DISORDERLY CONDUCT WITH A MOTOR VEHICLE.
(a) Prohibition. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle in the Village of Paddock Lake that constitutes
disorderly conduct with a motor vehicle.
(b) Definitions.
(1) Motor vehicle, vehicle and highway shall be
defined as the same terms are defined in §340.01,
Wis. Stats.
(2) Disorderly conduct with a motor vehicle means
the deliberate operation of a motor vehicle in a
manner that is unnecessary and unreasonably
violent, abusive, loud, maneuvered, or accelerated
in such a manner so as to disturb, annoy or
endanger any person or property in any public or
private area in the Village of Paddock Lake. It
includes, but is not limited to the unnecessary
and unreasonable spinning of wheels, squealing of
tires, accelerating the engine or vehicle or both,
raising one or more wheels off the surface, use of
the horn, loud playing of radios or audio
entertainment, emission of smoke, gases, or other
foul odors that are disagreeable, leaving the
highway to travel across property to avoid an
intersection, official control sign, signal or
other device, and deliberately causing the engine
to backfire. For the purpose of this definition,
the motor vehicle is not required to be moving at
the time of commission of the disorderly conduct.
25.02 WEAPONS.
(a) A person who is not a peace officer acting in his
official capacity shall not carry about his person any concealed
pistol, switchblade, knife, razor, slingshot, metal knuckles or
any other weapon or thing of deadly character.
(b) No person shall sell, give or transfer any such
weapon to any minor person.
25.03 FIREARMS.
(a) No person, except a sheriff, police officer or
their deputies, shall fire or discharge any firearm, rifle,
spring or air gun of any description within the Village or have
any firearm, rifle, spring or air gun in his possession or under
his control unless it is unloaded and knocked down or enclosed
within a carrying case or other suitable container. This section
shall not, however, prevent the maintenance and use of duly
supervised rifle or pistol ranges or shooting galleries
authorized by the Village Board, or the firing or discharging of
BB guns upon private premises by persons over the age of 16 or
under the direct personal supervision of a parent or guardian.
This section shall be deemed to prohibit hunting within the
Village, provided that the Village President may issue written
permits to owners or occupants of private premises to hunt or
shoot on such premises if he finds such privileges necessary for
the protection of life or property and subject to such safeguards
as he may impose for the safety of the lives and property of
other persons within the Village.
(b) No person shall discharge a crossbow or a bow-andarrow
within the Village, provided that this section shall not
prevent the maintenance and use of bows-and-arrows with a draw
strength of thirty pounds or less if used only for target
shooting at targets with suitable backing and in such a manner so
as to not endanger the lives of property of other persons within
the Village.
25.04 FIREWORKS
(a) Private Use and Sale. No person shall sell,
expose or offer for sale, use, keep, discharge or explode any
fireworks within the limits of the Village unless he shall be
authorized by a fireworks permit as hereinafter provided. The
term “fireworks” as used in this section shall be defined as
provided in Section 167.10(1), Wisconsin Statutes, shall be
deemed fireworks within the term of this ordinance.
(b) Fireworks Permit. Fireworks, other than those
prohibited by the laws of the state, may be used and displayed in
open fields, parks, rivers, lakes and ponds by public
authorities, fair associations, amusement parks, park boards,
civic organizations and other groups of individuals when a permit
for such display has been granted by the Village President. No
permit shall be granted unless the Village President determines
that the applicant will use the fireworks in a public exhibition,
that all reasonable precautions will be exercised with regard to
the protection of the lives and property of all persons and that
the display will be handled by a competent operator and conducted
in a suitable, safe place and manner. Before granting any
fireworks permits, the Village President shall require the
applicant to post with the Village Clerk/Treasurer an approved
indemnity bond in the sum of $2,000 for the payment of all claims
that may arise by reason of injuries to persons or property from
the handling, use or discharge of fireworks under such permit.
(c) Penalties. The penalty for violation of this
ordinance shall be not less than One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars
and not more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars for the first
violation and not less than Four Hundred ($400.00) Dollars and
not more than One Thousand ($1,000.00) Dollars for second and
subsequent violations. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
(d) Effective Date. This ordinance shall become
effective on the 20 day of August, 2009, and upon posting. th
25.045 REPEALED.
25.05 LITTERING.
No person shall dump, destroy, or throw any glass,
rubbish, waste, building and construction materials or dirt upon
any of the streets, alleys, public parks, highways, drainage
ditches, or the shore or surface of any body of water within the
Village, nor upon private property without permission from the
owner.
25.06 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
No person shall maintain any fence containing barbed
wire along or near any public sidewalk.
25.07 NOISE.
(a) No person shall disturb the peace and quiet of any
other person by creating excessive noise on is or any property.
Excessive noise shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Loud playing of phonographs, radios,
television sets, or music machines, or musical
instruments.
(2) Barking or howling dogs or cats.
(3) Vehicles without mufflers, or the unnecessary
use of horns on vehicles.
(4) Squealing of tires on motor vehicles.
(5) Gasoline or diesel powered pumps.
(6) Excessive noise created from gasoline or
diesel powered chainsaws.
25.08 DAMAGING PROPERTY.
No person shall damage, destroy or deface any public or
private property without permission of the owner.
25.09 REGULATION OF FIRES.
(a) Open Burning Defined. "Open burning" shall mean
the oxidation from which the products of combustion are emitted
directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or
chimney.
(b) Open Burning Prohibited. Open burning is
prohibited upon any street, alley, public way, park, Village
right-of-way or any public or private ground south of 60 Street th
(CTH “K”) in the Village except as follows:
(1) Small open flames for welding, acetylene
torches, safety flares, heating tile or similar
safety or public works applications.
(2) Outdoor fires for cooking, but only if such
fire is contained in a device made of metal,
concrete or brick, and specifically designed for
the cooking of food by heat, steam or smoke.
(3) Controlled burns by authorized Fire
Department personnel shall be by permit issued by
the Village Clerk/Treasurer upon conditions
imposed for the protection of life or property by
the Village President and Building Inspector.
(4) The burning of construction materials after
the issuance by the Village Building Inspector of
a permit issued in compliance with this ordinance
for the burning of non-prohibited construction
materials on the original site of construction or
razing for which the permit was issued.
(5) Campfires on privately owned property under
the supervision of an owner or lessee of such
property which are contained in an open earth pit
or similar method of containment until 1:00 a.m.
No person shall use or maintain a burn barrel in the Village of
Paddock Lake.
(c) Items Prohibited from Burning. No person, firm,
organization or corporation shall start, maintain, allow to be
burned, whether in a container or otherwise, any tires, roofing
materials, synthetic siding, plastics, urethane, petroleum
products or items in which petroleum products are contained,
insulation, treated lumber or any material which, when burned,
either singularly or in combination with other items, could
provide toxic fumes as that term is defined under applicable
sections of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, as may be amended
from time to time. No person, firm, organization or corporation
shall burn any newspaper, grass, leaves, cardboard or any other
recyclable material.
(d) Hours for Burning. There shall be no burning of
any kind before sunrise or after sunset, except as provided in
§25.09(b)(2) and §25.09(b)(5).
(e) Prohibition on the Importation of Construction
Materials. No person, firm, organization or corporation shall
bring into the Village refuse, debris or unused construction site
materials for the purpose of burning the same, irrespective of
whether such materials are non-prohibited items under the terms
of this ordinance.
(f) Burning Ban. Whenever the Fire Chief shall deem
it imprudent for burning, whether it be because of extreme
dryness, shortage of water, high wind, particular hazardous
location or any other reason, the Fire Chief may forbid by order,
the setting of any such fires at any time, refuse to issue a
permit where one is requested, or temporarily suspend previously
issued burning permits for open burning. Except for barbecue,
gas and charcoal grills, no open burning shall be undertaken
during periods when the Fire Chief has issued a burning ban
applicable to the area.
(g) Penalties. Any person, firm, partnership or
corporation who violates any provision of this ordinance shall,
for each such offense, be fined in an amount for the first
offense not less than Twenty-five ($25.00) Dollars nor more than
One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars; for a second offense within one
(1) year, a sum of not less than Seventy-five ($75.00) Dollars
nor more than Three Hundred ($300.00) Dollars; for a third or
subsequent offenses within one (1) year, a sum of not less than
Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars nor more than One Thousand
($1,000.00) Dollars, and in any event, for all costs of
prosecution.
25.10 POLLUTION.
No person shall pollute the air or any water course by
excessive discharge of waste products or foreign matter.
25.11 LOITERING AND OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
No person shall loiter, lounge or loaf, (which includes
remaining in a parked motor vehicle), in or about any public
street, highway or in any public building or place that is
accessible to the public, or engage in any sport or exercise in
such places, in an improper or indecent manner for any improper
purpose or after being requested to move by any law officer or by
any person in authority or custodian of any such building, road
or public area surrounding the building.
25.12 GAMBLING, LOTTERIES, FRAUDULENT DEVICES.
All forms of gambling, lotteries and fraudulent devices
and practices are prohibited within the limits of the Village.
Any peace officer of the Village is hereby authorized to seize
anything devised solely for gambling or found in actual use for
gambling within the Village and to dispose of the device after a
judicial determination that said device was being used for
gambling.
25.13 CURFEW.
No child 17 years of age or under shall loiter, idle or
remain, and no parent or guardian shall knowingly permit his
child or ward of such age to loiter, idle or remain in or upon
the streets, alleys or public places in the Village between the
hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday, and
12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday, unless such
child is accompanied by a parent or guardian or some person of
lawful age having legal custody of such child. This section
shall not be construed to prohibit such child from performing an
errand or duty if directed by his parent or guardian or of urgent
necessity or from pursuing the duties of his employment in an
expeditious and orderly manner or from going to or from places of
business or amusement or private homes.
25.14 INTOXICATING BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES.
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, no person
shall bring, sell or consume any beer, fermented malt beverage,
liquor or any other intoxicating beverages in any public place,
park or beach. Upon permit duly issued by the Village Board, a
bona fide club, civic organization, lodge or society that has
been in existence for at least 6 months prior to the date of
application may sell and consume fermented malt beverages at a
particular designated area during a particular picnic or similar
public gathering or at any meeting of such organization. The
Village Board may grant the permitted sale and consumption of
fermented malt beverages with such conditions as the Board may
deem fit and proper as to the handling, selling and consumption,
and the cleanup of area after the event.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or
serve or give to another person, or offer to sell, serve or give
to another person any fermented malt beverage or intoxicating
liquor while upon any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or
with any parked motor vehicle located on any street within the
Village.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any
fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor or to possess the
same in anything other than a sealed container while upon any
public street, sidewalk or parking lot or with any parked vehicle
located on any street within the Village.
25.145 ALCOHOL BEVERAGES.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code
of Ordinances, all provisions of Chapter 125, Wis. Stats.,
including any future revisions or amendments thereto, describing
and defining regulations with respect to alcoholic beverages,
including penalties to be imposed and the procedures for
prosecution, are hereby adopted and by reference made part of
this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to
be performed or prohibited by a statute incorporated herein by
reference is required or prohibited by this chapter.
25.15 POSSESSION OF LIQUOR ON SCHOOL GROUNDS PROHIBITED.
(a) Definitions.
(1) "Motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle owned,
rented or co-signed to a school.
(2) "School" means a public, parochial or private
school which provides an educational program for
one or more grades between grades 1 and 12 and
which is commonly known as an elementary school,
middle school, junior high school, senior high
school or high school.
(3) "School administrator" means the person
designated by the governing body of a school as
ultimately responsible for the ordinary operations
of a school.
(4) "School premises" means premises owned,
rented or under the control of a school.
(b) Liquor Prohibited. Except as provided by sub.
(c), no person may possess or consume intoxicating liquor:
(1) on school premises;
(2) in a motor vehicle, if a pupil attending the
school is in the motor vehicle; or
(3) while participating in a school sponsored
activity.
(c) Exceptions. Intoxicating liquor may be possessed
or consumed on school premises, in motor vehicles or by
participants in school-sponsored activities if specifically
permitted in writing by the school administrator consistent with
applicable laws and ordinances.
(d) Penalties. A person who violates this section is
subject to a forfeiture of not more than Two Hundred ($200.00)
Dollars except that the disposition and proceeding against a
person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be as provided by
§48.344, Wis. Stats.
25.16 POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA.
(a) No person shall have in his possession, use or
keep any tetrahydrocannabinol, Cannabis Sativa L or marijuana,
unless such person possesses a prescription from a licensed
physician for the same.
(b) Any person who violates this section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $200 nor
more than $250 and, in default of payment, shall be imprisoned in
the County Jail for not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days.
25.17 CONCESSION PERMITS, PUBLIC PLACES.
No person shall sell or offer for sale an article, food
or beverage or perform or offer to perform any services in any
park, beach or public place without first obtaining a written
permit by the Village Board to carry on such activity.
25.18 ASSEMBLY IN PUBLIC PLACES - PERMIT.
It shall be unlawful for any person to persons to
assemble upon any park, beach or public place for any political
or religious address, oration or demonstration of any kind, nor
shall any loud speaker or amplifier equipment be used without the
prior approval of the Village Board. The Village Board in
considering the application for such use of the public parks and
beaches may grant approvals subject to any terms and conditions
the Board may wish to impose upon such use giving consideration
to other members of the public using the park and the surrounding
neighborhood.
25.19 PARK AND BEACH REGULATIONS.
(a) Definitions. As used in this Chapter, the terms
"park", "beach", "public park" or "public beach" shall be defined
to mean those public parks and public beaches under the
jurisdiction and control of the Village Board.
(b) Closing Time. All public parks and beaches shall
be closed between sunset and sunrise the following day, and no
person shall remain in said parks or on the beaches after sunset
or before sunrise the following day.
(c) Protection of Small Children. No parent, guardian
or other person having under or within his custody or control a
child of less than 4 years of age shall permit said child to be
present in any public park or beach under the jurisdiction of the
Village Board without a responsible older person who shall have
care and custody of the infant child while present in any park or
beach. A responsible older person shall mean a person of
sufficient maturity and understanding to take charge of and
control the child and be responsible for the child's care in the
event of an injury or other emergency.
(d) Dogs and Pets. No person shall permit any dog,
cat or any other animal or pet to be in any park or beach,
whether or not such pet shall be under the direct control or on a
leash, always provided that this provision shall not apply to a
seeing eye dog under the control of its master and on the
premises for the purpose of leading or assisting a blind person.
(e) Vehicles. No person shall drive, ride or push any
motor vehicle, truck, motorcycle, bicycle or horse in any part of
the parks or beaches except on regular streets or drives
designated for such traffic. This section shall not apply to
baby strollers, baby carriages or wheel chairs or vehicles used
to serve the park by Village authority.
(f) Glass Containers. No person shall bring any food
or beverage or other consumable material or product onto any
beach or in any park in a glass container.
(g) Parking Prohibited. Parking in public parks,
shall be prohibited except in designated parking areas. There
shall be no parking in any area of the public parks, including
the designated parking areas, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
sunrise the following day.
(h) Intoxicating Beverages. No intoxicating beverages
shall be permitted in any Village park.
(i) Fires. No person shall build a fire on any beach
or park except in grills or fireplaces provided for such
purposes.
25.20 SHOPLIFTING.
Section 943.50(1)(2)(3), Wis. Stats., relating to
shoplifting is hereby adopted limited to the value of merchandise
not to exceed $100.
25.21 THEFT.
(a) Theft. Whoever intentionally takes and carries
away, uses, transfers, conceals, or retains possession of movable
property of another without the other’s consent and with intent
to deprive the owner permanently of possession of such property.
(b) Penalties. Whoever violates subsection (A) above
shall be as set forth in §25.26 of these ordinances.
(c) Use of Photographs as Evidence. In any action or
proceeding for a violation of subparagraph (A) above, a party may
use duly identified and authenticated photographs of property
which was the subject of the violation in lieu of producing the
property.
25.22 TRESPASS TO LAND.
Section 943.13, Wis. Stats., regarding trespass to
land, is adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter as
though set forth in full.
25.23 TRESPASS TO DWELLINGS.
Section 943.14, Wis. Stats., regarding trespass to
dwellings, exclusive of any penalty imposed thereby, is adopted
by reference and made a part of this Chapter as though set forth
in full.
25.24 ENTRY INTO LOCKED VEHICLE.
Section 943.11, Wis. Stats., regarding entry into
locked vehicle, exclusive of any penalty imposed thereby, is
adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter as though
set forth in full. Any person who violates this section, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more
than $1,000 and, in default of payment, shall be imprisoned in
the County Jail for not more than 90 days.
25.25 TOXIC INHALANTS.
(a) Definitions. "Toxic inhalants" shall mean any
glue, gasoline, aerosol, adhesive cement or any similar substance
containing one or more of the following volatile substances:
Acetone, benzene, butyl alcohol, cyclohexane, ethyl acetate,
ethyl alcohol, ethylene dichloride, hexane, isopropyl alcohol,
methyl alcohol, methyl celosove, acetate, methyl ethyl ketone,
methyl isobutyl ketone, pentachlorophenol, petroleum ether,
trichlorethylene, tricresylphosphate, toluene, toluol, or any
other chemical capable of producing intoxication when inhaled.
(b) Inhalation of Vapors or Fumes From Toxic Inhalants
Prohibited. No person shall inhale or otherwise introduce into
his respiratory tract any toxic vapors or fumes which may be
released from any toxic inhalants with the intent of becoming
intoxicated, elated, excited, stupefied, irrational, paralyzed,
or of changing, distorting, or disturbing his eyesight, thinking
process, judgment, balance or muscular coordination.
(c) Limitations on Sales, Transfers and Possession of
Toxic Inhalants. No person shall, for the purpose of violating
or aiding another to violate any provision of this section,
possess, buy, sell, transfer possession or receive possession of
any toxic inhalants.
25.26 PENALTIES.
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter
shall, upon conviction, be punished as follows:
(a) For a violation of Section 25.12 of this Code, he
shall forfeit not more than $25 and the costs of prosecution. In
the event of a default of payment of such forfeitures and costs
of prosecution, he shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until
the forfeiture and cost of prosecution are paid, but not
exceeding 5 days. However, for a first offense, minors shall be
warned of the penalty for such violation by any law officer of
the Village and shall be taken and delivered to the custody of
the person having legal custody over him. For a second or
subsequent offense, he shall be dealt with according to the
provisions of Chapter 48 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Unless a specific penalty is provided, a violator
of any section of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties
provided for in Section 1.07 of this Code.
(c) In addition to any penalty imposed for violation
of Section 25.07 of this Code, any person who shall cause
physical damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable
for the costs of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed
property. The parent or parents of any unemancipated minor child
who violates Section 25.07 may also be held liable for the cost
of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property in
accordance with Section 895.035 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) Any person who shall violate Section 25.15 of this
Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50 or
more than $100 together with the costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be
imprisoned in the County Jail until full payment is made, but not
to exceed 30 days.
(e) Any person who shall violate Section 25.31 of this
Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit the sum of $250,
together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
of such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county
jail until full payment is made, but not to exceed thirty (30)
days.
25.27 OBSCENE MATERIAL.
(a) Distribution of Obscene Material Prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person to cause to be sent or brought
into the Village for sale or distribution any material deemed to
be obscene as hereinafter defined. It shall also be unlawful for
any person to prepare, publish, print, exhibit, distribute, or
offer for sale any obscene material.
(b) Definitions.
(1) "Obscene" shall apply to any work or material
commonly referred to as hard core, which depicts
or describes acts of sexual intercourse, normal or
perverted, actual or simulated; acts of
masturbation; fellatio; cunnilingus; acts of
excretory function; lewd exhibition of the
genitals, especially in a stimulated condition;
and sexual relations between humans and animals,
any of which taken as a whole by the average
person applying contemporary community standards
would be found to:
(a) Appeal to the prurient interest in sex;
and
(b) Portray sexual conduct in a patently
offensive way; and
(c) In addition to findings of fact applying
contemporary community standards require
by sub (a) and sub (b), there shall also
be a finding applying contemporary
national standards, that said work or
material shall not have serious
literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
(2) "Materials" or "work" shall mean any book,
magazine, newspaper, or other printed or written
material, or any picture, drawing, photograph,
motion picture, video tape, or other pictorial
representation.
(3) "Person" shall mean any individual,
partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
(4) "Distribute" shall mean any transfer or
possession with intent to transfer, whether with
or without consideration.
(c) Penalties. Any person convicted of violating this
Section shall, upon conviction, forfeit the sum of not less than
$100.00 nor more than $500.00. Upon a conviction of a second
offense within a twelve month period, any person shall forfeit
not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 and in lieu of
payment shall be confined to the County Jail for a period of not
less than five nor more than thirty days. Each work or piece of
material defined herein shall constitute a separate offense under
this Chapter.
25.28 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
(a) Definition. Drug paraphernalia means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used,
intended for use, or designed for use, in the planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of this chapter. Drug paraphernalia includes, but is
not limited to the following:
(1) Kits used, intended for use or designed for
use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing
or harvesting of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived;
(2) Kits used, intended for use or designed for
use in manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances;
(3) Isomerization devices used, intended for use
or designed for use in increasing the potency of
any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
(4) Testing equipment used, intended for use or
designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing
the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
(5) Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine,
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and
lactose, used, intended for use or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances;
(6) Separation gins and sifters used, intended
for use or designed for use in removing twigs and
seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
(7) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing
devices used, intended for use or designed for use
in compounding controlled substances;
(8) Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other
containers used, intended for use or designed for
use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
(9) Containers and other objects used, intended
for use or designed for use in storing or
concealing controlled substances;
(10) Hypodermic syringes, needles and other
objects used, intended for use or designed for use
in parenterally injecting controlled substances
into the human body; and
(11) Objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish
oil into the human body, such as:
(aa) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone,
plastic or ceramic pipes with or without
screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls;
(bb) Water pipes;
(cc) Carburetion tubes and devices;
(dd) Smoking and carburetion masks;
(ee) Roach clips: meaning objects used to
hold, burning material, such as a marijuana
cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand;
(ff) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine
vials;
(gg) Chamber pipes;
(hh) Carburetor pipes;
(ii) Electric pipes;
(jj) Air-driven pipes;
(kk) Chilams;
(11) Bongs; or
(mm) Ice pipes or chillers.
(b) Determination. In determining whether an object is
drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority shall consider, in
addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:
(1) Statements by an owner or by anyone in
control of the object concerning its use;
(2) Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, under any state
or federal law relating to any controlled
substances;
(3) The proximity of the object, in time and
space to a direct violation of this chapter;
(4) The proximity of the object to controlled
substances;
(5) The existence of any residue or controlled
substances on the object;
(6) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the
intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she
knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use
the object to facilitate a violation of this
chapter; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone
in control of the object, as to a direct violation
of this chapter shall not prevent a finding that
the object is intended for use, or designed for
use as drug paraphernalia;
(7) Instructions, oral or written, provided with
the object concerning its use;
(8) Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use;
(9) National and local advertising concerning the
object's use;
(10) Whether the owner, or anyone in control of
the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or
related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor of tobacco products;
(11) Expert testimony concerning its use.
(c) Possession of Drug Paraphernalia.
(1) No person may use, or possess with the intent
to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze,
pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of
this chapter. Any person, 18 years of age or
older, who violates this ordinance shall be
subject to a penalty as is provided in Section
1.07 of this Code.
(2) Any person who violates this ordinance who is
under 18 years of age is subject to a forfeiture
of not more than Twenty-five ($25.00) Dollars and
to a disposition under Section 48.344 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, as may be amended from time to
time.
(d) Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to a Minor.
(1) Any person 18 years of age or over who
violates Section 25.28(c) of this Code by
delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18
years of age shall be subject to a fine of not
less than One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars and not
more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars.
(2) Any person who violates this section who is
under 18 years of age is subject to a forfeiture
of not more than Twenty-five ($25.00) Dollars and
to a disposition under Section 48.344 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, as may be amended from time to
time.
25.29 "LOOK-ALIKE" CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
(a) No person may knowingly deliver, attempt to
deliver or cause to be delivered a non-controlled substance and
expressly or impliedly represent to the recipient:
(1) The substance is a controlled substance; or,
(2) The substance is of a nature, appearance or
effect that will allow the recipient to display,
sell, distribute or use the non-controlled
substance as a controlled substance.
(b) Proof of any of the following is prima facie
evidence of a representation specified in paragraph (a) 1 or 2:
(1) The physical appearance of the finished
product containing the substance is substantially
the same as that of a specific controlled
substance.
(2) The substance is unpackaged or is packaged in
a manner normally used for the illegal delivery of
a controlled substance.
(3) The substance is not labeled in accordance
with 21 U.S.C. 352 or 353.
(4) The person delivering, attempting to deliver
or causing delivery of the substance to be made
states to the recipient that the substance may be
resold at a price that substantially exceeds the
value of the substance.
(c) "Controlled substance", for purposes of this
Section, shall have the same meaning as found in Section
161.01(4), Wis. Stats., as may be amended from time to time.
(d) A person convicted of violating this Subsection
may be fined not more than $200.00.
25.30 SKATEBOARDS.
No person shall ride or operate any device commonly
known as a skateboard or a device of a similar design on any
public street, sidewalk or commercial parking lot. Nor shall any
person ride such a devise on any privately-owned parking lot open
to the general public without the written consent of the owner of
such parking lot. Sections 340.01(43m), 346.77 and 346.78 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, are hereby incorporated herein by
reference.
25.31 SCRAP SALVAGE, GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTORS.
(a) Purpose. The Village Board of Trustees of the
Village of Paddock Lake, makes the following findings:
(1) The Village has implemented a recycling
program which, among other things, encourages the
separation and collection of various types of
household scraps, refuse and garbage; and
(2) The acts of third persons, defined as "scrap
salvage collectors" herein, in taking or
attempting to take or collect various components
of household scrap, garbage and refuse from
privately owned property has a detrimental effect
on the implementation and efficiency of the
Village recycling program; and
(3) In addition to having an adverse impact on
the Village recycling program, the acts of "scrap
salvage collectors" in going upon privately owned
property to collect scrap, garbage or refuse has
the potential for spreading disease, creating fire
hazards and other safety and health hazards,
creates, extends and aggravates urban blight,
interferes with the enjoyment of and reduces the
value of private property and interferes with the
comfort and well-being of the public; and
Based upon the foregoing findings, it is
determined that the adequate protection of the public health,
safety and welfare requires that "scrap salvage collectors" be
regulated and controlled, and such the purpose of this ordinance.
(b) Definitions. Except where otherwise indicated by
the context, the following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance:
(1) "Person" shall mean any person, firm,
partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
(2) "Scrap Salvage" shall mean any of the
following or combination thereof: old iron,
steel, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base
materials; used lumber, used conveyor belts, used
barrels, used appliances not intended for resale
as such; old ropes, rags, fibers or fabrics; old
tires or rubber; old bottles or other glass; waste
paper and other waste or discarded material which
might be prepared to be used again in some other
form; household furniture, used wearing apparel,
used brick, tile, plumbing fixtures, pipes, tools
or any other used articles or personal property;
aluminum cans, tin cans, glass bottles, plastic
bottles, or any other container; and any and all
household waste, garbage, refuse, debris or other
matter which is customarily placed by the owner of
private property upon his or her property for the
purpose of collection and disposal of the same by
a "contractor", as defined herein, whether or not
such material is separated or otherwise segregated
for purposes of recycling.
(3) "Contractor" shall mean any person, firm,
partnership, corporation, company or organization
of any kind whose services are enlisted or
contracted for by the Village or by the "Owner of
Private Property", as that term is defined herein,
for the purpose of removing and disposing of
"Scrap Salvage" from private property.
(4) "Owner of Private Property" means the legal
titleholder of record, tenant or other person who
is lawful possession of private property upon
which "Scrap Salvage" is situated.
(c) Prohibitions.
(1) Unauthorized Scrap Salvage Collectors. It
shall be unlawful for any person who is not a
"Contractor" as defined herein, to collect "Scrap
Salvage" which is located on privately owned
property without first obtaining the permission of
the owner of such private property as that term is
defined herein.
(2) Non-Profit and Charitable Entities. Nothing
contained herein is intended to prohibit bona fide
non-profit and charitable entities and persons
acting on their behalf with the permission of such
non-profit or charitable entity from collecting
recyclable items from private property for the
purpose of fund raising so long as such non-profit
or charitable entity complies with the following:
Not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date
upon which such recycling collection will occur
the non-profit or charitable entity shall notify,
in writing, the chairman of the Village Recycling
Commission of its intent to conduct a fund raising
drive by collecting recyclable items; the chairman
of the Village Recycling Commission must give his
or her written permission to the non-profit or
charitable organization to conduct scrap salvage
collection for the purpose of fund raising not
less than seven (7) days prior to the date of such
fund raising activity and he or she shall include
in such written permission such requirements as he
or she may specify to be in the public interest
including, but not limited to the following:
(a) the date and times during which the
scrap salvage collection activity shall
occur;
(b) the manner in which such scrap salvage
activity shall be conducted;
(c) the method of notification or
advertising which must be conducted prior to
the scrap salvage collection activities which
must be utilized to inform the public of such
activity; and
(d) such other requirements as are deemed
necessary under the circumstances. No such
scrap salvage fund raising activity shall
occur on any date upon which a regularly
scheduled Village garbage pickup is to occur,
whether or not such garbage pickup includes
recyclable items.
(3) Public Property. Nothing shall prohibit any
person from engaging in "Scrap Salvage" activities
on any publicly owned property located within the
Village.
25.32 MUNICIPAL TRUANCY ORDINANCE.
Pursuant to Wisconsin Statute 18.163, as may be amended
from time to time, any child found to be a habitual truant, as
that term is defined under §18.15, Wis. Stats., shall be subject
to any of the following dispositions which are deemed to be
available to the Municipal Court:
(a) Suspension of the child's operating privileges, as
defined in §340.01(40), Wis. Stats., for not less than 30 days
nor more than 90 days. In the event the Municipal Court shall
suspend a child's operating privileges under this subparagraph,
the Court shall immediately take possession of any suspended
license and forward it to the Department of Transportation,
together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of
the suspension.
(b) An order for the child to participate in
counseling, community service or a supervised work program as
provided under §48.34(9), Stats.
(c) An order for the child to remain at home, except
during hours in which the child is attending religious worship or
a school program, including travel time required to get to and
from the school program or place of worship. The order may
permit a child to leave his or her home if the child is
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
(d) An order for the child to attend an education
program under §48.34(12), Stats.
25.325 NON-HABITUAL TRUANCY.
Any child found to be truant from school, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than Fifty ($50.00) Dollars for a
first offense, One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars for a second offense
and Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for a third or subsequent
offense occurring within a 12-month period.
25.33 RESTRICTIONS ON THE SALE OF SPRAY PAINT AND MARKER PENS
TO MINORS.
(a) Purpose. The Village Board of Trustees has
determined that regulation of the sale of spray containers of
paint and other lacquer substances regularly used by vandals to
deface property is a necessary use of the police power so as to
prevent such vandalism and to protect property located within the
Village.
(b) Definitions.
(1) "Spray paint" means any container, regardless
of the material from which it is made, which is
made or adapted for the purpose of spraying paint.
(2) "Wide-tipped markers" means any indelible
marker or similar implement with a tip which, at
its broadest width, is three-eights (3/8") of an
inch or greater, which tip may take the form of a
point, a brush, an applicator or otherwise.
(3) "Graffiti" means any inscription, word,
figure or design marked, scratched, etched, drawn
or painted with spray paint, lacquer paint, ink,
chalk, dye or other substances on buildings,
fences, structures, vehicles and similar places
without the express permission of the owner or
operator of the property.
(c) Prohibited Conduct.
(1) No person, firm or corporation, except a
parent or legal guardian, employer, teacher or
other person authorized to supervise minors, may
sell or give away or in any way furnish spray
paint or wide-tipped markers to any person under
the age of eighteen (18).
(2) No person under the age of eighteen (18) may
possess spray paint or wide-tipped markers in a
public or private place, without the express
permission of the owner or operator of the
property.
(3) No person shall aid, assist or abet a person
under the age of eighteen (18) in obtaining
possession of spray paint or wide-tipped markers
except that this prohibition shall not apply to
parents or legal guardians, employers, teachers or
other persons authorized to supervise minors.
(4) No minor at the time of purchase of a spray
paint container or wide-tipped marker shall
furnish fraudulent evidence of majority in order
to purchase the same.
(d) Sale and Display of Spray Paint and Wide-Tipped
Markers. Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages as
a retail commercial establishment selling spray paint or widetipped
markers shall do all of the following:
(1) Place a sign in clear public view at or near
the display of such products stating as follows:
"GRAFFITI IS AGAINST THE LAW. THE DEFACING OF
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY IS PUNISHABLE BY A FINE
OF UP TO $1,000";
(2) Place a sign in the direct view of persons
responsible for accepting customer payment for
spray paint and wide-tipped markers stating:
"SELLING SPRAY PAINT OR WIDE-TIPPED MARKERS TO
PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IS AGAINST THE LAW.
VIOLATORS CAN BE FINED UP TO $1,000";
(3) Display such paint or markers in such a
manner so as to make them inaccessible to a
customer present in the area allocated for
customer use without assistance of an employee of
that establishment; or
(4) Display such items, if the person chooses not
to comply with the display requirements set forth
in subparagraph (3), above, such that mirrors,
cameras or personnel can readily observe customers
during all times such establishment is open to the
public.
(e) Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any
provision of this ordinance shall forfeit not less than Two
Hundred Fifty ($250.00) Dollars nor more than One Thousand
($1,000.00) Dollars per violation.
25.34 CHILDREN'S CODE ADOPTED.
Except as otherwise specifically provided by this Code
of Ordinances, all provisions of Chapter 48, Wis. Stats.,
including any future revisions or amendments thereto, describing
and defining regulations with respect to children, including
penalties to be imposed and the procedures for prosecution
thereof, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be
performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by
reference is required or prohibited by this chapter.
25.35 PROHIBITION OF EROTIC DANCING IN LICENSED
ESTABLISHMENTS.
(a) Purpose.
(1) The Village Board of the Village of Paddock
Lake has explicit authority under §125.10(1),
Stats., to adopt regulations governing the sale of
alcohol beverages which are in addition to those
set forth in Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(2) The Village Board has authority under its
general police powers set forth in §61.34(1), Wis.
Stats., to act for the good order of the
municipality and for the health, safety and
welfare of the public and may carry out its powers
by regulation and suppression.
(3) The Village Board recognizes it lacks
authority to regulate obscenity in light of
§66.051(3), Stats., and does not intend by
adopting this ordinance to regulate obscenity,
since nudity in and of itself is not obscene, it
declares its intent to enact an ordinance
addressing the secondary effects of live, totally
nude, non-obscene, erotic dancing in bars and
taverns.
(4) Bars and taverns featuring live, totally
nude, non-obscene, erotic dancing have in other
communities tended to further the increase of
criminal and other offensive activity, to disrupt
the peace and order of the communities, to
depreciate the value of real property, to harm the
economic welfare of the communities and to
negatively affect the quality of life of the
communities, and such secondary effects are
detrimental to the public health, safety and
general welfare of citizens.
(5) The Village Board recognizes the U.S. Supreme
Court has held that nude dancing is expressive
conduct within the outer perimeters of the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution and
therefore entitled to some limited protection
under the First Amendment, and the governing body
further recognizes that freedom of speech is among
our most precious and highly protected rights, and
wishes to act consistently with full protection of
those rights.
(6) The governing body is aware, based on the
experiences of other communities, that bars and
taverns in which live, totally nude, non-obscene,
erotic dancing occurs may and do general secondary
effects which the governing body believes are
detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Paddock
Lake.
(7) Among these secondary effects are:
(a) The potential increase in prostitution
and other sex-related offenses, as well as
other crimes and offenses,
(b) The potential depreciation of property
values in neighborhoods where bars and
taverns featuring nude dancing exist,
(c) Health risks associates with the spread
of sexually transmitted diseases, and
(d) The potential for infiltration of
organized crime for the purpose of unlawful
conduct.
(8) The governing body desires to minimize,
prevent and control these adverse effects and
thereby protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Paddock
Lake; protect the citizens from increased crime;
preserve the quality of life; preserve the
property values and character of surrounding
neighborhoods; and deter the spread of urban
blight.
(9) The governing body has determined that
enactment of an ordinance prohibiting live,
totally nude, non-obscene, erotic dancing in bars
and taverns licensed to serve alcohol beverages
promotes the goal of minimizing, preventing and
controlling the negative effects associated with
such activity.
(b) Nude Dancing In Licensed Establishments
Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to perform or engage
in, or for any licensee or manager or agent of the licensee to
permit any person, employee, entertainer or patron to perform or
engage in any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition on the
premises of a licensed establishment which:
(1) Shows his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva,
anus, anal clef or cleavage with less than a fully
opaque covering,
(2) Shows any portion of the female breast below
a point immediately above the top of the areola,
(3) Shows the covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
(c) Exemptions. The provisions of this ordinance do
not apply to the following licensed establishments: theaters,
performing arts centers, civic centers, and dinner theaters where
live dance, ballet, music and dramatic performances of serious
artistic merit are offered on a regular basis and in which the
predominant business or attraction is not the offering to
customers of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and where
the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on, or the
advertising or promotion of, employees engaging in nude erotic
dancing.
(d) Definitions. For purposes of this ordinance, the
term “licensed establishment” means any establishment licensed by
the Village Board of the Village of Paddock Lake to sell alcohol
beverages pursuant to Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The
term “licensee” means the holder of a retail “Class A”, “Class
B”, Class “B”, Class “A” or “Class C” license granted by the
Village Board of the Village of Paddock Lake pursuant to Chapter
125 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) Penalties. Any person, partnership, or
corporation who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than Two Hundred
($200.00) Dollars and not more than One Thousand ($1,000.00)
Dollars per violation. A separate offense and violation shall be
deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or
continues. In addition, violation of this ordinance constitutes
sufficient grounds for suspending, revoking or non-renewing an
alcohol beverage license under §125.12, Stats.
(f) Severability. If any section of this ordinance is
found to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity
of the remaining sections shall not be affected.
(g) Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect
upon the passage and publication as required by law.
25.36 SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA AND RELATED COMPOUNDS
(a) Purpose.
(1) The Village of Paddock Lake has a duty to
preserve the health, safety and welfare of its
inhabitants.
(2) The Board of Trustees of the Village of
Paddock Lake finds and determines that the
chemical compounds described hereunder are
intoxicating and/or hallucinogenic to humans upon
ingestion and are often used as alternatives to
marijuana; that these chemical compounds are
potentially dangerous to users; and that their
long term health effects are unknown; thus, the
use of these intoxicating chemical compounds
create a significant health and safety risk to the
citizens of the Village of Paddock Lake.
(3) Certain businesses within the Village of
Paddock Lake limits are currently selling some of
the intoxicating chemical compounds described
hereunder as incense or aromatics, but which are
typically used for human ingestion; such
substances sold at local convenience stores as
Spice, Black Mamba, K-2, Puff, Sugar Sticks and
other brand names, are gaining in popularity at an
alarming rate among high school and college aged
individuals, as well as among parolees and
probationers.
(4) While having similar or stronger
physiological effects as high potency marijuana,
these intoxicating chemical compounds do not show
a positive reading in traditional law enforcement
drug testing, which adds to the desirability and
increased use among drug abusers and increases the
threat to public health and safety by the
avoidance of detection.
(5) The intoxicating chemical compounds described
hereunder are not yet categorized as controlled
substances under state and federal law.
(6) In the interest of the health, safety and
welfare of its citizens, the Village of Paddock
Lake deems it appropriate and necessary to
prohibit the possession, use, sale, manufacture or
distribution of the intoxicating chemical
compounds described hereunder.
(b) Unlawful Intoxicating Chemical Compounds.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person,
including a corporation or other entity, to
manufacture, distribute, dispense, ingest, use,
possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, sell,
publicly display for sale, attempt to sell, give,
trade or barter any one or more of the following
chemical compounds and/or substances, including
their salts, isomers, homologues and salts of
their isomers and homologues:
(a) Salvia Divinorum or Salvinorum A–all
parts of the plant presently classified
botanically as Salvia Divinorum, whether
growing or not, the seeds thereof, any
extract from any part of such plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salts
derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or extracts.
(b) Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also
known as JWH-018).
(c) (6ar, 10ar)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-
dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10,
10a-tetrahydrobenzo(c) chromen-1-ol (also
known as HU-210 or 1, 1-dimethylheptyl-11-
hydroxy-delta8-tetrahydrocannabinol).
(d) 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-5-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP-
47, 497), and the dimethylhexyl,
dimethyloctyl and dimethylnonyl homologues of
CP-47, 497.
(e) 1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also
known as JWH-073).
(f) 1-(2-(4-(morpholinyl) ethyl))-3-(1-
naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-200).
(g) 1-Pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)
indole (also known as JWH-250).
(h) 1-Hexyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also
known as JWH-019).
(i) 1-Pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl) indole
(also known as JWH-398).
(j) N-benzylpiperazine (also known as BZP).
(k) 1-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl) piperazine
(also known as TFMPP).
(l) Any similar structural analogs of the
above chemical compounds.
(m) Any other synthetic cannabinoids.
(2) It is not an offense under subsection (1) of
this section if the person was acting at the
direction of an authorized agent of a law
enforcement agency to enforce or ensure compliance
with this law prohibiting the sale of the
aforementioned intoxicating chemical compound.
(3) If any of the aforementioned intoxicating
chemical compounds are found in the possession of
any person, they may be confiscated and destroyed
by law enforcement officials.
(4) This section shall not apply to drugs or
substances lawfully prescribed or to drugs or
substances which have been approved by the federal
Food and Drug Administration or which are
specifically permitted by Wisconsin law.
(c) Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of
this section will be subject to a fine of not less than Five
Hundred ($500.00) Dollars or more than One Thousand ($1,000.00)
Dollars. Each day during which a violation of this ordinance
occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(d) Injunctive Relief. The Village of Paddock Lake
shall, in addition to any other remedies provided by law, have
the authority to seek an injunction to compel compliance of any
business which fails to or refuses to comply with this section.
(e) Severability. If any provision of this ordinance
is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining
provisions of this ordinance which shall remain effective absent
the invalid provision, and to this end, the provisions of this
ordinance are declared to be severable.
25.37 SYNTHETIC BATH SALTS AND RELATED COMPOUNDS
(a) Purpose.
(1) The Village of Paddock Lake has a duty to
preserve the health, safety and welfare of its
inhabitants.
(2) The Board of Trustees of the Village of
Paddock Lake finds and determines that the
chemical compounds described hereunder are
intoxicating and/or hallucinogenic to humans upon
ingestion and are often used as alternatives to
cocaine and methamphetamines; that these chemical
compounds are potentially dangerous to users; and
that their long term health effects are unknown;
thus, the use of these intoxicating chemical
compounds create a significant health and safety
risk to the citizens of the Village of Paddock
Lake.
(3) Certain businesses within the Village of
Paddock Lake limits are currently selling some of
the intoxicating chemical compounds described
hereunder as “bath salts”, but which are typically
used for human ingestion; such substances sold at
local convenience stores under a variety of trade
names listed hereafter, are gaining in popularity
at an alarming rate among high school and college
aged individuals, as well as among parolees and
probationers.
(4) While having similar or stronger
physiological effects as controlled substances,
these intoxicating chemical compounds do not show
a positive reading in traditional law enforcement
drug testing, which adds to the desirability and
increased use among drug abusers and increases the
threat to public health and safety by the
avoidance of detection.
(5) The intoxicating chemical compounds described
hereunder are not yet categorized as controlled
substances under state and federal law.
(6) In the interest of the health, safety and
welfare of its citizens, the Village of Paddock
Lake deems it appropriate and necessary to
prohibit the possession, use, sale, manufacture or
distribution of the intoxicating chemical
compounds described hereunder.
(b) Unlawful Intoxicating Chemical Compounds.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person,
including a corporation or other entity, to
manufacture, distribute, dispense, ingest, use,
possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, sell,
publicly display for sale, attempt to sell, give,
trade or barter any one or more of the following
chemical compounds and/or substances, known as
mephedrone or methylenedioxpyravalerone, utilizing
the following trade names:
(a) Arctic Blast
(b) Bayou Ivory Flower
(c) Bloom
(d) Blue Magic
(e) Blue Silk
(f) Bolivian Bath
(g) Bonsai Winter Boost
(h) C Original
(i) Cloud 10
(j) Cloud 10 Ultra
(k) Cloud 9
(m) Cotton Cloud
(n) Dynamite Dynamite Plus
(o) Energizing Aromatherapy Powder
(p) Euphoria
(q) Gold Rush
(r) Hurricane Charlie
(s) Ivory Fresh
(t) Ivory Wave
(u) Ivory Wave Ultra
(v) Lady Bubbles
(w) Lunar Wave
(x) Mr. Nice Guy
(y) Mystic
(z) Ocean Snow
(aa) Pure White
(bb) Red Dove
(cc) Route 69
(dd) Scarface
(ee) Snow Day
(ff) Snow Leopard
(gg) Tranquility
(hh) Vanilla Sky
(ii) White China
(jj) White Dove
(kk) White Girls
(ll) White Horse
(mm) White Knight
(nn) White Lightning
(oo) White Rush
(pp) Wicked X
(qq) Wicked XX
(rr) Zoom
(2) It is not an offense under subsection (1) of
this section if the person was acting at the
direction of an authorized agent of a law
enforcement agency to enforce or ensure compliance
with this law prohibiting the sale of the
aforementioned intoxicating chemical compound.
(3) If any of the aforementioned intoxicating
chemical compounds are found in the possession of
any person, they may be confiscated and destroyed
by law enforcement officials.
(4) This section shall not apply to drugs or
substances lawfully prescribed or to drugs or
substances which have been approved by the federal
Food and Drug Administration or which are
specifically permitted by Wisconsin law.
(c) Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of
this section will be subject to a fine of not less than Five
Hundred ($500.00) Dollars or more than One Thousand ($1,000.00)
Dollars. Each day during which a violation of this ordinance
occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(d) Injunctive Relief. The Village of Paddock Lake
shall, in addition to any other remedies provided by law, have
the authority to seek an injunction to compel compliance of any
business which fails to or refuses to comply with this section.
(e) Severability. If any provision of this ordinance
is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining
provisions of this ordinance which shall remain effective absent
the invalid provision, and to this end, the provisions of this
ordinance are declared to be severable.
Chapter 27
SNOWMOBILES
27.01 State Snowmobile Laws Adopted
27.02 Operation Regulations
27.03 Snowmobile Renters
27.04 Penalties
27.05 Enforcement
27.01 STATE SNOWMOBILE LAWS ADOPTED.
(a) Enumeration. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the statutory provisions describing and
defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles in the following
enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby adopted
by reference and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein:
Wisconsin Statutes
(1) 350.01 through
350.99
Snowmobiles
(2) 346.02(10) Applicability of Rules of Road to
Snowmobiles
(3) 895.52 Recreational Immunity
27.02 OPERATION REGULATIONS.
(a) Access to Lake. Access to the ice-bound water of
Paddock Lake shall be only at those points where public access is
permitted to the lake or from private property contiguous to the
icebound waters with the express authorization of the owner(s) of
such private property.
(b) Trails. The following snowmobile trails and
routes are established to provide access to the ice-bound waters
of Paddock Lake and local, county and state designated trails:
(1) 65th Street from the public park
Southwestward to 65th Street; thence Westward to
the Western terminus of 65th Street.
(2) 72nd Street from the East terminus of 72nd
Street Westward along the channel to 248th Avenue.
(3) 243rd Avenue from Paddock Lake South to
Highway 50.
(4) From the channel on Hooker Lake Westward
along 78th Street to the intersection of 78th
Street and 244th Avenue; thence Northward on 244th
Avenue to Highway 50.
(5) 248th Avenue from the State Highway 50 North
to County Highway "K", but only on the median
strip.
(6) 74 Street from 248 Avenue Eastward to the th th
terminus of 74 Street. th
(c) Unattended Snowmobiles. No person shall leave or
allow a snowmobile to remain unattended on any public highway or
public property while the motor is running or with the starting
key in the ignition.
27.03 SNOWMOBILE RENTERS.
(a) License. No person shall engage in the business
of renting or leasing snowmobiles to the public, or renting or
lease the use of a snowmobile track or other private property to
the public for the operation of snowmobiles in the Village unless
he has first obtained a license as provided in this section.
(b) Application for License. Application for a
snowmobile renter’s license shall be filed with the
Clerk/Treasurer and shall include the name of the owner of the
premises on which such business will be conducted, the proposed
period and hours of operation, the name of the person, firm or
corporation which will conduct such business, the state
registration number of such commercial owner, if any, and the
registration numbers of any snowmobiles to be leased by such
business and such other information as the Village Board shall
require to consider such application. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee of Fifty ($50.00) Dollars to cover the costs
of investigation and issuance of the license.
(c) Approval of License. No license shall be issued
unless approved by the Village Board after public hearing. Notice
of hearing shall be given as a Class 1 notice under Chapter 985,
Wisconsin Statutes. The Village Board shall approve issuance of
the license only if it determines that the public health, safety
and welfare will not be adversely affected thereby, and that the
following requirements are met:
(1) The applicant must have on file with the
Village Clerk/Treasurer proof of liability
insurance in force covering the premises to be
licensed and the operation of any snowmobile
thereon or to be rented or offered for use to the
public by the business with limits of One Hundred
Thousand ($100,000.00) Dollars per person, Three
Hundred Thousand ($300,000.00) Dollars per
accident, and Ten Thousand ($10,000.00) Dollars
for property damages.
(2) If snowmobiles are to be used on the licensed
premises, such use must be restricted to areas
located at least one hundred fifty (150') feet
from any dwellings not owned or occupied by the
applicant.
(3) Snowmobiles shall be operated on the premises
only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m.
(d) Term of License. The licensing period shall be for
one (1) year from September 1 to August 31.
(e) Renewal of License. The Village Clerk/Treasurer
shall issue a renewal license to any person holding a valid
license under this section upon payment of the annual license
fee. However, any such applicant who has been convicted within
the preceding twelve (12) months of a violation of this chapter
or any state statute regulating or restricting the use of
snowmobiles or snowmobile renters shall not be entitled to a
license renewal until approved by the Village Board after public
hearing as required under subsection (c) of this section.
27.04 PENALTIES.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Chapter shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than $600
together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment
thereof may be imprisoned in the County Jail for a period not
exceeding 90 days. No person shall, however, forfeit any amount
in excess of the maximum fine or forfeiture allowed in the
Wisconsin Statutes for the same offense. The penalty and
forfeiture for snowmobile parking violations on highways shall be
the amount applicable to such violations by owners or operators
of motor vehicles for violations of Section 26.02 of this Code.
27.05 ENFORCEMENT.
(a) Uniform Citation for Highway and Parking
Violations. The uniform traffic citation promulgated under
Section 345.11, Wisconsin Statutes, shall be used for violations
of this Chapter relating to highway use and the parking of
vehicles except as herein provided.
(b) Other Violations. All violations of this Chapter
not described in subsection (a) shall be enforced in accordance
with Sections 66.12 and 66.114 and Chapter 799 of the Wisconsin
Statutes. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made as
provided in Section 66.12(1)(b), Wisconsin Statutes, in
substantially the same form as provided in the uniform traffic
citation within 5 days of the date of the citation for such
violation. Bail deposits may also be made under Section 66.12,
Wisconsin Statutes. Such deposits shall include a $2 Municipal
Court Clerk's fee and costs of prosecution.
(c) Police Department to Receive Stipulations and
Penalties. Stipulations, forfeited penalties and deposits for
obtaining release from arrest authorized under this Chapter may
be accepted at the Kenosha County Sheriff's Office or Village
Hall during regular business hours.
(d) Forfeited Penalties and Deposits. Except as
otherwise provided in Section 345.26, Wisconsin Statutes, and the
deposit schedule adopted by the State Board of County Judges
thereunder, required forfeited penalties and deposits or bail not
including costs or fees for violations of this Chapter, shall be
as follows:
Code Section Offense Deposit
27.01 Violations, except as hereinafter
provided
$20.00
27.01(a)(9) Driving animals 200.00
27.01(a)(10) Permitting operation by incompetent 100.00
27.01(a)(12) Operating snowmobile under
influence
100.00
27.02 Violations, except as hereinafter
provided
20.00
27.07(g) Unattended vehicles 10.00
27.03 Violations, each day 100.00
Chapter 28
BICYCLES AND BICYCLE LANES
28.01 Definitions
28.02 State Statutes Adopted
28.03 Additional Rules for Operation of Bicycles
28.04 Registration of Bicycles
28.05 Report on Sale of Bicycle
28.06 Bicycle Lanes Established
28.07 Penalties
28.01 DEFINITIONS.
(a) "Bicycle" shall mean every device propelled by
feet acting upon pedals and having wheels, of which any two
wheels are twenty (20") or more inches in diameter.
(b) "Play vehicle" shall mean any coaster, toy wagon,
roller skates, sled, toboggan or toy vehicle propelled by feet
acting upon pedals.
(c) "Child's seat" shall mean a seat manufactured and
designed for the purpose of attaching to a bicycle and equipped
with a safety belt, arm rest, back rest, foot rest and spoke
protector, and shall be used by a child under the age of six (6)
years.
28.02 STATE STATUTES ADOPTED.
The following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Code as if
set forth herein in full:
(a) 346.77 Responsibility of parent or guardian for
violation of bicycle or play vehicle regulations.
(b) 346.78 Play vehicles not to be used on roadway.
(c) 346.79 Special rules applicable to bicycles.
(d) 346.80 Riding bicycle on roadway.
(e) 346.802 Riding bicycle on bicycle lane.
(f) 346.803 Riding bicycle on bicycle way.
(g) 346.804 Riding bicycle on sidewalk.
(h) 346.81 Lamps and other equipment on bicycles.
28.03 ADDITIONAL RULES FOR OPERATION OF BICYCLES.
(a) In addition to the rules and regulations set forth
in Section 28.02 above, all operators of bicycles shall be
subject to the following provisions:
(1) All operators of bicycles shall observe all
rules dealing with vehicular traffic.
(2) Every bicycle when operated upon a street or
highway shall be in a good, safe mechanical
condition.
(3) No person shall operate a bicycle upon the
sidewalk of the Village of Paddock Lake.
(4) No operator of a bicycle shall tow any other
vehicle or play vehicle upon a public street or
roadway.
(b) The following regulations shall apply to persons
riding a child on a bicycle:
(1) The operator of said bicycle shall be at
least eighteen (18) years of age or older.
(2) The passenger shall be under the age of six
(6) years and seated on a child's seat.
(3) The child's seat shall be fastened securely
to the bicycle and shall be located behind the
handle bars.
(4) Only one child's seat shall be attached to a
bicycle except in the case of a tandem bicycle,
two such seats may be attached behind the front
handle bar.
28.04 REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES.
(a) Requirement. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate a bicycle unless it is first properly registered and
tagged or identified as hereinafter provided for in this Chapter.
(b) Procedure. Every owner of a bicycle shall file
with the Sheriff's Department a complete description of such
bicycle on forms to be provided by the Village, which shall
constitute a registration of such bicycle and shall be kept as a
public record by the Sheriff's Department. Said registration
shall be valid only until the date upon which such license
expires as designated on a metal or plastic tag, plate or
sticker, after which such registration must be renewed.
(c) Identification Tag. Upon approval of the
Sheriff's Department, a tag or sticker shall be issued by the
Sheriff's Department to the bicycle's owner. This identification
tag or sticker shall be numbered to correspond with the
registration form for such bicycle. If a metal or plastic tag,
or plate is issued, such tag or plate shall be attached to the
rear of the bicycle. A sticker, if issued, shall be attached to
the frame of the bicycle directly below the seat and in such a
manner as to be clearly visible from the left-hand side of the
bicycle. In the event that the tag or sticker is lost, such loss
shall be reported immediately to the Sheriff's Department and a
new registration shall be obtained as set forth in this Chapter.
No fee shall be charged for such identification tag or sticker.
28.05 REPORT OF SALE OF BICYCLE.
(a) All persons engaged in the business of selling new
or used bicycles shall at the time of the sale provide the
purchaser with a bill of sale for such bicycle. Such bill of
sale shall include the name and address of the purchaser,
description, serial or frame number of the bicycle, the wheel
size, and the equipment or accessories attached thereto. The
purchaser shall present the bill of sale to the Sheriff's
Department at the time the bicycle is presented for registration.
The seller of such new or used bicycle shall keep a copy of the
bill of sale for inspection by the Sheriff's Department or other
law enforcement officials at all reasonable hours upon request by
the Sheriff's Department or said officials.
28.06 BICYCLE LANES ESTABLISHED.
(a) Lanes. Pursuant to Section 349.23 Wisconsin
Statutes, the following bicycle lanes within the Village are
hereby established:
(1) The West three feet of the paved portion of
248th Avenue from its intersection of State Trunk
Highway 50 to the intersection of 67th Street.
(2) The East three feet of the paved portion of
248th Avenue from its intersection of State Trunk
Highway 50 to the intersection of 67th Street.
(b) Use.
(1) Said bicycle lanes may be used by
pedestrians. However, the bicycle shall have the
right-of-way.
(2) Motor vehicles in said lanes shall be
prohibited while being used by bicycles or
pedestrians.
(c) Identification. Bicycle lanes shall be designated
by the installation of official roadway signs giving notice to
all highway users of the bicycle lane, and designated areas shall
be painted lines on the roadways upon which bicycle lanes are
established.
28.07 PENALTIES.
(a) Fines. Any person violating any provision of this
Chapter upon the conviction thereof, may be required to forfeit
not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than Twenty Dollars
($20.00) for the first offense, and not less than Twenty-five
Dollars ($25.00) nor more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for the
second or subsequent conviction within a year. However, any
person violating Section 346.81(1) Wisconsin Statutes may be
required to forfeit not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more
than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00).
(b) Loss of License. In addition to, or in lieu of,
the penalties and forfeitures provided by this Section the Court
may prohibit a person from riding a bicycle for a period not to
exceed six (6) months and may order such person's license plate
or registration confiscated and held by the Court for a period of
not to exceed six (6) months.
Chapter 30
CABLE TELEVISION
30.01 Purposes
30.02 Definitions
30.03 Grant of Authority
30.04 Franchise Conditions
30.05 Subscriber Fees and Records
30.06 System Operations
30.07 General Provisions
30.01 PURPOSES.
The purpose of this Chapter is to:
(a) Provide for the franchising and regulation of
cable television systems within the Village of Paddock Lake; and
(b) Provide for the regulation by the Village of the
rates to be charged to subscribers for cable television service;
and
(c) Provide for the development of cable television as
a means to improve communication between and among the citizens
and public institutions of the Village; and
(d) Provide remedies and prescribed penalties for
violation of this Chapter and the franchise(s) granted hereunder.
30.02 DEFINITIONS.
(a) "Agency" means the person, department or agency
designated by the Board to act in matters related to cable
television. In the absence of any specific designation by the
Board, the Village President or his designate shall act as the
Agency.
(b) "Auxiliary Services" means any communications
services in addition to "regular subscriber services" including,
but not limited to services for which a per-program or per
channel charge is made, pay TV, burglar alarm services, data or
other electronic transmission services and home shopping
services, interactive two-way services and any other service
utilizing any facility or equipment of a cable television system
operating pursuant to a franchise granted under this Chapter.
(c) "Cable Television System" (or "Cable
Communications System") means any non-broadcast facility
consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal
generations, reception, and control equipment, that distributes
or is designed to distribute to subscribers audio, video, and
other forms of electronic or electrical signals, but such term
shall not include any such facility that serves or will serve
only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under
common ownership, control or management, and does not use
municipal right-of-ways.
(d) "Channel" is a band of frequencies, six megahertz
wide in the electro-magnetic spectrum capable for carrying either
one audio-visual television signal and a few non-video signals or
a large number of non-video signals.
(e) "Converter" means an electronic device which
converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference
within the television receiver of a subscriber, and by an
appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view
all signals delivered at designated dial locations.
(f) "Fair Market Value" means the price that a willing
buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going concern.
(g) "Federal Communications Commission" or "FCC" means
the present federal agency of that name as constituted by the
Communications Act of 1934, or any successor agency created by
the United States Congress.
(h) "Franchise" means the non-exclusive rights granted
hereunder to construct and operate a cable television system
along the public ways in the Village or within specified areas in
the Village, and is not intended to include any license or permit
required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a
business within the Village as may be required by other
ordinances and laws of the Village.
(i) "Franchise Area" means that portion of the Village
for which a franchise is granted under the authority of this
Chapter. If not otherwise stated in the franchise, the franchise
area shall be the corporate limits of the Village including all
territory thereafter annexed to the Village.
(j) "Grantee" means the natural person, partnership,
domestic or foreign corporation, association, joint venture, or
organization of any kind granted a franchise by the Board under
this Chapter and its lawful and approved successor, transferee or
assignee.
(k) "Persons" means any people, firms, corporations,
associations or other legally recognized entities.
(l) "Public Way" means the surface, the air space
above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public
street, highway, lane, path alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive,
bridge, tunnel, park, parkways, waterways, or other public rightof-
ways, including public utility easements or right-of-ways, and
any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located
thereon now or hereafter held by the Village which shall entitle
the Village and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of
installing and maintaining the Grantee's cable television system.
(m) "Regular Subscriber Service" means the
distribution to subscribers of signals over the cable television
systems on all channels except those for which a per-program or
per channel charge is made, two-way services, and those intended
for reception by equipment other than a television broadcast
receiver.
(n) "Schools" means all public, or private tax exempt,
educational institutions, including elementary and secondary
schools.
(o) “Subscriber” means any person who receives the
regular subscriber service and/or any one or more of such other
services as may be provided b y the Grantee's cable television
system, and does not further distribute such service(s).
(p) "Two-way Service" means the subscriber or any
other location shall have the capability to choose whether or not
to respond immediately or by sequential delay by utilizing any
type of terminal equipment whatever, by pushbutton code, dial
code, meter, voice, video including, but not limited to audio and
video, electrical or mechanically produced signal, display and/or
interrogation.
(q) "User" means a person or organization utilizing a
system channel or system equipment and facilities for purposes of
production and/or transmission of materials, as contrasted with
receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
30.03 GRANT OF AUTHORITY.
(a) Requirement of a Franchise. No person, firm,
company, corporation or association shall construct, install,
maintain or operate a cable television system within the Village
unless a franchise has first been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter, and unless such franchise is in full
force and effect. Such franchise shall not take the place of any
other license or permit which may be legally required of the
Grantee in order to conduct such a business, or construct or
install buildings, structures, facilities or equipment within the
Village.
(b) Franchise Applications. After receiving
applications for a franchise, the Village after considering the
legal, financial, technical and character qualifications of the
applicants, may grant one or more non-exclusive franchises
creating a right to construct and operate a cable television
system within the public ways of the Village. Franchise(s) may
be granted to the applicant(s) which in the Village's judgment
may best serve the public interest; provided, however, no
provision of this Chapter shall be deemed or construed as to
require the Village to grant a franchise.
30.04 FRANCHISE CONDITIONS.
(a) Franchise Term and Non-exclusivity. The term of
an original franchise shall be twenty-five (25) years from the
date the franchise is accepted by the Grantee. The term of a
renewed franchise shall be no more than twenty-five (25) years.
No franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall give any
exclusive right to a Grantee and every such franchise shall be
deemed to reserve the right to grant other franchises to use and
occupy the public ways of the Village for cable television or any
other purpose on such terms as the Village may then deem
appropriate.
(b) Notice to the Grantee. Except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter the Board shall not meet to take any
final action involving the review, renewal, revocation or
termination of the Grantee's franchise unless the Village has
advised the Grantee in writing, at least thirty (30) days prior
to such meeting, as to its time, place and purpose and published
a notice, at least once, ten (10) days before the meeting in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Village.
(c) Franchise Review and Modification. It shall be
the policy of the Village to amend a franchise, upon application
of the Grantee, when necessary to enable the Grantee to take
advantage of advancements in the state-of-the-art which will
afford it an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or
economically serve its subscribers; provided, however, that this
Section shall not be construed to require the Village to make any
amendment. Further, within the term of the franchise, the Board
may adopt a resolution setting forth the time and place of a
special Board meeting, the purpose of which will b e to consider
system performance, system design modifications, and the possible
need for the adoption of a reasonable and appropriate
modifications in a franchise of a nature that would not result in
effectively terminating the same.
(d) Performance Evaluation Session.
(1) If a community or other appropriate channel
maintained by Grantee is available, Grantee shall
notify subscribers of all evaluation sessions by
announcement on such channel, on the system
between the hours of 7 o'clock p.m. and 9 o'clock
p.m. for five (5) consecutive days preceding each
session
(2) Special evaluation sessions may be held at
any time during the time of the franchise at the
request of the Agency or the Grantee.
(3) If requested by the Board on not less than
sixty (60) days advance written notice to the
Grantee, the Board and the Grantee shall hold
scheduled performance evaluation sessions within
thirty (30) days of the third, fifth, tenth and
fourteenth anniversary dates of the Grantee's
award of the franchise and as required by Federal
and State law. All such evaluation sessions shall
be open to the public.
(4) Topics which may be discussed at any
scheduled or special evaluation sessions may
include, but not be limited to, service rate
structures, franchise fees, penalties, free or
discounted services, applications of new
technologies, system performance, services
provided, programming offered, customer
complaints, privacy amendments to this ordinance,
judicial and FCC rulings, line extension policies
and Grantee or Board rules.
(5) During a review and evaluation b y the Board
the Grantee shall fully cooperate with the Board
and shall provide such information and documents
as the Board may need to reasonably perform its
review.
(6) If at any time during the review the Board
determines that reasonable evidence exists of
inadequate cable system performance, it may
require the Grantee to perform reasonable tests
and analyses directed toward the suspected
inadequacies. The Grantee shall fully cooperate
with the Board in performing such testing and
shall prepare results and a report if requested
within thirty (30) days after notice. Such a
report shall include the following information:
(a) The nature of the complaint or problem
which precipitated the special tests;
(b) What system component was tested;
(c) The equipment used and procedures
employed in testing;
(d) The method, if any, in which such
complaint or problem was resolved; and
(e) Any other information pertinent to said
tests and analyses which may be required.
(e) Franchise Renewal.
(1) The Grantee shall be solely responsible for
requesting, the Board, in writing, to hold a
special Board meeting, the purpose of which will b
e to review the Grantee's performance during the
entire term of its franchise, to consider the
adequacy of the franchise from the standpoint of
the Village, of Grantee, and the Federal
Communications Commission Rules for Cable
Television, and to determine the advisability of
renewing the Grantee's franchise. Said request
shall be made not less than twelve (12) months
prior to the franchise expiration date. Upon
receipt of said request, the Board may adopt a
resolution setting forth the time and place of the
special Board meeting.
(2) The Board may hear any interested persons
during said special Board meeting and may
determine whether or not the Grantee did
reasonably comply with the terms and conditions
imposed by this Chapter and the franchise.
(3) If the Board determines that the Grantee has
been in reasonable compliance with the terms and
conditions imposed b y this Chapter and the
Franchise, the Board may, by resolution, renew the
Grantee's franchise, with any modification it
deems desirable, for a period of time not
inconsistent with the provisions of Section
30.04(a) of this Code.
(f) Franchise Revocation Procedures.
(1) Whenever a grantee shall refuse, neglect or
willfully fail to construct, operate or maintain
its cable television system or to provide service
to its subscribers in substantial accordance with
the terms of this Chapter and the franchise or to
comply with the conditions of occupancy of any
public ways, or to make required extensions of
service, or in any other way substantially violate
the terms and conditions of this Chapter, the
franchise, or applicable rules or regulations,
then the franchise may be revoked.
(2) In the event the Board or the Agency believes
that grounds for revocation exist or have existed,
the Board or Agency may notify a Grantee, in
writing, setting forth the nature and facts of
such noncompliance. If, within thirty (30) days
following such written notification, the Grantee
has not furnished reasonably satisfactory evidence
that corrective action has been taken or is being
actively and expeditiously pursued, or that the
alleged violations did not occur, or that the
alleged violations were beyond the Grantee's
control, the Agency shall thereupon refer the
matter to the Board.
(3) Upon referral from the Agency or by its own
motion, the Board may revoke a franchise pursuant
to Paragraph (f)(1) of this Subsection.
(4) The Board shall not revoke a franchise
pursuant to Paragraph (f)(3) of this Subsection
until it has given notice to the Grantee that it
proposes to take such an action and the grounds
therefor. Further, the Board shall not revoke a
franchise until the Grantee, or its
representative, has had reasonable opportunity to
be heard before the Board and show that the
proposed grounds for revocation did not or do not
exist, as the case may be.
(5) A Grantee shall not be subject to the
sanctions of this Section for any act or omission
wherein such act or omission was beyond the
Grantee's control. An act or omission shall not be
deemed to be beyond the Grantee's control if
committed, omitted, or caused b y a corporation,
or other business entity, which holds a
controlling interest in the Grantee, whether held
directly or indirectly. Further, the inability of
a Grantee to obtain financing, for whatever
reason, shall not be an act or omission which is
"beyond the Grantee's control."
(6) In the event that a franchise has been
revoked b y the Board, the Board shall have an
option, to the extent then permitted by existing
law, to either purchase the tangible assets of the
Grantee's cable television system previously
governed by the franchise at their fair market
value as defined herein or assign such rights to
purchase, or require removal of all Grantee's
property located within the public ways of the
Village at the Grantee's expense. Such an option
must be exercised within one (1) year from the
date of the revocation of the franchise, or the
entry of a final judgment by a court reviewing the
question of the Board's revocation, or the entry
of a final order upon appeal of the same,
whichever is later.
(7) The termination of a Grantee's rights under a
franchise shall in no way affect any other rights
the Village may have under the franchise or any
provision of law.
(g) Transfer of Ownership to Grantor.
(1) If those circumstances provided for in this
Chapter wherein the Village shall have the right
to purchase ownership of a Grantee's cable
television system or any of its assets, the
Village must give notice that it elects to
exercise such right and the Village may acquire
such assets at the time of payment of the value
thereof. In those circumstances where the question
of value has been submitted to arbitration, the
Board may affirmatively accept the decision of the
arbitrators within ninety (90) days after the
rendering of the arbitrator's decision. However,
if the Board fails to accept the arbitrator's
decision within the aforesaid ninety (90) day
period, the rights of the Village to purchase
shall expire.
(2) If any time lapses between the time of
transfer of assets and the time of payment
therefor, the Grantee shall be entitled to
interest during the interim at the rate of eight
percent (8%) per annum.
(h) Grantor's Right to Assign. A franchise shall not
limit the right of the Village to assign its rights to acquire
any or all assets of a Grantee's cable television system.
(i) Franchise Fee.
(1) The franchisee shall, during each year of
operation under this franchise, pay to the
Village, three (3%) percent of the annual basic
subscriber revenues received by the franchisee for
cable television service rendered to customers
located within the Village. For purposes of this
Subsection, "basic subscriber revenues" shall mean
only those revenues derived from regular
subscriber services, namely, carriage of broadcast
signals and required non-broadcast services. At
the time of this annual payment, the franchisee
shall furnish to the Village an annual report
showing the franchisee's annual basic subscriber
revenues during the preceding year and such other
information as the Village shall reasonably
request with respect to the franchisee's basic
subscriber revenues. Upon request, the franchisee
shall permit representatives of the Village to
examine the franchisee's books for the purpose of
verifying the amount of franchise fees.
(2) The Village shall have the right, consistent
with the provisions of this Code, to inspect the
Grantee's income records, the right of audit and
the recomputation of any amounts determined to be
payable under this Chapter. Any additional amount
due the Village as a result of the audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days following written
notice to the Grantee by the Village which notice
shall include a copy of the audit report. The cost
of said audit shall be borne by the Grantee if it
is properly determined that the Grantee's annual
payment due to the Village for the preceding year
is increased thereby by more than five (5%)
percent.
(3) In the event that any franchise payment or
recomputed amount is not made on or before the
applicable dates heretofore specified, interest
shall be charged from such due dates at the rate
of one (1%) percent per month.
(4) In no event shall the payments made by
Grantee hereunder exceed those permitted by law.
(j) Liability and Indemnifications.
(1) The franchisee shall pay and by its
acceptance of the franchise, the franchisee
expressly agrees that it will pay all damages and
penalties which the Village and its inhabitants
may legally be required to pay as a result of the
franchisee's negligence in the installation,
operation or maintenance of the cable television
system authorized herein. The Village shall notify
the franchisee's representative within fifteen
(15) days after the presentation of any claim or
demand to the Village, either by suit or
otherwise, made against the Village on account of
any negligence or contract as aforesaid on the
part of the franchisee. The franchisee shall carry
and pay the cost of the following liability
insurance in support of its undertaking to hold
the Village harmless from loss sustained b y
either on account of the negligence of the
franchisee, in at least the amounts indicated
below, for injury to or death of persons and
injury to or destruction of property:
(a) $100,000.00 for property damage to any
one person.
(b) $200,000.00 for property damage to any
one accident.
(c) $100,000.00 for personal injury to any
one person.
(d) $300,000.00 for personal injury to any
one accident.
The franchisee shall also maintain umbrella
liability insurance of not less than one million
dollars and shall comply with all provisions of
the worker's compensation laws of the State of
Wisconsin.
(2) The Grantee shall, at its sole cost and
expense, indemnify and hold harmless the Village,
its officials, boards, commissions, consultants,
agents and employees against any and all claims,
suits, causes of action, proceedings, and
judgments for damage arising out of the award of a
franchise to the Grantee and its operation of the
Cable television system under the franchise. These
damages shall include, but not be limited to,
penalties arising out copyright infringements and
damages arising out of any failure by Grantee to
secure consents from the owners authorized
distributors or licensees of programs to be
delivered by the Grantee's cable television system
whether or not any act or omission complained of
is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by the
franchise. Indemnified expenses shall include, but
not be limited to, all out-of-pocket expenses,
such as attorney fees, and shall also include the
reasonable value of any services rendered by any
consultants, agents and employees of the Village.
(k) Transfer of Franchise. No sale or transfer shall
be effective until the vendee, assignee or lessee has filed with
the appropriate officials of the Village an instrument duly
executed, reciting the fact of such sale, assignment or lease,
accepting the terms of this franchise and agreeing to perform all
of the conditions thereof. This system shall not be sold or
transferred by the franchisee to any outside interests except
upon written notice to the Village not less than thirty (30) days
before such transfer or sale.
30.05 SUBSCRIBER FEES AND RECORDS.
(a) Subscriber Contracts. No contract as to the
length of service for regular monthly subscriber shall be
required by the franchisee under ordinary circumstances.
Franchisee agrees that under ordinary circumstances it shall be
the right of the subscriber to start or terminate his or her
service on the cable according to his or her own wishes by making
advance payments to commence service, and by reasonable notice to
the franchisee to terminate the service. It is hereby
acknowledged, however, that equipment installed by the franchisee
on behalf of the subscriber shall remain the property of the
franchisee, and shall be subject to reasonable inspection and
service by the franchisee at reasonable hours and removal upon
termination of the service. In the event that any subscriber
shall fail to meet his or her obligations according to the rate
schedule and meet reasonable franchisee rules and regulations,
the franchisee shall have the right to withhold or deny service
to such subscriber.
30.06 SYSTEM OPERATIONS.
(a) Franchise Areas. The areas of the Village for
which applications for franchise will be accepted shall be
specified by the Board of Trustees.
(b) Service Area. Grantee must extend and make cable
television service available at standard installation rates in
all areas that are technically and financially feasible. In areas
that are not technically or financially feasible, the service
will be extended on a cost-sharing basis with the subscriber.
(c) System Description and Service.
(1) The cable television system to be installed
by Grantee shall comply in all respects with the
technical performance requirements set forth in
the FCC's Rules for Cable Television including
applicable amendments thereto; provided, however,
that nothing contained herein shall be construed
to prohibit the Grantee from proposing to comply
with more rigid technical performance
requirements. If the FCC should delete said
requirements, the Village hereby reserves the
right to amend this Chapter to incorporate similar
standards and every franchise granted pursuant to
this Chapter shall be subject to such reserved
power whether or not expressly so conditioned.
(2) Upon request the franchisee shall furnish
free of charge, inside wiring and outside
connections and services for basic services only
to all public and parochial schools located within
the Village and to Village buildings, when other
connections are being made within the particular
area of any such schools or public buildings;
provided, however, any and all inside wiring or
work for pay services in addition to basic
services shall be done at the expense of the
schools, or the Village, as the case may be, and
provided that a service cable has previously been
installed in reasonable proximity to such schools
or public buildings. In addition, the franchisee
agrees to provide such access channels as are
required by the FCC Rules and Regulations.
(3) A Grantee, and all other persons using or
making use of the cable communications system(s),
shall comply with all Federal, State and local
laws, rules and regulations regarding the
exhibition, display or showing of obscene or
indecent materials.
(4) At the option of the subscriber, a Grantee
shall provide, at its cost, a device capable of
locking out any premium programming video and
audio signals.
(d) Operational Requirements and Records.
(1) Grantee shall construct, operate, and
maintain the cable television system in full
compliance with the rules and regulations,
including applicable amendments, of the Federal
Communications Commission and all other applicable
Federal, State, or local laws and regulations,
including the latest editions of the National
Electrical Safety Code and the National Fire
Protection Association National Electrical Code.
The cable television system and all its parts
shall be subject to inspection by the Village, and
the Village hereby reserves the right to review a
Grantee's construction plans prior to the
commencement of construction.
(2) All inquiries or complaints shall be received
during normal business hours, 8:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m. Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday and 8:00
a.m. to 12:00 p.m. Saturday. All complaints and
inquiries will be investigated, responded to or
acted upon as promptly as is practical, and unless
circumstances otherwise require, within three
business days of their receipt.
(3) Grantee shall exercise its best effort to
design, construct, operate, and maintain the
system at all times so that signals carried are
delivered to subscribers without material degradation
on quality (within the limitations imposed
by the technical state-of-the-art).
(e) Street Occupancy.
(1) Grantee shall utilize existing poles,
conduits and other facilities whenever possible,
and shall not construct or install any new,
different, or additional poles, conduits, or other
facilities whether on the public way or on
privately-owned property, until the written
approval of the appropriate governmental
authority, and, if necessary, of the property
owner is obtained, and which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld b y the municipality.
However, no location of any pole or wireholding
structure of the Grantee shall be a vested
interest and such poles or structures shall be
removed or modified by the Grantee at its own
expense whenever the Village or other governmenta1
authority determines that the public convenience
would be enhanced thereby.
(2) Where the Village or a public utility serving
the Village desires to make use of the poles or
other wireholding structures of the Grantee but
agreement therefor with the Grantee cannot be
reached, the Village may require the Grantee to
permit such use for such consideration and upon
such terms as the Village shall determine to be
just and reasonable, if the Village determines
that the use would enhance the public convenience
and would not unduly interfere with the Grantee's
operation.
(3) All transmission lines, equipment and
structures shall be so installed and located as to
cause minimum interference with the rights and
appearance and reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin on any public way and at all
times shall be kept and maintained in a safe,
adequate, and substantial condition, and in good
order and repair. The Grantee shall at all times
employ reasonable care and shall install and
maintain in use commonly accepted methods and
devices for preventing failures and accidents
which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or
nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades,
flags, lights, flares, or other devices shall be
used at such times and places as are reasonably
required for the safety of all members of the
public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any
public way b y the Grantee shall be placed in such
a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel
on such public way, and only after obtaining and
complying with appropriate street occupancy
permits from the Village.
(4) Grantee shall remove, replace, or modify at
its own expense, the installation of any of its
facilities as may be deemed necessary by the
Village or other appropriate governmental
authority to meet its proper responsibilities.
(5) All installations shall be underground in
those areas of the Village where public utilities
providing both telephone and electric service are
underground at the time of installation. In areas
where either telephone or electric facilities are
above ground at the time of installation, the
Grantee may install its service above ground,
provided that at such time as those facilities are
required to be placed underground by the Village
or are placed underground, the Grantee shall
likewise place its services underground without
additional cost to the Village or to the
individual subscriber so served within the
Village. If the facilities of either the electric
or the telephone utility are aerial, the cable
television facilities may be located underground
at the request of a property owner, provided that
the excess cost over aerial location shall be
borne by the property owner making the request.
(6) In the event of disturbance of any public way
or private property b y the Grantee, it shall, at
its own expense and in a manner approved by the
Village or other appropriate governmental
authority and the owner, replace and restore such
public way or private property in as good a
condition as before the work causing such
disturbance was done. In the event the Grantee
fails to perform such replacement or restoration
the Village or the owner shall have the right to
do so at the sole expense of the Grantee. Demand
for payment to the Village or owner for such
replacement or restoring of such roads or private
property as may have been disturbed must be in
writing to the Grantee.
(7) Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster,
it becomes necessary in the judgment of the
Village to remove or damage any of the Grantee's
facilities, no charge shall be made by the Grantee
against the Village for restoration and repair.
(8) At the request of any person holding a valid
building moving permit issued b y the Village or
other appropriate governmental authority and upon
at least 72 hours notice, Grantee shall
temporarily raise, lower, or cut its wires as may
be necessary to facilitate such move. The direct
expense of such temporary charges, including
standby time, shall be paid b y the permit holder,
and Grantee shall have the authority to require
holder, and Grantee shall have the authority to
require payment in advance.
(9) Grantee shall have the authority to trim
trees on public property at its own expense as may
be necessary to protect its wires and facilities,
subject to the supervision and direction of the
Village or other appropriate governmental
authority.
(f) Construction Schedule and Reports.
(1) Upon accepting the franchise, Grantee shall,
within ninety (90) days, file the documents
required to obtain all necessary Federal, State
and local licenses, permits and authorizations
required for the conduct of its business, and
shall submit monthly reports to the Village on
progress in this respect until all such documents
are in hand. Failure of the Grantee to pursue all
necessary steps to secure the aforementioned
authorizations with due diligence shall constitute
a substantial violation of this Chapter.
(2) The grantee shall commence construction of
the cable system within eight (8) months after
receiving all necessary permits, authorizations
and licenses, and shall complete construction of
the system in the Service Area and offer and b e
capable of delivering cable television service in
full accordance with this Chapter and the
franchise granted hereunder to subscribers in not
less than fifty (50%) percent of the occupied
dwelling units in the SA within twelve (12) months
after commencing construction, and shall be
capable of delivering service to the remaining
fifty (50%) percent of the occupied dwelling units
in the SA in the succeeding twelve (12) month
period thereafter, or such lesser periods as shall
be specified in the franchise. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, failure of the Grantee for any reason
to commence construction within twelve (12) months
of the date of acceptance of the franchise shall
be grounds for revocation of the franchise. For
the purpose of this Section, construction shall b
e deemed to have commenced when the first aerial
strand cable has been attached to a pole, or the
first underground trench has been opened.
(3) Every three (3) months after the start of
construction, Grantee shall furnish the Village a
report on progress of construction until complete.
The report shall include a map that clearly
defines the areas wherein regular subscriber
service is available.
(g) Protection of Privacy.
(1) No person may intrude on the privacy of
another by doing any of the following without the
written consent of the subscriber given within the
preceding two (2) years:
(a) Monitor the subscriber's cable equipment
or the use of it, except to verify the
system's integrity or to collect information
for billing of pay services.
(b) Provide anyone with the name or address
or other information that discloses or
reasonably leads to the disclosure of any
aspect of the behavior, preferences or
finances, of the subscriber or of a member of
the subscriber's household.
(2) A person may supply the name, address or
other information identifying a cable television
subscriber or member of the subscriber's household
to another person if the person receiving the
information uses it only for billing of pay
services or to send listings of cable television
programs to the subscriber.
30.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(a) Limits on Grantee's Recourse.
(1) Except as expressly provided in this Chapter
and the franchise, the Grantee shall have no
recourse against the Village for any loss, expense
or damage resulting from the terms and conditions
of this Chapter or the franchise nor for the
Village's failure to have the authority to grant
the franchise. The Grantee expressly agrees that
upon its acceptance of the franchise it does so
relying upon its own investigation and
understanding of the power and authority of the
Village to grant said franchise.
(2) The Grantee, by accepting the franchise,
acknowledges that it has not been induced to
accept same by any promise, verbal or written, by
or on behalf of the Village by any third person
regarding any term or condition of this Chapter or
the franchise not expressed therein.
The Grantee further pledges that no promise or
inducement, oral or written, has been made to any
Village employee or official regarding receipt of
the cable television franchise.
(3) The Grantee further acknowledges by acceptance
of the franchise that it has carefully read the
terms and conditions of this Chapter and the
franchise and accepts without reservation the
obligations imposed by the terms and conditions
herein.
(4) The decision of the Village Board concerning
Grantee selection and awarding of the franchise
shall be final.
(b) Compliance with State and Federal Law. The
Grantee shall, at all times, comply with all laws of the State
and Federal government and the rules and regulations of any
Federal or State administrative agency; provided, however, this
Section shall not be construed to require the Village to make an
initial determination of any such violation.
(c) Special License. The Village reserves the right
to issue a license, easement or other permit to anyone other than
the Grantee to permit that person to traverse any portion of the
Grantee's franchise area within the Village in order to provide
service outside the Village. Such license or easement, absent a
grant of franchise in accordance with this Chapter, shall not
authorize nor permit said person to provide a cable television
service of any nature to any home or place of business within the
Village nor to render any service or connect any subscriber with
the Village to the Grantee's cable television system.
(d) Franchise Validity. The Grantee agrees, by the
acceptance of the franchise, to accept the validity of the terms
and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise in their
entirety and that it will not, at any time, proceed against the
Village in any claim or proceeding challenging any term or
provision of this Chapter or the franchise as unreasonable,
arbitrary or void, or that the Village did not have the authority
to impose such term or condition.
(e) Failure to Enforce Franchise. The Grantee shall
not be excused from complying with any of the terms and
conditions of this Chapter or the franchise by any failure of the
Village, upon any one or more occasions, to insist upon the
Grantee's performance or to seek Grantee's compliance with any
one or more of such terms or conditions.
(f) Rights Reserved to the Grantor.
(1) The Village hereby expressly reserves the
following rights:
(a) To exercise its governmental powers, now
or hereafter, to the full extent that such
powers may be vested in or granted to the
Village.
(b) To adopt, in addition to the provisions
contained herein and in the franchise and in
any existing applicable ordinances, such
additional reasonable regulations of general
applicability as it shall find necessary in
the exercise of its police power.
(c) To amend any provisions of this Chapter,
and to renegotiate any provision of a
franchise granted pursuant hereto, which is
declared or rendered void or unenforceable by
any court or administrative body having
jurisdiction thereof, or by changes in State
or Federal laws enacted after the award of
the franchise.
(d) To renegotiate the entire franchise
should decision(s) of courts or
administrative bodies having appropriate
jurisdiction, or State or Federal laws
enacted after the award of a franchise,
render void or unenforceable substantial and
material portions of this Chapter or a
franchise granted pursuant hereto, where the
result thereof is to make the balance of the
Chapter or the franchise meaningless or where
the authority of the Village to regulate
cable communication systems within the
Village is substantially and materially
abrogated.
(g) Time Essence of Agreement. Whenever this Chapter
or the franchise sets forth any time for any act to be performed
by or on the behalf of the Grantee, such time shall be deemed of
the essence and the Grantee's failure to perform within the time
allotted shall, in all cases, be sufficient grounds for the
Village to invoke the remedies available under the terms and
conditions of this Chapter and the franchise.
(h) Acceptance. This Chapter and the franchise and
their terms and conditions shall be accepted by the Grantee by
written instrument filed with the Village within thirty (30) days
after the granting of the franchise, unless said period is
extended by the Board at its sole discretion. In its acceptance,
the Grantee shall declare that it has carefully read the terms
and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise and accepts all
of the terms and conditions imposed by this Chapter and the
franchise and agrees to abide by the same.
(i) Landlord/Tenant Relations.
(1) Interference with cable service prohibited.
Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential
dwelling nor his agent or representative shall
interfere with the right of any tenant or lawful
resident hereof to receive cable television
service, cable installation or maintenance from a
cable television company regulated under a valid
and existing cable television franchise issued by
the Village.
(2) Gratuities and payments to permit service
prohibited. Neither the owner of any multiple
unit residential dwelling nor his agent or
representative shall ask, demand or receive any
payment, service or gratuity in any form as a
condition for permitting or cooperating with the
installation of a cable communications service to
the dwelling unit occupied by a tenant or resident
requesting service.
(3) Penalties and charges to tenants for service
prohibited. Neither the owner of any multiple
unit residential dwelling nor his agent or
representative shall knowingly penalize, charge or
surcharge a tenant or resident, or forfeit or
threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or
resident, or discriminate in any way against such
tenant or resident who requests or receives cable
communications service from a Grantee operating
under a valid and existing cable communication
franchise issued by the Village.
(4) Reselling service prohibited. No person
shall resell, without the expressed, written
consent of both the Grantee and the Board, any
cable service, program or signal transmitted by a
cable television company operating under a
franchise issued by the Village.
(5) Protection of property permitted. Nothing in
this Section shall prohibit a person from
requiring that cable television system facilities
conform to laws and regulations and reasonable
conditions necessary to protect safety,
functioning, appearance and value of premises or
the convenience and safety of persons or property.
(6) Risks assumed by Grantee. Nothing in this
Section shall prohibit a person from requiring a
Grantee to agree to indemnify the owner, or his
agents or representatives, for damages or from
liability for damages caused by the installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of cable
television facilities.
(j) Theft of service. It shall be unlawful for any
person to attach or affix or to cause to be attached or affixed
any equipment or device which allows access to or use of the
cable television service without payment to the Grantee for same.
(k) Penalties. Persons, whether natural, artificial
or commercial entities who violate any other provisions of this
Chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, as provided for in Section
1.07 of this Code.
(1) Grantee may promulgate rules. Grantee shall have
the authority to promulgate rules, regulations, terms and
conditions of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to
enable it to exercise its rights and perform its services under
this Chapter and the Rules of the FCC, and to assure
uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers. Such
rules and regulations shall not be deemed to have the force of
law.
(m) Delegation of Powers. Any delegable right, power
or duty of the Village, the Agency, the Board or any official of
the Village under this Chapter may be transferred or delegated by
resolution of the Board to an appropriate officer, employee, or
department of the Village or any other legal authority.
Chapter 31
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
31.01 Special Assessments
31.01 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
(a) Authority. This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to
Section 66.62 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as may be amended or
renumbered from time to time.
(b) Levy of Assessments. The cost of installing or
constructing any public work or assessment shall be charged in
whole or in part to the property benefitted thereby, and to make an
assessment against such property in such manner as the Village
Board determines. Such special assessment shall be a lien against
the property from the date of the levy.
(c) Procedure. In levying a special assessment under
this Section, the Village Board of Trustees shall first enact a
resolution which, in general terms, describes the public work and
delineates those parcels benefitted thereby. Such description
shall include an estimate of the total costs of the project and an
estimate of the costs to be levied against each benefitted parcel.
(d) Hearing. Public hearings shall be conducted by the
Board of Trustees following notice as provided in Subsection (e)
below.
(e) Notice. A copy of the resolution described in
Subsection (c) above, together with a notice of the time and place
of the public hearing described in Subsection (d) above, shall be
served upon the owner, or an agent, of each lot or parcel of land
which will be subject to the levy of a special assessment under
this Ordinance. Service of the notice shall be made not less than
ten (10) days prior to the hearing described in Subsection (d)
above and may be made by:
(1) Personal delivery;
(2) Certified or registered mail; or
(3) Publication in the official newspaper as a
Class 1 notice, under Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, together with mailing by first class mail
if the name and mailing address of the owner or an
agent can be readily ascertained.
Chapter 32
FAIR HOUSING
32.01 Declaration of Policy
32.02 Definitions
32.03 Prohibited Acts
32.04 Acts Not Prohibited
32.05 Administration and Enforcement
32.06 Penalties
32.07 Severability
32.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village
of Paddock Lake pursuant to the constitution of the United States
and the State of Wisconsin and also its power to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare, that all persons
regardless of sex, race, color, handicap, religion, national
origin, sex or marital status of the person maintaining a
household, lawful source of income, age or ancestry, are entitled
to fair and equal access to housing; and to that end, the Village
of Paddock Lake hereby enacts the following Ordinance which
prohibits any person from discriminating against any other person
by impairing access to any housing on the basis of sex, race,
color, handicap, religion, national origin, sex or marital status
of the person maintaining a household, lawful source of income,
age or ancestry.
32.02 DEFINITIONS.
In this section unless the context requires otherwise:
(a) "Village Attorney" means the Village Attorney of
the Village of Paddock Lake.
(b) "Committee" means the standing Committee on Health
and Welfare of the Village Board of Trustees.
(c) "Discriminate" and "discrimination" means to
segregate, separate, exclude, or treat any person or class of
persons unequally because of sex, race, color, handicap,
religion, national origin, sex or marital status of the person
maintaining a household, lawful source of income, age or
ancestry; and, for a person engaged in the business of accepting
mortgages on real estate or insuring against hazards, because of
the atmospheric, economic, ethnic, racial or social
characteristics of the neighborhood in which housing is located.
It is intended that the facts set forth herein shall be the sole
basis for prohibiting discrimination.
(d) "Handicap" means any physical disability, or
developmental disability as defined in §51.01(5)(a), Wisconsin
Statutes.
(e) "Housing" means any improved property, including
any mobile home park, which is used or occupied, or is arranged,
intended or designed to be used or occupied, as a home or
residence.
(f) "Person" means any individual, partnership, labor
or other association, corporation, legal representative,
receiver, trustee manager, employee or any other agent of any
such person.
(g) "Private non-profit corporation" means a
corporation chartered under Chapter 181, Wisconsin Statutes and
recognized as tax-exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Act of 1954, as amended.
(h) "Unimproved residential lot" means any residential
lot upon which no permanent building or structure containing
living quarters has been constructed.
32.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
(a) It is a prohibited act for any person to
discriminate:
(1) By refusing to sell, lease, finance or
construct housing or by refusing to discuss the
terms thereof.
(2) By refusing to permit inspection or exacting
different or more stringent price, terms or
conditions for the sale, lease, financing or
rental of housing.
(3) By refusing to finance or sell an unimproved
residential lot or to construct a home or
residence upon such a lot.
(4) By publishing, circulating, issuing or
displaying, or causing to be published,
circulated, issued or displayed, any
communication, notice, advertisement or sign in
connection with the sale, financing, lease or
rental of housing, which states or indicates any
discrimination in housing.
(5) For a person in the business of insuring
against hazards, by refusing to enter into, or by
exacting different terms, conditions or privileges
with respect to a contract of insurance against
hazards to a dwelling.
(6) By refusing to renew a lease, causing the
eviction of a tenant from rental housing or
engaging in the harassment of a tenant.
(b) It is a prohibited act for any person to induce or
attempt to induce any other person to sell, rent, or lease any
dwelling by representatives regarding the present or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a
particular race, color, religion, national origin or economic
status, or by
representatives to the effect that such present or prospective
entry will or may result in:
(1) the lowering of real estate values in the
area concerned;
(2) a deterioration in the character of the area
concerned;
(3) an increase in criminal or antisocial
behavior in the area concerned; or
(4) a decline in the quality of the schools or
other public facilities serving the area.
(c) No person may coerce, intimidate, threaten or
interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of any
right granted or protected by this section, or with any person
who has aided or encouraged another person in the exercise or
enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this section.
32.04 ACTS NOT PROHIBITED.
(a) Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit
discrimination on the basis of age in relation to housing
designed to meet the needs of elderly individuals.
(b) Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person
from exacting different or more stringent terms or conditions for
financing housing based on the age of the individual application
for financing if the terms or conditions are reasonably related
to the individual applicant.
(c) Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the
development of housing designed specifically for persons with a
handicap and discrimination on the basis of handicap in relation
to such housing.
(d) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
prohibit an owner, or his agent, from requiring that any person
who seeks to buy, rent or lease housing supply information
concerning his or her family, marital, financial and business
status but not concerning race, color or creed.
32.05 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
(a) Any person who claims to have been injured by a
discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be
irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is
about to occur (hereafter "person aggrieved") may file a
complaint with the Village Attorney. Upon a receipt of such a
complaint, the Village Attorney shall forward a copy of the
complaint to the Committee, which shall conduct an investigation
of the complaint. The Committee may request assistance in its
investigation of any private non-profit corporation maintaining
an office within the Village which has staff trained to supervise
such an investigation.
(b) If the Committee or its designee finds reason to
believe that a discriminatory practice has occurred or is about
to occur, it shall attempt through conciliation or persuasion, to
obtain compliance with this chapter. If all such attempts at
conciliation or persuasion fail, the Committee shall hold a
public hearing to determine probable cause and shall notify the
Village Attorney of its findings. If probable cause is found,
the Village Attorney shall then issue a complaint if, in his
judgment, an action of discrimination is sustainable in court.
(c) The Village Attorney shall file an annual report
of all alleged violations and dispositions with the Village Board
of Trustees.
32.06 PENALTIES (see 432(2) in statutes and Chapter 188 laws
of 1979).
(a) Any person who willfully violates this section
shall, for the first such violation, forfeit not less than $100
nor more than $1,000 plus all costs incurred by the Village,
including attorney fees. In default of such payment, the
violator shall be imprisoned in the County Jail for not less than
five (5) days nor more than thirty (30) days or community
service.
(b) Any person adjudged to have violated this section
within 5 years after having been adjudged to have violated this
section, for every violation committed within the 5 years, shall
forfeit not less than $1,000 nor more than $10,000. In default
of such payment, the violator shall be imprisoned in the County
Jail for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than one (1)
year.
(c) Payment of any forfeiture under this ordinance
shall be stayed during pendency of any appeal.
32.07 SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any
provision of this Ordinance is invalid, or if the application to
any person or circumstance is invalid, such invalidity shall not
effect the other provisions of this Ordinance which can be given
effect without the invalid provisions and/or application.
Chapter 33
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
IN FLOOD PRONE AREAS
33.01 Intent
33.02 Permit Requirements
33.03 Permit Application and Fee
33.04 Duties of the Building Inspector/Zoning
Administrator
33.05 Annexation and Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
33.06 Definitions
33.07 Penalty
33.08 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
33.09 Separability
33.10 Effective Date
33.01 INTENT.
The Village of Paddock Lake, Wisconsin wishes to
establish eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program,
and in order to do so must meet the requirements of 44CFR Part
60.3 (a). The Village of Paddock Lake, Wisconsin wishes to
minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss
of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare. the State of Wisconsin has in
§66.010 and §61.354 of the Wisconsin Statutes delegated the
responsibility to local governments to adopt regulations designed
to minimize flood loss. The President and Board of Trustees of
the Village of Paddock Lake, Kenosha County, Wisconsin in order
to determine which developments would increase the flood hazard
or be damaged by flooding, does ordain the following measures
within the jurisdictional limits of the Village.
33.02 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
(a) No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, move,
or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining a
separate permit for each building or structure from the Building
Inspector/Zoning Administrator.
(b) No man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, which either changes exterior dimensions or location of
the improvement or which otherwise would require building or
zoning permitting, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, fences, children’s play equipment, pools,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations, shall be commenced until a separate permit
has been obtained from the Building Inspector/Zoning
Administrator for each change.
(c) No manufactured home shall be placed on improved
or unimproved real estate without first obtaining a separate
permit for each mobile or manufactured home from the Building
Inspector/Zoning Administrator.
(d) Storing of buoyant materials, such as firewood,
timbers, trailers, boats, children play equipment, ice fishing
shanties, piers.
33.03 PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEE.
To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file a
permit application on the form furnished by the Village for that
purpose. The form must be completed and submitted to the
Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator with the appropriate fee
before the issuance of a permit will be considered. The permit
shall be Two Hundred Fifty ($250.00) Dollars to defray any
professional fees the Village may incur in the review of
application.
33.04 DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR/ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
(a) The Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator is
appointed as the “Village representative” responsible for
receiving applications and examining plans and specifications for
the proposed construction or development.
(b) After reviewing the application, the Building
Inspector/Zoning Administrator may require any additional
measures which are necessary to meet the minimum requirements of
this ordinance.
(c) The Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator shall
review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits
have been received from those governmental agencies from which
approval is required by Federal or State Law, including Section
404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
(d) The Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator shall
review all permit applications to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If the
proposed building site is in a flood prone area as determined by
the Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator, all new construction
and/or substantial improvements (including the placement of
manufactured homes) shall be:
(1) Designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and/or hydrostatic loads, including
the effects of buoyancy.
(2) Constructed of materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage.
(3) Constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
(4) Constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
(e) The Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator shall
review proposals for subdivisions, certified survey maps, P.U.D.s
and Condominium Plats and other new proposed development to
determine whether such proposals will be reasonable safe from
flooding and shall make such recommendations to the Village Plan
Commission for approval or modification of such proposals as are
appropriate. If the subdivision proposal or other proposed new
development is in a flood prone area, any such proposal shall be
reviewed to assure that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage within the flood
prone area.
(2) All public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, water, and electrical systems are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
(3) Adequate drainage is provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazard.
(f) The Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator shall
require within the flood prone areas, new and replacement water
supply systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
(g) The Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator shall
require within flood prone areas new and replacement sanitary
sewer systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into flood waters.
33.05 ANNEXATION AND EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
To the extent that it continues to have authority to do
so, the Village of Paddock Lake shall not approve any development
located in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) outside the
corporate limits unless such development or plat is in accordance
with the following:
(a) A floodplain ordinance legally adopted by the
Village of Paddock Lake that meets the minimum Federal (44 CFR
60.3), and State of Wisconsin, and local requirements for
development within a Special Flood Hazard Area.
(b) The SFHA’s of those parts of unincorporated
Kenosha County that are within the extraterritorial Jurisdiction
of the Village of Paddock Lake or that may be annexed into the
Village of Paddock Lake are generally identified as such on the
Flood Hazard Boundary Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA or the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
(c) Nothing contained herein shall abrogate, modify,
contradict or otherwise change the obligations imposed upon the
Village by virtue of provisions contained in agreements entered
into by the Village pursuant to §66.0307, Wis. Stats.
33.06 DEFINITIONS.
(a) “Buoyant”. Any material which is capable of
floating or keeping other items afloat.
(b) “Children’s play structures”. Any apparatus,
contrivance or structure which has a primary or secondary purpose
of allowing, enhancing or assisting children in play, whether of
man made or natural materials. Children’s play structures shall
include, but shall not be limited to, swing sets, tetter totters,
sandboxes, slides or similar devices or improvements.
(c) “Development”. Any man made change to real
estate, including but not limited to construction or
reconstruction of buildings, installing manufactured homes or
travel trailers, installing utilities, construction of roads or
bridges, erection of levees, walls or fences. Drilling, mining,
filling, dredging, and storage of materials.
(d) “Flood”. A general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from
overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
(e) “Floodplain” or “Flood Prone Area”. Any land area
susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
(f) “Flood proofing”. Any combination of structural
or non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate
or improved real property, water or sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
(g) “Landscape features”. Materials such as timbers
or other materials, whether nature or man made which are
intentionally placed upon a yard for the purpose of enhancing,
improving and/or beautifying the visual appearance of the yard.
(h) “Manufactured Home”. A structure, transportable
in one or more sections. Which is built on a permanent Chassis,
and is designated for use with or without a permanent foundation
when attached to the required utilities.
(i) “New Construction”. Means for the purpose of
determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an
initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974 whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, new construction structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
(j) “Person”. Individual, corporation, partnership,
association, or any other entity, including State and local
governments and agencies.
(k) “Special Flood Hazard Area”. The land in the
floodplain within a community subject to a 1 percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated
as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been
completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance
rate map, Zone A is usually refined into Zones A, AO, AH, Al-30,
AE, A((, AR, AR/Al-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30,
VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term “Special
Flood Hazard Area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area
of special flood hazard”.
(l) “Structure”. For floodplain management purposes,
a walled and roofed building, including gas or liquid storage
tanks, that is principally above ground. The term includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers left on site more than
one hundred (180) days.
(m) “Substantial Improvement”. Any repair,
reconstruction or improvement of a structure the cost of which
exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the structure
either, (a) before the improvement or repair is started, or (b)
if the structure is damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition,
“Substantial Improvement” is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the structure regardless of the
actual work performed. The term does not however, include
either, (1) any project for improvement of the structure to
comply with existing State or local health, sanitary of safety
code specification which is solely necessary to insure safe
living conditions or (2) any alteration of a “historic structure”
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure.
33.07 PENALTY.
Any person who violates this ordinance shall upon
conviction be fined not less than Fifty ($50.00) Dollars nor more
than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars. A separate offence shall be
deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
33.08 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
(a) This ordinance is not intended to repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing agreement to which the Village
is a signator, ordinance, covenants, or deed restrictions.
(b) Where this ordinance and other ordinances,
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
33.09 SEPARABILITY.
The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be
deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion of this
Ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
33.10 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage and approval and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 34
SEXUAL OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
34.01 Background & Purpose
34.02 Residency and Activity Restrictions
34.03 Definitions
34.04 Sexual Offender and Sexual Predator
Residence Prohibitions; Exceptions
34.05 Sexual Offender and Sexual Predator
Prohibited Activity Restrictions
34.06 Property Owners Prohibited from Renting
Real Property to Certain Offenders and
Sexual Predators; Notification
Requirements
34.07 Exception for Placements under Chapter
980 of the Wisconsin Statutes
34.08 Severability
34.09 Injunction
34.10 Penalties
34.11 Continuation
34.01 BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE.
(a) The Village of Paddock Lake amended Chapter 34 of
the Village Code related to sex offender residency in order to
create terms and conditions that are consistent with those of
surrounding municipalities, and in order to comply with
amendments to Wisconsin State laws concerning Chapter 980
placements.
(b) Regulation of sex offender residency is not an
issue unique to the Village of Paddock Lake. To the contrary,
virtually all, if not literally all, of the municipalities in the
greater Milwaukee area regulate sex offender residency, and this
is consistent with comparable regulations that, while not
universally adopted, are very common throughout the State of
Wisconsin and nationwide.
(c) The Village Board now intends to revisit its
regulation of sex offender residency, in light of changes in
state law.
(d) In revisiting the matter the Village Board hereby
intends to, and does, reconsider the whole issue, from its most
basic premises, to ensure that the regulations are tailored to
the circumstances of Paddock Lake, while preserving the sole
intent to protect children from potential recidivism of convicted
child sex offenders.
(e) In revisiting the matter, the Village Board again
observes the risks posed by sex offenders against children, which
risks are nationally recognized in such landmark legislation as
the 1994 Jacob Wetterling Crimes Against Children and Sexually
Violent Offender Registration Act; 1996 Megan's Laws; and the
2006 Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act; and these 'risks
are also recognized by legislation in every State in the United
States of America including Wisconsin.
(f) The Village Board finds that the data concerning
child sex offenders is horrific and demonstrates the need for
action, including the following1:
(1) “Sex crimes are unfortunately fairly common
in the United States.”
(2) “It is estimated that one in every five girls
1Center for Sex Offender Management (CSOM) statistics. CSOM is a collaborative effort of the U.S. Department of
Justice, Office of Justice Programs, the National Institute of Corrections, the State Justice Institute, and the American Probation
and Parole Association, and these quoted statistics are from its "Fact Sheet: What You Need to Know about Sex Offenders".
and one in every seven boys are sexually abused by
the time they reach adulthood.”
(3) “Children are particularly vulnerable.
Approximately 67% of all victims of reported
sexual assaults are under the age of 18, and more
than half of these victims are under the age of
12.”
(4) “Most sexual offenses are committed by
someone the victim knows ... or acquaintance.”
(5) “No single factor or combination of factors
can fully explain why someone offends sexually,
though some factors may combine to increase
people's tendency to offend. These factors are ...
[physiological, sociocultural, developmental] and
situational/circumstantial (e.g. having easy
access to victims...).”
(6) “About 12% to 24% of sex offenders will
reoffend.”
(g) The Village Board also finds these statistics of
the U.S. Department of Justice to be shocking and a call to
action2:
(1) “Approximately 1.8 million adolescents in the
United States have been victims of sexual
assault.”
(2) “An estimated 60% of perpetrators of sexual
abuse are known to the child but are not family
members, e.g. family friends, babysitters, child
care providers, neighbors.”
(h) The Village Board is not inclined to sit idly by
and do nothing to protect children within the Village when these
most vulnerable members of our community face these documented
threats from offenders who are highly prone to re-offend if given
the opportunity to do so.
(i) The Village Board has reviewed many studies and
reports concerning recidivism of sex offenders and the
2U.S. Department of Justice, National Sex Offender Public Website "Facts and Statistics”
effectiveness of sex offender residency restrictions3, and
has been fully advised in the matter.
(j) The literature on the subject includes some
studies that support the practice of imposing sex offender
residency restrictions and others that are critical of the
practice.
(k) The Village Board finds it to be significant that
some of the key studies that have concluded that sex offender
residency restrictions have limited effectiveness have added
significant qualifications to that conclusion; e.g. in "An
Evaluation of Sex Offender Residency Restrictions in Michigan and
Missouri," (Huebner, et al., 2013), the authors generally do not
support sex offender residency restrictions, but nevertheless
find that following adoption of sex offender residency
restrictions “the rate of recidivism for technical violations
significantly decreased for Missouri sex offenders...” (id. at 9)
and “the number of sex offense convictions did decline...” in
Missouri (id. at 10).
(l) The Village Board recognizes the merits, mentioned
in some studies, of individualized consideration of the risks and
benefits of residency restrictions on an offender-by-offender
basis, though this assessment of risks is not a perfect science
and could give rise to equal protection or other enforcement
concerns; and on the local level it is important to provide clear
information to those who may want to locate in the Village,
including a map of available residency locations; and the Village
Board finds that this desire for uniformity and clarity outweighs
the desire for individualized consideration at the Village level,
in general.
(m) In review of the residency restrictions of
communities throughout Kenosha County and its environs, the
Village Board finds that many of such communities have an
3These include but are not limited to: Recidivism of sex offenders released from prison in 1994, U.S. Department of
Justice, Office of Justice Programs, copyright November 2003; The final report of the Commission to Improve Community Safety
and Sex Offender Accountability, of the State of Maine, dated January 2004; Sex Offender Recidivism Prediction, Correctional
Service of Canada dated October 14, 2004; Recidivism of Sex Offenders, May 2001, Center for Sex Offender Management;
Treating Sex Offenders, Wisconsin Lawyer Magazine, October 1994; The Impact of Residency Restrictions on Sex Offenders
and Correctional Management Practices: A Literature Review, Marcus Nieto and Professor David Jung, California Research
Bureau, California State Library, August 2006; Sex Offenders: You Are Now Free to Move About the Country, and Analysis of
Doe v. Miller's Effects on Sex Offender Residential Restrictions, UMKC Law Review, Spring 2005; There Goes the
Neighborhood? Estimates of the Impact of Crime Risk on Property Values from Megan's Laws, Linden and Rockoff, National
Bureau of Economic Research, May 2006; The Effect of Proximity to a Registered Sex Offender's Residence on Single-Family
Housing Selling Price, Goliath Appraisal Journal, July 2003; Sex Offenders, Sexually Violent Predators, Punishment, Residence
Restrictions and Monitoring, California Proposition 83, Analysis by the Legislative Analyst; An Evaluation of Sex Offender
Residency Restrictions in Michigan and Missouri, Huebner, et al., 2013.
"original domicile restriction," which allows each community to
take back its own while not adding an additional burden of more
than its own sex offenders to its community; such burdens
including neighborhood and citizen concerns and responses, risks
of recidivism, and potential property value impacts4.
(n) If the Village of Paddock Lake would not have an
original domicile restriction, the Village would have open doors
for non-resident sex offender residency when other communities
have closed doors, inviting a substantial increase in child sex
offender placements, with the related adverse impacts on the
health, safety and welfare of the Village and its residents.
(o) The Village Board believes that for all but the
most severe offenders, this risk of adverse impact declines as
time passes following the date of a Designated Offender's
offense, as the offender matures, recovers and reintegrates with
society over time; and if this results in the offender being
removed from the State registration list, the offender is thereby
automatically removed from the Village residency restrictions;
but even if State registration is required, once ten years has
passed from the date of the most recent offense giving rise to
the Designated Offender designation, provided it is not a Class A
felony against a child, the Village Board finds it is appropriate
to remove the original domicile restriction and allow such
reformed citizen to move into the Village of Paddock Lake in
compliance with this ordinance; and by opening this door the
Village Board hopes that it is establishing a precedent for its
surrounding communities to open their doors as well.
(p) The Village Board recognizes that it cannot
eliminate all risk of child sex offender re-offense, and it must
balance all of the competing public policies, but intends by
these regulations to strike the legislative balance that is
appropriate for the circumstances of the Village of Paddock Lake.
(q) It is not the intent of this ordinance to banish
sex offenders from residing within the Village of Paddock Lake,
and careful attention has been given to ensure that there are
ample locations for sex offenders to reside within the Village of
4Property value impacts have been noted in numerous studies, including "The Effect on Proximity to a Registered Sex
Offender's Residence on Single-Family House Selling Price," Larsen, J., Lowery, K., & Coleman, .I. (2003), The Appraisal
Journal, 71(3), 253-65; and "Neighborhood Tipping and Sorting Dynamics in Real Estate; Evidence from the Virginia Sex
Offender Registry," Wentland, Bain, Brastow, Stoll, Waller, Social Science Research Network, April 2013. Property values are
only one such impact. Stop it Now, a non-profit organization devoted to sex offender research, offers this advice to those
concerned about sex offenders moving into a neighborhood, among others: Create a family safety plan; attend notification
meetings; notify the police of suspicious activity; and don't wait to take action for prevention. At a minimum, this heightened
awareness and activity burdens the families and neighbors where sex offenders are placed, and collectively this burdens the
Village staff and resources, for every Designated Offender placement.
Paddock Lake in compliance with the requirements of this
ordinance.
(r) In reconsidering the matter, having given the
matter due consideration, and having based its determination on
the effect of the amendments on the health, safety and welfare of
the community and the immediate neighborhoods affected and the
current and future Village residents who are child sex offenders,
and having given due consideration to the municipal problems
involved, hereby determines that the following amendments to
Chapter 34 will appropriately support the public health, safety
and general welfare of the Village of Paddock Lake, will not be
hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive and will not for any other
reason cause a substantial adverse effect on the property values
and general desirability of the Village neighborhoods.
34.02 RESIDENCY AND ACTIVITY RESTRICTIONS.
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter not to
impose a criminal penalty but rather to service the Village of
Paddock Lake’s compelling interest to promote, protect and
improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Village of Paddock Lake by creating areas around locations where
children regularly congregate in concentrated number wherein
certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from
establishing temporary or permanent residency.
(b) Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use
physical violence and sexual offenders who prey on children are
sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public
safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical
violence and to repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders
commit many offenses, have many more victims that are never
reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes.
This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society
at large while incalculable, clearly exorbitant.
34.03 DEFINITIONS.
In this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
(a) Child. A person under the age of sixteen (16)
years, for purposes of this chapter.
(b) Designated Offender. Any person who is required
to register under §301.45, Wis. Stats., for any sexual offense
against a child, or any person who is required to register under
§301.45, Wis. Stats., and who has been designated a special
bulletin (SBX) sex offender pursuant to §301.46(2) and (2m), Wis.
Stats.
(c) Minor. A person under the age of eighteen (18)
years.
(d) Permanent Residence. A place where the Designated
Offender lodges or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive
days.
(e) Prohibited Activity. Participation in a holiday
event involving Minors. Holiday events in which the Designated
Offender is the parent or guardian of the Minors involved, and no
non-familial Minors are present, are exempt from the definition
of Prohibited Activity. A Designated Offender participates in a
Prohibited Activity by taking part in the event which shall
include, without limitation, distributing candy or other items to
children on Halloween, wearing a Santa Clause costume on or
preceding Christmas, or wearing an Easter Bunny costume on or
preceding Easter.
(f) Prohibited Location. Any school, licensed
day-care center, park, trail, playground, or place of worship.
The Village Administrator shall maintain an official map showing
the prohibited locations and safety zones within the Village. The
Village Administrator shall update the map at least annually to
reflect any changes in the prohibited locations and safety zones.
The map shall be available in the office of the Village
Clerk/Treasurer and posted on the Village website.
(g) Safety Zone. A Safety Zone is any real property
that supports or upon which there exists any facility used for or
that supports a school for Minors, a public park, a park
facility, a trail or any other Prohibited Location, including any
sidewalks or lawn adjacent to such Prohibited Location.
(h) Temporary Residence. Either:
(1) A place where the person abides, lodges or
resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days
in the aggregate during any calendar year and
which is not the person's permanent address; or
(2) A place where the person routinely abides,
lodges or resides for a period of four or more
consecutive or non-consecutive days in any month
and which is not the person's Permanent Residence.
(i) Village. The Village of Paddock Lake, Wisconsin.
34.04 SEXUAL OFFENDER AND SEXUAL PREDATOR RESIDENCE
PROHIBITIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
(a) Prohibited Location of Residence. It shall be
unlawful for any Designated Offender to establish a Permanent
Residence or Temporary Residence within One Thousand Five Hundred
(1,500') feet of a Prohibited Location.
(b) Original Domicile Restriction. It shall be
unlawful for any Designated Offender to establish a Permanent
Residence or Temporary Residence within the Village unless the
Designated Offender was legally domiciled in the Village at the
time of the offense resulting in the person's most recent
conviction for committing the sexually violent offense and/or
crime, subject to the following. This restriction does not apply
if the Designated Offender's most recent conviction of an offense
that is within the definition of Designated Offender occurred ten
(10) years or more prior to taking occupancy within the Village,
provided the Designated Offender has not been convicted of a
Class A felony against a child.
(c) Determination of Minimum Distance Separation. For
purposes of determining the minimum distance separation under
this chapter, the requirement shall be measured by following a
straight line from the closest point of the outer property line
of the Permanent Residence or Temporary Residence of a Designated
Offender to the nearest outer property line of a Prohibited
Location. If any portion of a tax parcel contains a Prohibited
Location, the entire tax parcel shall be considered a Prohibited
Location. If any portion of a tax parcel would constitute a
Prohibited Location of Residence, the entire tax parcel shall be
considered a Prohibited Location of Residence.
(d) Exceptions. A Designated Offender residing within
a Prohibited Location of a Residence shall not be in violation of
this chapter if any of the following apply:
(1) Subject to §34.06(A) below, The Designated
Offender established the Permanent Residence or
Temporary Residence and reported and registered
the residence pursuant to §301.45, Wis. Stats.,
before the initial effective date of the relevant
provision of this chapter, and the Designated
Offender has resided in such Permanent Residence
or Temporary Residence continuously since the
effective date of this chapter, except for
temporary absences of no more than thirty (30)
consecutive days.
(2) The Designated Offender is a Minor and is not
required to register under §301.45, Wis. Stats.
(3) The Prohibited Location situated within One
Thousand Five Hundred (1,500') feet of the
person's Permanent Residence was opened or
established after the Designated Offender
established the Permanent Residence and reported
and registered the residence pursuant to §301.45,
Wis. Stats.
(4) The residence is also the primary residence
of the Designated Offender's parents,
grandparents, siblings, spouse or children,
provided that such parent, grandparent, sibling,
spouse or child established the residence at least
two (2) years before the Designated Offender
established residence at that location, subject to
the following. The Designated Offender is
prohibited from residing in such location if a
victim of an offense giving rise to the Designated
Offender's designation also resides in the
residence and is a Minor, unless the Designated
Offender is on probation or parole and residing
with the victim is approved in writing by the
probation or parole officer; and if not on
probation or parole, such location is prohibited
unless approved in writing by the Kenosha County
Sheriff, based upon a finding that the
circumstances of the offense, the Designated
Offender, the victim, and all relevant information
in the matter substantially eliminates the risk of
re-offense against the victim.
34.05 SEXUAL OFFENDER AND SEXUAL PREDATOR PROHIBITED ACTIVITY
RESTRICTIONS.
(a) Safety Zone Prohibition. A Designated Offender
shall not enter upon or be present upon or within a Safety Zone,
except as set forth below in subsection (B), below.
(b) Exceptions. A Designated Offender who enters upon
or who is present upon or within a Safety Zone does not commit a
violation of this §34.05 if any of the following apply:
(1) The property also supports a church,
synagogue, mosque, temple, or other house of
religious worship, subject to all of the following
conditions:
(a) The Designated Offender's entrance and
presence upon the property occurs only during
hours of worship or other religious
programs/services as posted to the public;
and
(b) The Designated Offender shall not
participate in any religious education
programs that include Minors.
(2) The property also supports a use lawfully
attended by a Designated Offender's natural or
adopted child, for which a child's use reasonably
requires the attendance of the Designated Offender
as the child's parent upon the property, subject
to the following condition:
(a) The Designated Offender's entrance and
presence upon the property occurs only during
hours of activity related to the use, as
posted to the public, and only as reasonably
necessary in connection with such activity.
(3) The property also supports a polling location
in a local, state or federal election, subject to
all of the following conditions:
(a) The Designated Offender is eligible to
vote;
(b) The property is the designated polling
place for the Designated Offender; and
(c) The Designated Offender enters the
polling place property, proceeds to cast a
ballot with whatever usual and customary
assistance is available to any member of the
electorate, and vacates the property
immediately after the voting.
(4) The property also supports a school lawfully
attended by a Designated Offender as a student
under which circumstances the Designated Offender
may enter upon the property supporting the school
at which the Designated Offender is enrolled for
such purposes, and at such times, as are
reasonably required for the educational purposes
of the school.
(5) The property also supports a court,
government office or room for public governmental
meetings, subject to all of the following
conditions:
(a) The Designated Offender is on the
property only to transact business at the
government office or place of business, other
than a public library, or to attend an
official meeting of a governmental body; and
(b) The Designated Offender leaves the
property immediately upon completion of the
business or meeting.
(c) Prohibited Activity. It is unlawful for a
Designated Offender to participate in a Prohibited Activity.
34.06 PROPERTY OWNERS PROHIBITED FROM RENTING REAL PROPERTY
TO CERTAIN OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS; NOTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Property Owner Restrictions. It shall be unlawful
for any property owner to lease or rent any place, structure,
mobile home, trailer or any part thereof, with the knowledge that
it will be used as a Permanent Residence or Temporary Residence
by any person prohibited from establishing a Permanent Residence
or Temporary Residence therein pursuant to this chapter, if such
place, structure, mobile home, trailer or any part thereof is
located within a Prohibited Location of a Residence as defined in
§34.04(a).
(b) Notice to Sheriff. A Designated Offender, and any
property owner who leases or rents any place, structure, mobile
home, trailer or any part thereof, with the knowledge that it
will be used as a Permanent Residence or Temporary Residence by
any person who is a Designated Offender, must each notify the
Kenosha County Sheriff in writing a minimum of twenty-eight (28)
days prior to establishing either a Permanent Residence or
Temporary Residence within the Village. In addition, any property
owner who has leased or rented any place, structure, mobile home,
trailer or any part thereof as a Permanent Residence or Temporary
Residence by any person who is a Designated Offender, at any time
during a calendar year, shall report in writing to the Kenosha
County Sheriff as to the status of the leasing or renting by the
Designated Offender, including without limitation, the names of
all Designated Offenders who lease or rent any portion of such
place, structure, mobile home, trailer or any part thereof as of
December l of such calendar year, the remaining lease term under
the current lease for each Designated Offender, and if a
Designated Offender no longer leases or rents such place,
structure, mobile home, trailer or any part thereof, the date
said Designated Offender no longer leased or rented such place.
All such information shall be provided in writing to the Kenosha
County Sheriff on or before December 31 of each calendar year.
(c) Notice to Property Owner. A Designated Offender
shall tell any property owner from whom the Designated Offender
intends to lease or rent any place, structure, mobile home,
trailer or any part thereof, that the Designated Offender is a
Designated Offender as defined in §34.03, prior to entering into
any lease or rental arrangement.
34.07 EXCEPTION FOR PLACEMENTS UNDER CHAPTER 980 OF THE
WISCONSIN STATUTES.
To the extent required by Section 980.135 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, and notwithstanding the foregoing provisions
of this chapter, the Village of Paddock Lake hereby exempts and
may not enforce any portion thereof that restricts or prohibits a
sex offender from residing at a certain location or that
restricts or prohibits a person from providing housing to a sex
offender against an individual who is released under Wisconsin
Statutes Section 980.08, or against a person who provides housing
to such individual, so long as the individual is subject to
supervised release under Chapter 980 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
the individual is residing where he or she is ordered to reside
under Section 980.08 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and the
individual is in compliance with all court orders issued under
Chapter 980 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
34.08 SEVERABILITY.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid
for any reason, or be repealed, it shall not affect the validity
of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the
part so declared to be invalid or repealed.
34.09 INJUNCTION.
If a Designated Offender or property owner violates any
provision of this chapter the Village may, in addition to all
other rights and remedies allowed by law or this chapter, refer
the matter to an attorney chosen by the Village Administrator to
bring an action in the name of the Village in circuit court to
seek a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction or
permanent injunction against such Designated Offender or property
owner to prevent them from violating the terms of this chapter or
to take any action, or prevent any action, necessary for
compliance with the terms of this chapter.
34.10 PENALTIES.
Any person, firm or entity who violates any provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
forfeiture not to exceed One Thousand ($1,000.00) Dollars,
together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
thereof, shall be committed to jail for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days. Each violation and each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Neither the
issuance of a citation nor the imposition of a forfeiture
hereunder shall preclude the Village from seeking or obtaining
any and all legal and equitable remedies available by law or this
chapter.
34.11 CONTINUATION.
The provisions of this Chapter 34, insofar as they are
substantively the same as those of the ordinances in force
immediately prior to the enactment of the Chapter or amendments
hereto, are intended and hereby declared as a continuation of
such ordinances and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness
of such provisions shall be from the date of the first adoption
of such provisions.
Chapter 35
INTERIM ZONING IN EXTRATERRITORIAL AREAS
35.01 Interim Zoning--Town of Bristol
35.02 Extraterritorial Zoning--Town of Salem
35.01 INTERIM ZONING--TOWN OF BRISTOL.
(a) Intent and Purpose. Pursuant to §63.23(7a)(b) of
the Wisconsin Statutes, this interim zoning ordinance is enacted
to preserve existing land uses and to prohibit new uses in
certain territory within the Town of Bristol, Kenosha County,
Wisconsin, described below, which is within the village's
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, while a comprehensive
extraterritorial zoning plan for such territory is being
prepared.
(b) Application. This ordinance applies to the
following described land in the Town of Bristol, Kenosha County,
Wisconsin:
All of Section 6 and the North ½ of Section 7 in Town 1
North, Range 21 East, located in the Town of Bristol,
Kenosha County, State of Wisconsin.
(c) Land Uses Permitted/Prohibited. Land uses which
are not existing uses as of the effective date of this ordinance
are prohibited. Existing uses, as of the effective date of this
ordinance, may be continued.
(d) Land Uses. As of the effective date of this
ordinance, the Town of Bristol has adopted the zoning ordinance
of Kenosha County, Wisconsin. The official maps maintained by
the Office of Zoning Administrator, Kenosha County, Wisconsin,
showing all land uses which are existing as of the effective date
of this ordinance, within the land to which this ordinance
applies, shall be binding in determining existing land uses.
(e) Existing Land Use--Determination and Appeal. Any
interested party may request from the Village Building Inspector
a determination of whether a particular use of land was existing
as of the effective date of this ordinance. Any party aggrieved
by such determination may appeal the determination to the Village
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(f) Amendments. While the interim zoning ordinance is
in effect, the Village Board of Trustees may amend the district
and regulations of the ordinance according to the procedure set
forth in the Wisconsin Statutes.
(g) Building Permits. The Town of Bristol, if it
issued building permits upon the effective date of this
ordinance, may continue to do so, but the Village Building
Inspector shall approve such permits as to zoning prior to their
issuance.
(h) Enforcement. The Village Building Inspector shall
enforce this ordinance and the penalty and enforcement provisions
of the zoning ordinance shall be applicable hereto.
(i) Effective Period. This interim zoning ordinance
shall be effective for two (2) years unless rescinded by the
Village Board, superseded by an extraterritorial zoning ordinance
adopted pursuant to the Wisconsin Statutes or extended by the
Village Board for a period not to exceed one (1) year, pursuant
to the Wisconsin Statutes.
(j) Effective Date. This ordinance shall become
effective upon passage and publication. Within fifteen (15) days
after its passage, the Village Clerk shall publish this
ordinance, in a newspaper having general circulation in the area
proposed to be zoned, as a Class 1 Notice, under Chapter 985,
Wisconsin Statutes, and the Village Clerk shall mail a certified
copy of this ordinance to the Clerk of Kenosha County and to the
Clerk of the Town of Bristol and shall file a copy of this
ordinance with the Village Plan Commission.
35.02 EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING--TOWN OF SALEM.
(a) Intent and Purpose. Pursuant to §62.23(7a) of the
Wisconsin Statutes, this extraterritorial zoning ordinance is
enacted to preserve existing land uses and to prohibit new uses
in certain territory within the Town of Salem, Kenosha County,
Wisconsin, described below, which is within the Village's
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, while a comprehensive
extraterritorial zoning plan for such territory is being
prepared.
(b) Application. This ordinance applies to the
following described land in the Town of Salem, Kenosha County,
Wisconsin:
All of Sections 1, 3, 10, 11 and 12, the East ½ of
Section 4, and the Northeast ¼ of Section 9, and all of
Sections 13, 14 and 15 lying North of 89th Street (CTH
"AH"), all being in Township 1 North, Range 20 East of
the Fourth Principal Meridian, lying and being in the
Town of Salem, Kenosha County, Wisconsin.
(c) Land Uses Permitted/Prohibited. Land uses which
are not existing uses as of the effective date of this ordinance
are prohibited. Existing uses, as of the effective date of this
ordinance, may be continued.
(d) Land Uses. As of the effective date of this
ordinance, the Town of Salem has adopted the zoning ordinance of
Kenosha County, Wisconsin. The official maps maintained by the
Office of Zoning Administrator, Kenosha County, Wisconsin,
showing all land uses which are existing as of the effective date
of this ordinance, within the land to which this ordinance
applies, shall be binding in determining existing land uses.
(e) Existing Land Use--Determination and Appeal. Any
interested party may request from the Village Building Inspector
a determination of whether a particular use of land was existing
as of the effective date of this ordinance. Any party aggrieved
by such determination may appeal the determination to the Village
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(f) Amendments. While this extraterritorial zoning
ordinance is in effect, the Village Board of Trustees may amend
the district and regulations of the ordinance according to the
procedure set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes. Notice is hereby
given pursuant to §62.23(7a)(a), Stats., that the Village Board
of Trustees intends to prepare a comprehensive zoning ordinance
for all of the area described in subsection (b), above.
(g) Building Permits. The Town of Salem, if it issued
building permits upon the effective date of this ordinance, may
continue to do so, but the Village Building Inspector shall
approve such permits as to zoning prior to their issuance. Any
permits not so approved shall be deemed invalid. Pursuant to
§62.23(8), Stats., any building or improvement erected,
constructed or reconstructed in violation of this ordinance shall
be deemed an unlawful structure and the Village Building
Inspector or other official designated by the Village Board may
bring action to enjoin such erection, construction or
reconstruction, or cause such structure to be vacated or removed.
(h) Enforcement. The Village Building Inspector shall
enforce this ordinance and the penalty and enforcement provisions
of the zoning ordinance shall be applicable hereto.
(i) Effective Period. This extraterritorial zoning
ordinance shall be deemed an extension of the extraterritorial
zoning ordinance passed by the Village Board of Trustees on
October 17, 2001 and shall be effective for a period of one (1)
year unless superseded by an extraterritorial zoning ordinance
adopted pursuant to the Wisconsin Statutes.
(j) Effective Date. This ordinance shall become
effective upon passage and publication. Within fifteen (15) days
after its passage, the Village Clerk shall publish this
ordinance, in a newspaper having general circulation in the area
proposed to be zoned, as a Class 1 Notice, under Chapter 985,
Wisconsin Statutes, and the Village Clerk shall mail a certified
copy of this ordinance to the Clerk of Kenosha County and to the
Clerk of the Town of Salem and shall file a copy of this
ordinance with the Village Plan Commission.

Chapter 36
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
36.01 Title
36.02 Definitions
36.03 General
36.04 Applicability
36.05 Powers and Duties of Building Inspector
36.06 Approval of Alternative Materials, Methods
and Equipment
36.07 Violations
36.08 Notices and Orders
36.09 Unsafe, Unfit for Occupancy, Unlawfully
Occupied and Vacant Substandard Structures
and Unsafe Equipment Subject to Closing as a
Public Nuisance
36.10 Standards for Securing Structures
36.11 Emergency Measures
36.12 Razing Structures
36.13 General Property Maintenance Requirements
36.14 Exterior Premises
36.15 Exterior of Structures
36.16 Interior of Residential Structures
36.17 Waste Collection and Removal and Recycling
36.18 Extermination
36.19 Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations
36.20 Plumbing Systems Facilities and Fixture
Requirements
36.21 Mechanical and Electrical Facilities and
Equipment
36.22 Fire Safety Requirements
36.23 Reinspection Fees
36.24 Chronic Nuisance Property
36.25 Outdoor Wood Furnaces
36.26 Penalties
36.01 TITLE.
This Chapter of the Village of Paddock Lake Code of
General Ordinances shall be known as the "Property Maintenance
Ordinance” of the Village of Paddock Lake, Wisconsin, hereinafter
referred to as "this Ordinance" or “Ordinance”.
36.02 DEFINITIONS.
(a) General.
(1) Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated,
the following terms shall, for the purposes of
this Ordinance, have the meanings stated in this
Section.
(2) Interchangeability. Words stated in the
present tense include the future; words stated in
the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter; the singular number includes the plural;
and the plural includes the singular, except where
the context indicates another interpretation.
(3) Terms Defined Elsewhere. Where terms are not
defined in this Ordinance and are defined in other
Village Ordinances, State law, Codes, ASHRAE,
NFPA, or NEC such terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them therein.
(4) Terms Not Defined. Where terms are not
defined herein, or through the methods of
interpretation authorized by this Section, such
terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings as
the context indicates.
(5) Parts. Whenever the words structure,
accessory structure, dwelling unit, dwelling,
premises, building, lodging house, or lodging
room, are stated in this Ordinance, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the
words "or any part thereof".
(6) Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory and not
discretionary.
(7) May. The word "may" is permissive.
(8) Phrases. The phrase "used for" shall include
the phrases "arranged for", "designed for",
"intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied
for".
(9) Other Terms. Terms defined in other sections
of this Ordinance shall have the meaning stated
therein.
(b) General Definitions.
(1) Accessory Building/Structure. A detached
building or structure on the same lot, with and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal building or structure or use of the
land, e.g., a child’s playhouse, garden house,
greenhouse, garage, carport, shed, fence, or
retaining wall.
(2) Approved. Approved by the Building Inspector
under the provisions of this Ordinance or approved
by an authority designated by State law or this
Ordinance.
(3) Attractive Appearance. An appearance which
is in accordance with generally accepted
professional practices for new construction within
the Village and which is not likely to adversely
affect the values of the property in issue or of
abutting or neighborhood properties.
(4) Basement. That portion of a building which is
partly or completely below grade.
(5) Bathroom. A room containing plumbing fixtures
including a bathtub or shower.
(6) Bedroom. A room or space used or intended to
be used for sleeping purposes.
(7) Building. A combination of material to form
a construction that is safe, stable, and adapted
to permanent or continuous occupancy in accordance
with the State law, and the Code of General
Ordinances.
(8) Building Inspector. The Village of Paddock
Lake Building Inspector or any duly authorized
designee of the Building Inspector.
(9) Code of General Ordinances. Village of
Paddock Lake Code of General Ordinances.
(10) Commercial. Arranged, designed, used or
intended to be used for nonresidential occupancy.
(11) Condemn. To adjudge unfit for any occupancy.
(12) Dwelling. A place of abode, a residence, a
house or multiple dwelling units for use by one
(1) or more persons, including lodging houses, but
excluding hotels, motels, and tourist rooming
houses.
(13) Dwelling Unit. A single unit providing
complete, independent living facilities for one
(1) or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking
and sanitation.
(14) Effectively Screened. The use of any
acceptable screening materials that comply with
the requirements of the Code of General Ordinances
and which results in a screening that is at least
seventy-five (75%) percent opaque.
(15) Efficiency Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit
with separate bathroom and kitchen facilities.
Separate bedroom is optional.
(16) Egress Window. Shall have the meaning
provided in COMM 21.03 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(17) Exterior Premises. The open space on the
premises or the portion of the premises upon which
there is no structure.
(18) Exterior Storage. Storage of raw materials,
equipment parts, bulk commodities, or any other
items or materials used in business carried out on
the premises.
(19) Extermination. The control and elimination of
insects, rats, vermin or other pests by
controlling their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that serve as their
food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or
by any other approved pest elimination methods.
(20) Garbage. The animal or vegetable waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food.
(21) Good Repair. Free from blighting and
hazardous conditions, clean and sanitary, and in a
safe condition.
(22) Good Working Condition. Capable of performing
the task for which it was designed and in the
manner intended by this Ordinance.
(23) Habitable Space. Space in a structure for
living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms,
toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility
spaces, and similar areas are not considered
habitable spaces.
(24) Imminent Hazard. A condition which could
cause serious or life threatening injury or death
at any time.
(25) Impervious To Water. Constructed of concrete,
cement block, terrazzo, brick, tile or other
material having tight-fitting joints prohibiting
the movement of water and approved by the Building
Inspector.
(26) Infestation. The presence within or
contiguous to a structure or upon premises, of
insects, rats, vermin or other pests detrimental
to human health.
(27) Labeled. Devices, equipment, appliances, or
materials to which has been affixed a label, seal,
symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency
or other organization concerned with product
evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of
the production of the above labeled items and by
whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance
with applicable nationally recognized standards.
(28) Let For Occupancy Or Let. To permit, provide,
or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling,
dwelling unit, premise, or structure to a person
who is or is not the legal owner of record
thereof, pursuant to a written lease, or unwritten
agreement or license.
(29) Lodging House. A dwelling containing three
(3) or more lodging rooms.
(30) Lodging Room. A room, excluding hotel rooms,
within a lodging house let and used primarily for
the sleeping and living purposes of one (1)
person, which room may exclude cooking facilities
and sanitary facilities.
(31) Mixed Occupancy. Occupancy of a structure in
part for residential use and in part for some
other lawful use not accessory thereto within the
meaning of the Code of General Ordinances.
(32) Motor Vehicle(s). "Motor Vehicle(s)" shall
include mobile home, moped, motor bicycle,
motorbus, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motor
home, motor truck and motor vehicle as defined in
Chapter 340 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(33) Nonresidential. Arranged, designed, used or
intended to be used for occupancy which is not
residential in nature.
(34) Nuisance Boat(s) or Recreational Vehicle(s).
Any inoperable, unlicensed, unwaterworthy boat or
recreational vehicle.
(35) Nuisance Motor Vehicle(s). Any inoperable,
unlicensed, unroadworthy, disassembled or wrecked
motor vehicle. A vehicle for which a license has
been applied for shall be deemed a licensed
vehicle if proof of application is prominently
displayed on the front windshield.
(36) Occupancy. The use of a structure or
premises.
(37) Occupant. Any individual having lawful
occupancy, living, or sleeping or working in a
structure or having or exercising possession of a
space within a structure, whether or not a tenant.
(38) Openable Area. That part of a window,
skylight or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly
to the outdoors.
(39) Operator. Any person, other than the owner,
who has charge, care and control of a structure or
premises, including maintenance responsibility,
which is let or offered for occupancy.
(40) Owner. Any person having title to the
premises as recorded in the Office of the Register
of Deeds for Kenosha County, or as recorded in the
Village of Paddock Lake assessment rolls.
(41) Person. Any natural person, firm,
partnership, corporation, or legal entity.
(42) Premises. Any lot whether or not improved
with a principal or accessory building. When a lot
is improved with a structure, the lot and premises
shall be jointly referred to as premises.
(43) Provided. Furnished, supplied, paid for or
under control of the responsible person.
(44) Public Nuisance. Any unreasonable activity or
use of premises that interferes substantially with
the comfortable enjoyment of life, health and
safety of another or others.
(45) Residential. Arranged, designed, used or
intended to be used for residential occupancy.
(46) Responsible Person. The owner, operator or
manager of any structure or premises.
(47) Rodent Harborage. A place of shelter for
rodents, e.g., piles of rubbish, inoperable motor
vehicles, garbage.
(48) Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste
materials, except garbage. The term shall include
the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke
and other combustible materials, paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather,
tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other
similar materials.
(49) Screening. A hedge, wall or fence to provide
a visual separation and a physical barrier not
less than three (3’) feet in height, nor more than
six (6’) feet in height, unless otherwise provided
for in the Code of General Ordinances.
(50) Smoke Detector. A device which detects
particles or products of combustion other than
heat.
(51) State Laws. The laws, rules and regulations
of the State of Wisconsin.
(52) Structure. Any existing principal building,
whether or not inhabited or inhabitable, and any
existing accessory building, such as a garage,
which is not inhabited or inhabitable. Structure
may also be included within the meaning of
premises as indicated by the context.
(53) Tenant. A person occupying a premises under a
written lease, rental agreement or license, or
recognized under State law as having a month-tomonth
tenancy.
(54) Toilet Room. A room containing a water closet
or urinal, but not a bathtub or shower.
(55) Ventilation. The natural or mechanical
process of supplying conditioned or nonconditioned
air to, or removing such air from, any
space.
(56) Waste. “Waste” shall mean and include
garbage, ashes, rubbish and trash, but not of an
earthly or construction nature.
(57) Weeds. “Weeds” or “Noxious Weeds” shall mean
Canada Thistle, leafy spurge, field bindweed
(Creeping Jenny), Ambrosia trifida (commonly
called Giant Ragweed), Arubuoisia artemeslifla
(commonly called Common Ragweed), and such other
weeds as are defined in "Weeds of the North
Central States, North Central Regional Research
Publication No. 281, Bulletin 772", published by
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
College of Agriculture, Agricultural Experiment
Station.
(58) Workmanlike. Work executed in a skilled
manner, e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in
line, undamaged, without marring adjacent work in
accordance with generally accepted professional
procedures and construction standards.
(59) Yard. An open space on a lot improved with a
structure.
(60) Zoning Ordinance. Village of Paddock Lake
zoning ordinance.
36.03 GENERAL.
(a) Scope. The provisions of this Ordinance shall
apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures
and all premises and shall constitute minimum requirements and
standards for premises, structures, equipment, and facilities for
light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from
the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards,
and for safe and sanitary maintenance; determine the
responsibility of owners, operators, and occupants; regulate the
occupancy of existing structures and premises, provide for the
administration and enforcement of this Ordinance; and provide for
penalties for conviction of violation of this Ordinance.
(b) Intent. This Ordinance shall be construed to
secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health,
safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the occupancy
and maintenance of structures and premises. The establishment and
enforcement of minimum residential and nonresidential property
maintenance standards is necessary to preserve and promote the
public interest and protect private property. This includes,
among others, the protection of physical, aesthetic and monetary
values. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with
these provisions shall be altered or repaired by the responsible
person to provide compliance with this Ordinance.
(c) Severability.
(1) If any provision of this Ordinance is held to
be unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment
shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions of this Ordinance, which shall remain
in full force and effect.
(2) If the application of any provision of this
Ordinance is held to be an invalid application to
a particular premises or structure by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such provision shall
continue to apply and remain in full force and
effect to any premises or structure not
specifically included in said judgment.
36.04 APPLICABILITY.
(a) General. The provisions of this Ordinance shall
apply to all matters affecting or relating to existing structures
and to premises as set forth herein. Where, in a specific case,
different sections of this Ordinance specify different
requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. The provisions
of this Ordinance shall not apply to the construction of new
structures, which are subject to other State laws and Village
Ordinances.
(b) Conflict. In any case where a provision of this
Ordinance is found to be in conflict with a provision of State
law or the Code of General Ordinances, the provision which
established the higher standard for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare shall prevail.
(c) Responsibility for Maintenance. Except as
otherwise specified herein, each responsible person or tenant
where relevant, as designated herein, shall be responsible for
the maintenance of structures and premises under this Ordinance
and shall be subject to penalty for conviction of any violation
of this Ordinance.
(d) Prior Regulations. Equipment, systems, devices and
safeguards required by previous State laws, Zoning Ordinance or
Code of General Ordinances under which the structure was
constructed, altered or repaired or premises developed, shall be
maintained in good repair and in good working order. The
requirements of this Ordinance are not intended to provide the
basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety
systems and devices in good repair and in good working order in
structures.
(e) Application of Other Ordinances. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to authorize the use of a
structure or premises contrary to any other provision of the Code
of General Ordinances or the zoning ordinance. Repairs,
additions or alterations to a structure, shall be done in
accordance with the procedures and provisions of State laws,
Zoning Ordinance, and the Code of General Ordinances. Nothing in
this Ordinance shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside
any provision of the Zoning Ordinance.
(f) Existing Remedies. The provisions in this
Ordinances shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the Village or its officers or agencies under State
laws or the Code of General Ordinances relating to the removal or
demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and
unsanitary or the abatement of public nuisances.
(g) Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work,
alterations or installations which are caused directly or
indirectly by the enforcement of this Ordinance shall be executed
and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
(h) Historic Buildings. The provisions of this
Ordinance shall apply to structures designated by the Federal
Government or the State as historic buildings. Any work to said
structures shall also comply with COMM 70 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(i) Referenced Statutes, Ordinances, Codes and
Standards. The State laws, Ordinances, codes and standards
referenced in this Ordinance shall be incorporated herein by
reference and be a part of the requirements of this Ordinance to
the prescribed extent of each such reference and include
amendments, renumbering and successor acts.
(j) Requirements Not Covered By This Ordinance.
Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper
operation of an existing structure or equipment, or for the
public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically
covered by this Ordinance, shall be determined by the Building
Inspector.
36.05 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
(a) General. The Building Inspector shall administer
and enforce this Ordinance.
(b) Inspections. The Building Inspector has the power
to inspect premises and structures to determine compliance with
this Ordinance. All reports of such inspections shall be in
writing, signed or initialed and dated. The Building Inspector is
authorized after review with the Village Administrator to engage
such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual
technical issues that arise in the course of his/her duties.
(c) Right Of Entry. The Building Inspector is
authorized to enter structures or premises, at reasonable times,
with the express or implied consent of the owner, operator or
occupant, to conduct administrative interior and exterior
inspections for Ordinance administration and enforcement and for
purposes specified in the Code of General Ordinances. If entry is
refused or not obtained, the Building Inspector is authorized to
pursue recourse to obtain entry as provided by law.
(d) Obstruction. No owner, or operator of a premises
may deny the Building Inspector the right to enter and inspect
any portion thereof under the control of a lawful occupant where
such occupant has consented to said entry and inspection.
(e) Denial of Entrance. No occupant of a premises
shall obstruct the owner thereof from complying with any order(s)
of the Building Inspector made under authority of this Ordinance.
Obstruction shall include the denial of entrance into a premises
at reasonable times pursuant to reasonable notice.
(f) Identification. The Building Inspector shall carry
identification when entering and inspecting premises in the
performance of the duties under this Ordinance and display such
identification, when asked.
(g) Notices and Orders. The Building Inspector shall,
as necessary, issue notices and orders to responsible persons and
tenants, where relevant, to obtain compliance with this
Ordinance.
(h) Records. The Building Inspector is responsible for
keeping official records of all business and activities specified
in the provisions of this Ordinance in accordance with State and
Village record keeping requirements.
36.06 APPROVAL OF ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS, METHODS AND
EQUIPMENT.
(a) Modifications. Whenever there are practical
difficulties involved in achieving strict compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance, the Building Inspector shall have
the authority to grant modifications for individual cases,
provided the Building Inspector shall first find that special
individual reason makes enforcement of the strict letter of this
Ordinance impractical and the modification will be in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and that such
modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety
protections. The details of action granting such modifications
shall be recorded and entered in the Village records.
(b) Alternative Materials, Methods and Equipment. The
provisions of this Ordinance are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any method of
construction or equipment not specifically prescribed by this
Ordinance, provided that any such alternative has been approved
as hereinafter provided. An alternative material or method of
construction or equipment shall be approved where the Building
Inspector finds that the proposed alternative complies with the
intent of the provisions of this Ordinance, and that the
material, method, or equipment proposed is, for the purpose
intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this
Ordinance in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance,
durability and safety.
(c) Required Testing. Whenever there is insufficient
evidence of compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, or
evidence that a material, method or equipment does not conform to
the requirements of this Ordinance, or in order to substantiate
claims of suitability for alternative materials, methods, or
equipment, the Building Inspector shall have the authority to
require tests to be made by the owner or contractor at no expense
to the Village to determine compliance with this Ordinance.
36.07 VIOLATIONS.
(a) Violations. It shall be a violation of this
Ordinance for any responsible person or tenant, where relevant,
to fail to timely comply with any of the provisions of this
Ordinance.
(b) Notice of Violation. The Building Inspector shall
serve a notice of violation and order to repair in accordance
with this Ordinance.
(c) Prosecution of Violation. If the order to repair
is not complied with in a timely manner, the Building Inspector
shall initiate the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, and to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the premises.
36.08 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
(a) Notice of Violation and Order To Repair. Whenever
the Building Inspector determines that there has been a violation
of this Ordinance, notice shall be given to the responsible
person or tenant, where applicable, in the manner and form
prescribed in this Ordinance.
(b) Form. Such notice and order shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the violation with
reference to the applicable provision(s) of this
Ordinance.
(3) Contain an order to repair and allow a
reasonable date certain for the violation to be
corrected.
(c) Method of Service. Such notice and order shall be
deemed to be properly served if a copy is:
(1) Personally served in the manner provided for
in the State Statutes for service of process; or,
(2) Sent by certified mail addressed to the last
known address; or,
(3) Sent by U.S. first class mail, postage
prepaid, addressed to the last known address; and,
(4) Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the
main entrance to the structure, where there is a
structure.
(d) Recurring Violations. Whenever there has been a
notice of violation and order issued to the responsible person or
tenant, where relevant, for a violation of this Ordinance, no
further notice and order shall be necessary for any reoccurrence
of the same or similar violation prior to the commencement of any
forfeiture action or prior to seeking an injunction in a court of
record.
36.09 UNSAFE, UNFIT FOR OCCUPANCY, UNLAWFULLY OCCUPIED AND
VACANT SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES AND UNSAFE EQUIPMENT SUBJECT TO
CLOSING AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
(a) Definitions. The following words and phrases shall
have the following meaning:
(1) Unsafe Structure. A structure that endangers
safety for reasons that it is in imminent danger
of failure or collapse, or a part of it has failed
or collapsed, or it is in a condition of decay or
dilapidation, or it has the presence of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, toxic
fumes, gases or materials, or it is the subject of
the operation of equipment causing or contributing
to an unsafe condition.
(2) Structure Unfit For Occupancy. A structure
which is an unsafe structure; or, a structure
which is unfit for habitation, occupancy or use
because of the degree to which the structure is
dilapidated, in disrepair or lacks maintenance;
or, a structure which is unsanitary, vermin or rat
infested, contains filth and contamination; or a
structure which lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities, or other essential
equipment required by this Ordinance and the Code
of General Ordinances.
(3) Unsafe Equipment. Any equipment within the
structure or servicing the structure which is in
such disrepair or condition that such equipment is
unsafe for operation and use.
(4) Unlawful Structure. A structure in whole, or
in part, occupied by more persons than permitted
under this Ordinance, or a structure which is
erected, altered or occupied contrary to State
law, or the Code of General Ordinances.
(5) Vacant Substandard Structure. A vacant
structure that has been damaged by fire, water,
wind, animals, or vandalized and/or entered and
inhabited and unfit for habitation or occupancy.
(6) Endanger(s) Safety. To threaten to or to
injure or damage any person or property, or the
life, health and safety of any person.
(7) Equipment. All piping, ducts, vents, control
devices and other components of systems that are
permanently installed and integrated in the
structure to provide control of environmental
conditions, plumbing, electrical and heating
systems, and other systems specifically regulated
in this Ordinance. Equipment does not include
appliances.
(8) Close/Closed/Closing. To vacate, cease
operation or use, and/or secure.
(9) Emergency Measures. To vacate, secure or
temporarily repair a structure or close public
streets, sidewalks, ways and places due to a
public nuisance which imminently endangers safety.
(10) Open and Accessible Structure. A structure
which has no barrier to unlawful entry.
(b) Public Nuisance. When any structure is found by
the Building Inspector to be unsafe or unfit for occupancy,
unlawful, or vacant substandard, such structure is deemed a
public nuisance which may be closed to habitation, occupancy and
use pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance. When equipment
is found by the Building Inspector to be unsafe for operation and
use, such unsafe equipment is deemed a public nuisance which may
cause the building to be closed to use pursuant to the provisions
of this Ordinance.
(c) Prohibition. No person or party may maintain or
permit a structure or equipment to be a public nuisance within
the Village.
(d) Securing An Open and Accessible Structure. An
open and accessible structure which endangers safety is deemed a
public nuisance. The responsible person shall, upon written or
verbal notice from the Building Inspector secure an open and
accessible structure in accordance with the standards for
securing structures set forth in this Ordinance.
36.10 STANDARDS FOR SECURING STRUCTURES.
(a) Boarding. Any vacant or inhabited structure
deemed a public nuisance under this Ordinance and requiring
securing shall be secured as follows:
(1) At least one (1) door boarded and secured at
the grade level shall be maintained with locks and
hinges to permit entry for inspection purposes.
(2) All doors and windows on ground level and
those doors and windows accessible to grade by
stairs or permanently fixed ladders within ten
(10’) feet of grade shall be boarded and secured.
(3) Boards shall be cut to fit door and window
openings, and screws at least two (2") inches in
length shall be used to fasten boards to the
structure. One-half (½") inch or three-quarter
(3/4") inch wood or plywood shall be used.
(4) The boarded material shall be painted to
match the trim or siding color of the structure or
be painted flat white.
(5) Alternate methods of boarding may be
permitted upon written approval by the Building
Inspector.
(b) Fencing. When any structure has been damaged by
fire, water, illegal entry, or other cause; when hazardous or
dangerous conditions exist; and, when such structure cannot be
secured by conventional locking or boarding up windows and doors,
such structure shall be fenced off so as to prevent access and
entry to the structure and the area immediately surrounding the
structure within twenty-four (24) hours of the damage.
(c) Prohibition. No person or party shall board or
fence a structure contrary to the standards contained in this
Ordinance.
(d) Special Assessments. In the event the responsible
person fails to comply with an order of the Building Inspector to
secure the structure in accordance with the standards for
securing structures set forth in this Ordinance, the Building
Inspector shall have the structure properly secured. Costs
incurred in securing the structure shall be paid by the Village
and the Building Inspector shall recover such costs through
special assessments levied against the benefitted property. A
One Hundred ($100.00) Dollar administrative fee for processing
and administering the special assessment shall be added to the
special assessment against the benefitted property.
36.11 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
(a) Emergency Closing of a Structure. When, in the
opinion of the Building Inspector, a structure or unsafe
equipment is a public nuisance under this Ordinance, and there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a structure, or a part
of any structure has fallen and the occupation of the remaining
structure will endanger safety, or there is actual or potential
danger to the occupants, users or those in the proximity of any
structure, the Building Inspector is authorized and empowered to
order and require the responsible person to close the structure
forthwith. The Building Inspector shall, in such event, cause
such structure to be placarded at each entrance with a placard
bearing the words: “Unfit For Habitation/Occupancy”.
In the event the Building Inspector has required a
structure to be closed, it shall be unlawful for any person to
enter, inhabit, occupy or use such structure, except for the
purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs,
removing the hazardous condition, demolishing the structure, or
otherwise securing compliance with an order of the Building
Inspector.
(b) Emergency Securing and Repairs. Notwithstanding
any other provisions of this Ordinance, in the event the Building
Inspector has required the emergency closing of a structure, or
identified an open and accessible structure which endangers
safety, the Building Inspector may cause the securing of the
structure to render such structure temporarily safe, whether or
not the procedure described in this Ordinance for providing
notices and orders has been instituted and shall cause such other
reasonable action to be taken as the Building Inspector deems
necessary to meet such emergency. The Building Inspector may also
employ the necessary labor and materials to perform or cause to
be performed emergency repairs as expeditiously as possible.
36.12 RAZING STRUCTURES.
(a) Definitions. The following words and phrases shall
have the following meaning:
(1) Structure. Includes any portion of a
structure.
(2) Raze the Structure. To demolish and remove
the structure and to restore the site to a dustfree
and erosion-free condition.
(3) Condemn. The process of issuing a raze order
and razing a structure.
(b) Administration and Enforcement. The Building
Inspector is authorized to administer and enforce Section 66.0413
of the Wisconsin Statutes, entitled Razing Buildings, which is
incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth herein,
and any successor statutes.
(c) Raze Order.
(1) The Building Inspector may issue a raze
order:
(a) If a structure is old, dilapidated, or
out of repair and consequently dangerous,
unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise unfit for
human habitation and unreasonable to repair,
order the owner of the structure to raze the
structure; or, if the structure can be made
safe by reasonable repairs, order the owner
to either make the structure safe and
sanitary, or to raze the structure at the
owner's option.
(b) If there has been a cessation of normal
construction of a structure for a period of
more than two (2) years, order the owner of
the structure to raze the structure.
(2) The raze order shall identify:
(a) The basis for the raze order.
(b) The time for compliance.
(d) Service of Order. A raze order shall be
considered served on the owner of record of the structure that is
subject to the order, or on the owner's agent if the agent is in
charge of the structure, in the same manner as a summons is
served in circuit court. A raze order shall be served on the
holder of an encumbrance of record by first class mail at the
holder's last known address and by publication as a Class 1
notice under Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes. If the owner
or owner's agent cannot be found, or if the owner and the owner's
agent is deceased and an estate has not been opened, the raze
order may be served by posting it on the main entrance of the
structure and by publishing it as a Class 1 notice under Chapter
985 of the Wisconsin Statutes, before the time limited in the
raze order begins to run. The time limited in the raze order
begins to run from the date of service on the owner or owner's
agent; or, if the owner or owner's agent cannot be found, from
the date that the raze order was posted on the structure.
(e) Effect of Recording Order. If a raze order is
recorded with the Kenosha County Register of Deeds, the raze
order is considered to have been served as of the date the raze
order is recorded on any person claiming an interest in the
structure or the real estate as a result of a conveyance from the
owner of record, unless the conveyance was recorded before the
recording of the raze order.
(f) Failure to Comply With the Raze Order. If the
owner of a structure fails or refuses to comply with the raze
order within the time prescribed, the Building Inspector may
proceed to post the property as unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use, secure the structure, and raze the structure or
contract with a private contractor for such work.
(g) Special Assessments. The Building Inspector shall
recover all costs to condemn and raze the structure through
special assessments levied and to be collected as a delinquent
tax against the real estate upon which the structure is located.
Such special assessment shall be a lien upon the real estate. A
One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars administrative fee for processing
and administering the special assessment shall be added to the
special assessment against the benefitted property.
36.13 GENERAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Scope. The provisions of this Ordinance shall
govern the minimum requirements and the responsibilities of
persons for maintenance of premises including existing
structures, exterior premises and equipment whether occupied or
vacant.
(b) Responsibility. The responsible persons shall
maintain their premises in compliance with this Ordinance. A
person shall not occupy a premises, or permit another person to
occupy a premises which does not comply with the requirements of
this Ordinance. Occupants, including owner occupants and tenants,
of a premises are responsible for caring for and maintaining that
part of the premises which they occupy and control, including
garages, fences, and accessory buildings. All responsible
persons shall be jointly and severally responsible for securing
compliance of their premises with this Ordinance.
36.14 EXTERIOR PREMISES.
All exterior premises shall be maintained by the
responsible person or tenant, where relevant, in accordance with
this Section.
(a) Clean, Sanitary and Reasonably Safe.
(1) In a clean and sanitary condition, free from
debris.
(2) Free from recyclable materials.
(3) Free from nuisance motor vehicles, nuisance
boats, scrap metals, and all household furniture
not designed for outdoor use.
(4) In a condition so as not to become infested
with rodents or a rodent harborage.
(5) Free from used building materials.
(6) Free from animal feces which were present for
more than twenty-four (24) hours.
(7) Free from physical hazards.
(8) Free from appliances, furnaces, water
heaters, water softeners or building materials
which are not integrated into a structure within
five (5) days of being placed on the premises.
(9) Free from any accumulation of combustible
materials which are not used as an integral part
of an authorized business carried out on the
premises.
(10) Free of any raw materials, equipment parts,
or bulk commodities, unless said items are a raw
material used in a lawful business carried out on
the premises or a final manufactured product.
(11) Free from motor vehicle, boat or aircraft
parts and tires, excluding tires used as
sandboxes, swings, and playground equipment.
(b) Unpaved Lawn Park Areas. The unpaved public lawn
park areas abutting private property between the curb and lot
line shall be maintained by the abutting property owner.
(c) Grading and Drainage. All premises shall be graded
and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure
located thereon. All courts, yards or other areas on the premises
shall be properly graded to divert water away from the structure.
Adjacent ground surface shall be sloped away from the structure
with a grading of at least one-half (½") inch per foot for a
minimum of five (5’) feet where possible or by other means such
as eaves, troughs and downspout extensions. Approved retention
and detention basins shall be permitted to hold water in
accordance with their approved design and capacity.
(d) Weeds. All exterior premises shall be kept free
from weeds. Weeds which equal or exceed eight (8 ) inches in
height shall be destroyed by cutting.
(e) Landscaping. Landscaping, plantings and other
decorative surface treatments, including species of grass common
to southeastern Wisconsin, shall be installed and maintained so
as to present an attractive appearance in all yard areas.
Plantings, including, but not limited to grasses, trees and
shrubs shall be maintained so as not to present hazards to
persons or vehicles traveling on public right-of-ways and shall
be maintained so as to enhance the appearance and value of the
property on which located, and thereby enhancing the appearance
and value of abutting property.
(f) Firewood Storage. Firewood, for personal use only,
may be kept on residentially zoned or used property. It shall be
stored in straight, orderly piles which are raised a minimum of
six (6") inches off the ground, which are not more than six (6’)
feet in height, and which are not in the "front yard".
(g) Exterior Storage. Exterior storage is subject to
all required Village reviews, approvals and permits. Exterior
storage in business zoning districts shall be screened in
accordance with requirements of a conditional use permit and the
Zoning Ordinance. All required screening shall be maintained in
good repair. Exterior storage is prohibited on residentially
zoned or used property, unless specifically granted by
conditional use permit.
(h) Rodent Harborage. All premises shall be kept free
from non-domesticated rodent harborage. Where non-domesticated
rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by a State
approved process which will not be injurious to human health.
After rodent extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
control rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation.
(i) Exhaust Vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans,
blowers or other exhaust vents shall not discharge gases, steam,
vapor, hot air, grease, smoke odors or other gaseous or
particulate wastes directly upon public or private property or
that of another tenant on the same premises.
(j) Accessory Buildings/Structures. All accessory
buildings and structures, including windows and doors which are a
part thereof, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
(k) Graffiti. The owner of any building or accessory
building shall be responsible for removing all graffiti therefrom
within fifteen (15) days of graffiti placement.
36.15 EXTERIOR OF STRUCTURES.
The exterior of a structure shall be maintained by the
responsible person in accordance with this Section.
(a) Exterior Walls, Surfaces and Repairs. All exterior
walls and surfaces, including, but not limited to, decorative
features and overhang extensions, doors, door and window frames,
cornices, porches and trim, shall be maintained in good repair.
All exterior surfaces shall be free from decay, missing parts,
serious cracking, irregularities, and peeling, flaking and
chipped paint. Flaking and chipping paint, when removed, shall be
collected and stored in containers and disposed of in accordance
with Federal and State law. Exterior wood surfaces, other than
decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and
decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment.
Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and
affected surfaces treated and repainted in a workmanlike manner.
All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and
skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and watertight.
All surface repairs shall be completed to closely match the
existing surface color and texture.
(b) Street Numbers. All dwellings or buildings in the
Village shall be numbered in accordance with the requirements of
Land Information of Kenosha County, to be such colors so as to
contrast with any background surfaces and shall be of sufficient
size, not less than four (4") inches high, to be clearly read
from the street.
(c) Structural Members. All structural members shall
be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, and be capable
of safely supporting the imposed loads.
(d) Foundation Walls. All foundation walls shall be
maintained structurally sound, plumb and free from open cracks
and breaks, in good repair, and shall be kept in such condition
so as to prevent the entry of rodents.
(e) Exterior Walls. All exterior walls shall be
maintained structurally sound, free from holes, breaks, loose or
rotting materials, in good repair, and maintained weatherproof.
(f) Roofs and Drainage. The roof and flashing shall be
maintained structurally sound, tight and not have defects that
admit water. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness
or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be
maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water
shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public
nuisance.
(g) Decorative Features. All cornices, belt courses,
corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative
features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage
and in a safe condition. Any missing parts shall be replaced with
matching parts.
(h) Overhang Extensions. All canopies, marquees,
signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and
similar overhang extensions shall be maintained structurally
sound and in good repair with proper anchorage.
(i) Stairways, Decks, Porches, Ramps and Balconies.
Every exterior stairway, deck, porch, ramp, and balcony, and all
appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally
sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of
supporting the imposed loads. Any new or replacement stairways,
decks, porches, ramps and balconies shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of the Code of General
Ordinances and State law.
(j) Chimneys and Towers. All chimneys, cooling
towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances shall be maintained
structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed
surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements
and against decay or rust by periodic application of weathercoating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
(k) Handrails and Guardrails. Every stairway, deck,
porch, ramp and balcony with more than three (3) risers or more
than twenty-four (24") inches above grade, shall have handrails
and guardrails installed. Every handrail and guardrail shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair with proper
anchorage, and capable of supporting imposed loads.
(l) Windows, Storm Windows, Skylight, Door and Frames.
Every window, storm window, skylight, door and frame shall be
kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight.
(m) Glazing. All window glazing materials shall be
maintained free from cracks and holes.
(n) Openable Windows. Every window, other than a fixed
window, shall be easily openable, capable of being held in
position by existing window hardware, and have locking devices in
good repair and good working order.
(o) Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and
hardware shall be maintained in good working condition and in
good repair.
(p) Guards For Basement Windows. Every basement
window that is operable shall have storm windows or other
approved protection against the entry of rodents, in good working
condition and in good repair.
36.16 INTERIOR OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall
be maintained by the responsible person in compliance with this
Section.
(a) Interior Wall, Ceiling and Floor Surfaces and
Repairs. All interior wall, ceiling and floor surfaces,
including, but not limited to, windows and doors, shall be
maintained in good repair. All surfaces shall be free from
serious cracking, irregularities and peeling, flaking and chipped
paint.
(b) Structural Members. All structural members shall
be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, and be capable
of supporting the imposed loads.
(c) Toilet Room Compartment and Bathroom Flooring.
Every toilet room floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall
be properly constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably
impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(d) Stairs and Walking Surfaces. All interior stairs
and railings, ramps, balconies, porches, decks and other walking
surfaces shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition,
in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting
the imposed loads.
(e) Handrails and Guardrails. Every handrail and
guardrail shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair,
with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed
loads.
(f) Interior Doors. Every interior door shall fit
reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being
opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to
jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the
attachment hardware.
36.17 WASTE COLLECTION AND REMOVAL AND RECYCLING.
(a) General. Every exterior premises shall be
maintained to be free from any accumulation of waste, except for
temporary collection disposed on a weekly basis.
(b) Disposal. The responsible person or tenant, where
applicable, for every premises shall be responsible for waste
collection and removal and recycling.
(c) Removal of Debris.
(1) No person shall dispose of rocks, trees,
stumps, waste, building material or other debris
from land development, building construction,
street grading, or installation of underground
utilities, upon the surface of any land in the
Village except at approved disposal sites.
(2) No responsible person for any premises shall
allow an accumulation of rocks, trees, stumps,
waste, building material or other debris from land
development, building construction, street grading
under owner's control, or installation of
underground utilities under owner's control upon
the surface of their premises for a period of more
than ten (10) days.
(3) All fill dirt shall be leveled off to permit
mowing or the use of a weed wacker for weeds
between May 15 and November 1. Stones, bottles,
wire, and other debris that will interfere with
mowing operations shall be removed.
36.18 EXTERMINATION.
(a) Infestation. All premises shall be kept free from
insect and rodent infestation. All premises in which insects,
rats, vermin and other pests are found shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall
be taken to prevent reinfestation.
(b) Responsibility for Extermination. The responsible
person for any premises shall be responsible for extermination.
(c) Extermination. All extermination services
performed for others shall be performed by a licensed
exterminator.
36.19 LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS.
(a) General.
(1) Scope. The provisions of this Section shall
provide the minimum requirements and standards for
light, ventilation and occupancy limitations for
structures.
(2) Responsibility. The responsible person shall
provide and maintain light, ventilation and
occupancy limitations in compliance with this
Section.
(3) Prohibition. A person shall not occupy, or
permit another person to occupy any structure that
does not comply with the requirements of the Code
of General Ordinances.
(4) Alternative Devices. In lieu of the means for
natural light and ventilation herein prescribed,
artificial light or mechanical ventilation
complying with the Code of General Ordinances
shall be permitted.
(b) Light.
(1) Habitable Spaces. Every habitable space shall
have at least one (1) window of a size required by
the Code of General Ordinances and State law
facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The
minimum total window pane areas for every
habitable space shall be eight (8%) percent of the
floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other
portions of a structure face a window of any room
and such obstructions are located less than three
(3’) feet from the window and extend to a level
above that of the ceiling of the room, such window
shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors nor to a court, and shall not be included
as contributing to the required minimum total
window area for the room.
Where natural light for rooms or spaces without
exterior window pane areas is provided through an
adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the
adjoining room shall be at least eight (8%)
percent of the floor area of the interior room or
space, but not less than twenty-five (25) square
feet. The exterior window pane area shall be based
on the total floor area being served.
(2) Other Spaces. All other spaces shall be
provided with natural or artificial light
sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary
conditions, the safe occupancy of the space, and
the safe use of the appliances, equipment and
fixtures.
(c) Ventilation.
(1) Habitable Spaces. Every habitable space
shall have at least one (1) openable window. The
total openable area of the window in every room
shall be equal to the natural ventilation required
by State law.
(2) Bathrooms and Toilet Rooms. Every bathroom
and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation
requirements for habitable spaces as required by
State law.
(3) Clothes Dryer Venting Systems. Clothes dryer
venting systems shall be independent of all other
systems and shall be vented in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions.
36.20 PLUMBING SYSTEMS FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS.
(a) General.
(1) Scope. The provisions of this Section shall
govern the minimum requirements and standards for
plumbing systems, facilities and fixtures in
structures.
(2) Responsibility. The responsible person of the
structure shall provide and maintain plumbing
systems facilities, and fixtures in compliance
with the Code of General Ordinances and State law.
(3) Prohibition. A person shall not occupy or
permit another person to occupy any structure that
does not comply with the requirements of this
Section.
(4) Maintaining Sanitary Sewer and Water Service.
No responsible person shall cause any sanitary
sewer or water service to be removed from or shut
off from or discontinued for any occupied
dwelling, dwelling unit or lodging room, except
for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while actual repairs are in process, or
during temporary emergencies beyond the control of
the responsible person.
(5) Maintaining Fixtures. Every occupant of a
dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation
thereof.
(b) Required Facilities.
(1) Dwelling Units. Every dwelling unit shall
contain its own bathtub or shower, toilet,
bathroom sink and kitchen sink which shall be
maintained by the responsible person in good
repair, in good working condition, and in a
sanitary condition.
(c) Toilet Rooms and Bathrooms.
(1) Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall
provide privacy and shall not constitute the only
passageway to a hall or other space, or to the
exterior.
(d) Plumbing Systems and Fixtures.
(1) General. All plumbing systems and fixtures
shall be properly installed in good repair, in
good working condition, and shall be kept free
from obstructions, leaks and defects and be
capable of performing the function for which such
plumbing fixtures are designed.
(2) Fixture Clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall
have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning.
(3) Plumbing System Hazards. Where it is found
that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes
a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting,
cross-connection, backsiphonage, improper
installation, deterioration or damage or for
similar reasons, the Building Inspector shall
require the defects to be corrected to eliminate
the hazard.
(e) Water Supply System.
(1) General. Every sink, bathtub or shower,
drinking fountain, water closet, laundry facility
or other plumbing fixture shall be properly
connected to either a public water supply system
or to a State or Village approved private water
system and shall be supplied with hot or tempered
and cold running water in accordance with the Code
of General Ordinances and State law.
(2) Free From Contamination. The water supply
shall be maintained free from contamination, and
all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be
located above the flood level rim of the fixture.
Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets, and
other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are
attached and left in place, shall be protected by
an approved atmospheric type vacuum breaker or an
approved permanently attached hose connection
vacuum breaker.
(3) Supply. The water supply system shall be
installed and maintained to provide a supply of
water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at
pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to
function properly, safely, and free from defects
and leaks.
(4) Water Heating Facilities. Every dwelling unit
shall have water heating facilities properly
installed in good repair, proper working
condition, and maintained and capable of providing
an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every
required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, water
closet and laundry facility at a temperature of
not less than 110°F. (49°C). A gas-burning water
heater shall not be located in any bathroom,
toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room
normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion
air is provided. An approved combination
temperature and pressure relief valve and relief
valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed
and maintained on water heaters.
(f) Sanitary Sewer and Treatment System.
(1) General. All plumbing fixtures shall be
properly connected to either a public sewer and
treatment system or to a State or Village approved
private sewage treatment system.
(2) Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent,
waste and sewer line shall be maintained in good
repair, good working condition and function as
designed and be kept free from obstructions and
leaks.
36.21 MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT.
(a) General.
(1) Scope. The provisions of this Section shall
govern the minimum requirements and standards for
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment
in structures.
(2) Responsibility. The responsible person of the
structure shall provide and maintain mechanical
and electrical facilities and equipment in
compliance with this Section.
(3) Prohibition. A person shall not occupy or
permit another person to occupy any structure that
does not comply with the requirements of this
Ordinance. No responsible person shall cause any
mechanical or electrical service, facility or
equipment which is required under this Ordinance
to be removed from, shut off from or discontinued
from any occupied dwelling, dwelling unit or
lodging room let or occupied by him/her, except
for temporary interruption as may be necessary
while actual repairs are in process, or during
such temporary emergencies when discontinuance of
service is approved by the Building Inspector.
(b) Heating Facilities and Equipment.
(1) Facilities and Equipment Required. Heating
facilities and equipment shall be provided in
structures as required by this Section.
(2) Residential Occupancies. Dwellings and
dwelling units shall be provided with heating
facilities and equipment capable of maintaining a
room temperature of 68°F in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms when the outside
temperature is at or above 0°F, and 60°F when the
outside temperature is below 0°F.
(3) Heat Supply. Every responsible person for any
structure who rents one (1) or more dwelling
units, lodging units on terms, either expressed or
implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof,
shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not
less than 68°F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms,
and toilet rooms when the outside temperature is
at or above 0°F, and 60°F when the outside
temperature is below 0°F.
(4) Central Heating System Requirements. Every
central heating system shall comply with State
law. It shall also comply with the following
requirements:
(a) The central heating system shall be in
good repair and proper working condition.
(b) Every heat duct, steampipe and hot water
pipe shall be free of leaks and shall
function so that an adequate amount of heat
is delivered where intended.
(c) Every seal between the sections of a
warm air furnace shall be tight so noxious
gases will not escape into heat ducts.
(5) Space Heaters. Every space heater shall
comply with State law. It shall also comply with
the following requirements:
(a) No space heater burning solid, liquid or
gaseous fuels shall be a portable type.
(b) Every space heater burning solid, liquid
or gaseous fuels shall be properly vented in
accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
(c) Every coal burning or oil burning space
heater shall have a fire resistant panel
beneath it.
(d) The location of space heaters, the
insulation of walls and ceilings close to
such heaters and the construction,
installation and guarding of smokepipes and
walls or ceilings through which they pass
shall meet the requirements of applicable
State law and the Code of General Ordinances.
(c) Fuel Burning Appliances.
(1) Definition. “Fuel Burning Appliances” shall
mean and include non-electrical stoves and food
preparation devices, water heaters and fireplaces,
and all components and accessories therefor, which
burn natural gas, LP gas, wood or other
combustible materials.
(2) Installation and Maintenance. All fuelburning
appliances shall be properly installed
and maintained in good repair, in good working
condition, and shall be capable of performing the
intended function.
(3) Prohibited Use. Fuel burning appliances shall
not be used to meet the heating requirements of
this Ordinance.
(4) Venting. All fuel burning appliances shall be
connected to an approved chimney or vent, except
for appliances which are approved by the
manufacturer for unvented operation.
(5) Clearances. All manufacturer required
clearances for fuel burning appliances shall be
maintained.
(6) Safety Controls. All safety controls for
fuel burning appliances shall be maintained in
good repair, good working condition and be capable
of performing the intended function.
(7) Combustion Air. A supply of air for complete
combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the
space containing the fuel burning appliance shall
be provided.
(8) Energy Conservation Devices. Devices intended
to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a
fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line
thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping
therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled
by the manufacturer for such purpose and the
installation is specifically approved by the
manufacturer.
(d) Electrical Facilities.
(1) Facilities Required. Every occupied
structure shall be provided with an electrical
system in compliance with the requirements of this
Section.
(2) Service. Every dwelling and dwelling unit
shall be served by a main service that is not less
than sixty (60) amperes, three (3) wires and
protected with fusetate fuses or circuit breakers.
The size and usage of electrical appliances shall
serve as a basis for determining the need for
additional facilities in accordance with NFPA 70
and the National Electrical Code.
(3) Electrical System Hazards. Where it is found
that the electrical system in a structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the
structure by reason of inadequate service,
improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper
wiring or installation, deterioration or damage,
or for similar reasons, the Building Inspector
shall require the defects to be corrected to
eliminate the hazard.
(e) Electrical Equipment.
(1) Installation. All electrical equipment,
wiring and appliances shall be properly installed
and maintained in good repair, in good working
condition and be capable of performing the
intended function.
(2) Convenience Outlets. Convenience outlets are
to be located to prevent use of extension cords in
accordance with National Electrical Code (NEC)
400-8 and Comm 16 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code. All extension cords, temporary wiring and
exposed or abandoned wiring shall be removed.
(3) Lighting fixtures. Every toilet compartment,
bathroom, laundry room, boiler room, furnace room
and public hall shall contain at least one (1)
supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light
fixture. Every kitchen shall have at least three
(3) receptacles on two (2) small appliance
circuits, plus a light fixture on a general
lighting circuit. Any new kitchen receptacle
outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter
protection.
36.22 FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
(a) General.
(1) Scope. The provisions of this Section shall
provide the minimum requirements and standards for
fire safety relating to structures and premises,
including fire safety facilities and equipment to
be provided.
(2) Enforcement.
(a) Building Inspector. The Building
Inspector or his designee who may include a
member(s) of the Salem Fire Department shall
be responsible for enforcing the requirements
of this Ordinance in one and two-family
dwellings and in the individual units located
in multi-family units containing three (3) or
more units.
(3) Responsibility. The responsible person of the
premises shall provide and maintain fire safety
facilities and equipment in compliance with this
Section.
(4) Prohibition. A person shall not occupy or
permit another person to occupy any premises that
does not comply with the requirements of this
Section.
(b) Means Of Egress.
(1) General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed
path of travel shall be provided from any point in
a structure to an open public street, alley or
court connected to a street.
(2) Exit Capacity. The capacity of the exits
serving a floor shall be sufficient for the
occupants.
(3) Arrangement. Exits from dwellings, dwelling
units, and lodging units shall not lead through
other such units, or through toilet rooms or
bathrooms.
(4) Security. Bars, grilles or screens placed
over emergency escape windows shall be releasable
or removable from the inside without the use of a
key, tool or force greater than that which is
required for normal operation of the window.
(c) Unobstructed Passageways.
(1) Egress. Stairways, passageways, doors,
windows, fire escapes or other means of egress
shall be kept open and unobstructed. Exterior
exits shall be unobstructed.
(2) Hazardous Material. Combustible, flammable,
explosive or other hazardous materials, such as
paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or
combustible rubbish, such as wastepaper, boxes and
rags, shall not be accumulated or stored unless
such storage complies with the applicable
requirements of State law and the Code of General
Ordinances.
(d) Fire Resistance Ratings.
(1) General. The fire resistance rating of
floors, walls, ceilings, and other elements and
components required by State law shall be
maintained.
(2) Fire Doors and Smoke Barriers. All required
fire doors and smoke barriers shall be maintained
in good working order, including all hardware
necessary for the proper operation thereof. Fire
doors shall not be held open by door stops, wedges
and other unapproved hold-open devices.
(e) Fire Protection Systems.
(1) General. All systems, devices and equipment
to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or
control a fire, or any combination thereof, shall
be maintained in good working condition and be
capable of performing their intended function.
(2) Smoke Detectors. The responsible person of a
dwelling, dwelling unit and lodging room shall
install a functional smoke detector as required by
State law and the Code of General Ordinances.
36.23 REINSPECTION FEES.
To compensate the Village for inspection and
administrative costs related to the enforcement of this
Ordinance, there shall be charged to the property owner, a
reinspection fee for each inspection following the initial
inspection which resulted in an order for corrective action and
the first reinspection to determine compliance with an order for
corrective action issued hereunder. There shall be no
reinspection fee for a final inspection indicating compliance or
for a reinspection occurring during the period of an approved
time extension granted for good cause and involving a good faith
effort on the part of the property owner to comply with the
order. Each chargeable reinspection fee shall be Sixty ($60.00)
Dollars. Reinspection fees which are not paid by or on behalf of
the property owner within thirty (30) days of mailing of an
invoice to the property owner of record on the Village tax roll
shall be charged and collected as a special assessment against
the real estate upon which the reinspections were made, and shall
be a lien upon the real estate until paid in full, with interest
accruing on the unpaid balance at the rate of seven (7%) percent
per annum. There shall also be a One Hundred ($100.00) Dollar
administrative charge added to the charge and special assessment
to cover the administrative costs of
charging and specially assessing the property.
36.24 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY
(a) Findings. The Village Board of the Village of
Paddock Lake finds that any Premises that has generated two (2)
or more calls for police services, resulting in arrest or the
issuance of citations for nuisance activities, has received more
than the level of general and adequate police service and has
placed an undue and inappropriate burden on the taxpayers of the
Village. Therefore, the Village Board directs the Building
Inspector, as provided in this section, to charge the owners of
such Premises the costs associated with abating the violations at
Premises where nuisance activities chronically occur.
(b) Enforcement By Injunction. The regulations of this
Section may be enforced by means of an injunction.
(c) Definitions. For purposes of this Ordinance, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings provided.
(1) “Nuisance Activity” shall mean any of the
following activities, behaviors or conduct
whenever engaged in by Premises' owners,
operators, occupants or persons associated with a
Premises:
(a) An act of harassment as defined in
Section 947.013, Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Disorderly Conduct as defined in Section
11.02 of the Code of General Ordinances, or
Section 947.01, Wisconsin Statutes.
(c) Battery, substantial battery or
aggravated battery as defined in Section
940.19, Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) Indecent conduct as defined in Code of
General Ordinances or Section 944.20(1),
Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) Keeping a place of prostitution, or
leasing a building for the purposes of
prostitution as defined in the Code of
General Ordinances or Section 944.34,
Wisconsin Statutes.
(f) Littering of Premises as defined in the
Code of General Ordinances.
(g) Theft as defined in the Code of General
Ordinances or Section 943.20, Wisconsin
Statutes.
(h) Arson as defined in Section 943.02,
Wisconsin Statutes.
(i) Possession, manufacture or delivery of a
controlled substance or related offenses as
defined in Chapter 961, Wisconsin Statutes.
(j) Gambling as defined in the Code of
General Ordinances or Section 945.02,
Wisconsin Statutes.
(k) Trespassing as defined in the Code of
General Ordinances or Section 943.13,
Wisconsin Statutes, or Criminal Trespass to
Dwelling as defined in Section 943.14,
Wisconsin Statutes.
(l) Discharge of a firearm as defined in the
Code of General Ordinances.
(m) The production or creation of excessive
noise as defined in the Code of General
Ordinances.
(n) Loitering as defined in the Code of
General Ordinances.
(o) Owning, keeping, having or harboring any
bird or animal that causes a disturbance of
the peace as defined in the Code of General
Ordinances.
(p) Obstruction/interference with Police or
Fire personnel.
(q) Any act of aiding and abetting, as
defined in Section 939.05, Wisconsin
Statutes, any of the activities, behaviors or
conduct enumerated in Sections a. to p.
above.
(2) “Person Associated With” shall mean any
person who, whenever engaged in a Nuisance
Activity, enters, patronizes, visits or attempts
to enter, patronize or visit, or waits to enter,
patronize or visit, a Premises or person present
on a Premises, including any officer, director,
customer, agent, employee or independent
contractor of a Premises' owner.
(3) Premises shall mean a place of abode, a
residence, a house or multiple dwelling unit for
one (1) or more persons, including lodging houses,
but excluding hotels, motels and tourist rooming
houses. In the case of multiple dwelling units,
“Premises” as used in this Section, may consist of
any single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one (1) or more persons,
including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
(d) Procedure.
(1) Whenever the Building Inspector determines
two (2) or more nuisance activities of the types
defined in these ordinances have occurred at a
Premises, resulting in arrests and/or the issuance
of citations and/or verified by written police
reports, on separate days during a sixty (60) day
period, the Building Inspector may notify the
Premises' owner in writing that the Premises is in
danger of becoming a chronic nuisance. This notice
shall be deemed to be properly delivered if sent
either by first class mail to the Premises'
owner's last known address, or if delivered in
person to the Premises' owner. If the Premises'
owner cannot be located, the notice shall be
deemed to be properly delivered if a copy of it is
left at the Premises' owner's usual place of abode
in the presence of some competent member of the
family at least fourteen (14) years of age, or a
competent adult currently residing there and who
shall be informed of the contents of the notice.
If a current address cannot be located, it shall
be deemed sufficient if a copy of the notice is
sent by first class mail to the last known address
of the owner as identified by the records of the
Village Clerk/Treasurer. This notice shall
contain:
(a) The street address or legal description
sufficient for identification of the
Premises.
(b) A description of the nuisance activities
that have occurred at the Premises and a
statement indicating that the cost of future
enforcement may be assessed as a special
charges against the Premises.
(c) A statement that the Premises' owner
shall, within thirty (30) days, respond to
the Building Inspector either with an appeal
or to propose a written course of action to
abate the nuisance activities which is
acceptable to the Building Inspector.
(2) Whenever the Building Inspector determines
that an additional Nuisance Activity has occurred
at a Premises for which notice has been issued
pursuant to Section (d)(1), above, and either this
Nuisance Activity has occurred not less than
thirty (30) days after notice has been issued or a
course of action as required by Section (d)(1)(c)
has not been submitted, the Building Inspector may
charge any Premises' owner found to be in
violation of this Section the costs of enforcement
in an amount not to exceed Two Hundred ($200.00)
Dollars. All costs so charged are a lien upon such
Premises and may be assessed and collected as a
special charge. A One Hundred ($100.00) Dollar
Administrative Fee shall be added to the special
assessment against the property, as provided in
Section (f).
(e) Violation. Each subsequent incident of nuisance
activities shall be deemed a separate violation.
(f) Cost Recovery. Upon receipt of a notice from the
Building Inspector issued pursuant to Section (d)(2), the
Building Inspector shall charge any Premises owner found to be in
violation of this Section the costs of enforcement, including
administrative costs, in full or in part. All costs so charged
are a lien upon such Premises and may be assessed and collected
as a special charge. A One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars
Administrative Fee shall be added to the special assessment
against the benefitted property.
(g) Appeal. Any appeal of these sections shall be to
the Village Board of Trustees and shall be in writing.
36.25 OUTDOOR WOOD FURNACES.
(a) Definitions.
(1) Outdoor Wood Furnace (OWF): Any equipment,
device, appliance or apparatus, or any part
thereof, which is installed, affixed or situated
outdoors and is primarily hand-loaded for the
purpose of combustion of solid fuel to produce
heat or energy and used for providing heat for an
interior space or water source.
(2) Outdoor Wood-Pellet Furnace: An outdoor wood
pellet furnace that is designed to burn corn, wood
pellet fuel, or other biomass pellets with metered
fuel and air feed and controlled combustion
engineering, which burns only pellets.
(3) Chimney: Flue or flues that carries off
products of combustion, exhaust from an outdoor
wood boiler, firebox or burn chamber.
(4) EPA HH Phase 2 Program: EPA HH (Hydronic
Heater) Phase 2 program administered by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency and that
has a particulate matter emission limit of 0.32
pounds per million British Thermal Units and is
labeled accordingly.
(5) EPA HH Phase 2 Program Qualified Model: A
Hydronic Heater that has been EPA HH Phase 2
qualified. The model has met the EPA HH Phase 2
emission level and is labeled accordingly.
(6) Existing Outdoor Wood Furnace: An Outdoor
Wood Furnace that was purchased and installed
prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
(7) New Outdoor Wood Furnace: An Outdoor Wood
Furnace that is first installed, established or
constructed after the effective date of this local
ordinance.
(8) Natural Wood: Wood, which has not been
painted, varnished or coated with similar
materials, has not been pressure treated with
preservatives and does not contain resins or glues
as in plywood or other composite wood products.
(9) Recyclables: Any product material or
commodity that is recyclable as defined by the
State of Wisconsin, this includes plastics, paper,
cardboard, and yard waste.
(b) Regulations for Outdoor Wood Furnaces.
(1) No person from the effective date of this
ordinance shall, construct, install, establish,
operate or maintain an Outdoor Wood Furnace within
the zoning districts of R-1,R-2,R-3,RM-1, B-1, or
B-2.
(2) No person shall, from the effective date of
this ordinance, operate an existing Outdoor Wood
Furnace unless such operation conforms to
manufacturer’s instructions regarding such
operation and requirements of this ordinance
regarding fuels that may be burned in an Outdoor
Wood Furnace as set forth in this ordinance.
(3) All new Outdoor Wood Furnaces shall be
constructed, established, installed, operated and
maintained in conformance with manufacturer’s
instructions and the requirements of this
ordinance. In the event of a conflict, the
requirements of this ordinance shall apply unless
the manufacturer’s instructions are stricter, in
which case the manufacturer’s instructions shall
apply.
(4) The owner of any new Outdoor Wood Furnace
shall produce the manufacturer’s owner’s manual or
installation instructions to the Building
Inspector for review prior to the issuance of
permits or installation.
(5) All new Outdoor Wood Furnaces shall be
laboratory tested and listed to appropriate safety
standards such as UL, CAN/CSA, ANSI, BYH or other
applicable safety standards.
(6) If an existing Outdoor Wood Furnace is,
through the course of a proper investigation by
local authorities, creating a verified nuisance,
as defined by local or state law, the following
steps may be taken by the owner and the Building
Inspector having jurisdiction:
(a) Modifications made to the unit to
eliminate the nuisance such as extending the
chimney, or relocating the Outdoor Wood
Furnace.
(b) Cease and desist operating the unit
until reasonable steps can be made taken to
ensure that the Outdoor Wood Furnace will not
be a nuisance.
(c) Site and Use Regulations.
(1) Outdoor Wood Furnaces shall be constructed,
established, installed, operated and maintained
pursuant to the following conditions:
(a) Fuel burned in any new or existing
Outdoor Wood Furnace shall be only natural
untreated wood, wood pellets, biomass pellets
or other listed fuels specifically permitted
by the manufacturer’s instructions such as
fuel oil, natural gas or propane as a backup
fuel.
(b) The following fuels are strictly
prohibited in new or existing Outdoor Wood
Furnaces:
(1) Wood that has been painted,
varnished or coated with similar
materials and/or has been pressure
treated with preservatives and contains
resin or glues as in plywood or other
composite wood products.
(2) Rubbish or garbage, including but
not limited to food wastes, food
packaging, food wraps and animal
carcass.
(3) Any plastic materials including but
not limited to nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene, urethane foam and synthetic
fabrics, plastic films and plastic
containers.
(4) Rubber including tires or other
synthetic rubber-like products.
(5) Newspaper, cardboard, or any other
recyclable paper product.
(2) Setbacks for any new or existing Outdoor Wood
Furnace model not EPA Hydronic Heater Program
Qualified:
(a) The Outdoor Wood Furnace shall be
located on the property the unit serves and
be at least one hundred (100) feet from any
property line.
(b) The Outdoor Wood Furnace shall be
located at least seventy-five (75) feet from
any residence that is served by the unit.
(c) The Outdoor Wood Furnace shall be
located at least three hundred (300) feet
from any residence that is not served by the
unit.
(d) The Outdoor Wood Furnace shall be
located at least twenty (20) feet from any
structure not serving as an accessory to the
Outdoor Wood Furnace.
(3) Chimney heights for any Outdoor Wood Furnace
model that is not EPA Hydronic Heater Program
Qualified:
(a) The chimney of any new Outdoor Wood
Furnace shall extend at least two (2) feet
above the peak of any residence not served by
the Outdoor Wood Furnace located within three
hundred (300) feet of such Outdoor Wood
Furnace.
(b) The chimney of any Outdoor Wood Furnace
shall extend at least twenty (20) feet above
the furnace served.
(4) Setbacks for EPA HH phase 2 Program qualified
models (0.32 lbs./Million Btu heat output):
(a) The Outdoor Wood Furnace shall be
located on the property the unit serves and
be at least one hundred (100) feet from any
property line.
(b) The Outdoor Wood Furnace shall be
located at least fifty (50) feet from any
residence served by the unit.
(c) The Outdoor Wood Furnace shall be
located at least two hundred (200) feet from
any residence that is not served by the unit.
(d) The Outdoor Wood Furnace shall be
located at least twenty (20) feet from any
structure not serving as an accessory to the
Outdoor Wood Furnace.
(5) Chimney heights for EPA HH Phase 2 Program
qualified models:
(a) If located within three hundred (300)
feet to any residence not served by the
furnace, the chimney serving the furnace
shall be at least two (2) feet higher than
the peak of the residence within three
hundred (300) feet of the furnace.
(b) The chimney of any EPA HH phase 2
qualified furnace shall extend at least
twelve (12) feet above the furnace served.
(6) Outdoor Wood Furnaces that are specifically
designed to burn corn, wood pellet fuel or other
biomass pellets with metered fuel and air feed and
controlled combustion engineering shall be
installed per the manufacturer’s recommendations.
(d) Appeals. Appeals from any actions, decisions, or
rulings of the Building Department or for a variance from the
strict application of the specific requirements of this ordinance
may be made to the Village Board of Appeals. Requests for all
appeals shall be made in writing to the Village Building
Inspector and Board of Appeals not later than thirty (30) days of
the act, decision or ruling from which relief is sought.
(1) Appeals Fees. Appeals fees shall be
established by the Village Board.
(2) Appeals for Outdoor Wood Furnaces shall
adhere to the requirements and procedures of the
Zoning Variance Board of Appeals.
(3) Criteria for Variances. In making its
determination, the Board of Appeals shall take
into consideration the benefit to the applicant if
the variance is granted, as weighted against the
detriment of the neighborhood or community by such
grant. In making such determination the Board of
Appeals shall consider the standards set forth in
Section 12.09(k) of these ordinances and shall
also consider:
(a) Whether an undesirable change will be
produced in the character of the neighborhood
or a detriment to nearby properties will be
created by granting the variance;
(b) Whether the benefit sought by the
applicant can be achieved by some method,
feasible for the applicant to pursue, other
than a variance;
(c) Whether the requested variance is
substantial;
(d) Whether the alleged difficulty was selfcreated,
which consideration shall be
relevant to the decision of the Board of
Appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude
the granting of the variance.
36.26 PENALTIES.
(a) Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate
a provision of this Ordinance, shall, upon conviction, be subject
to a forfeiture of not more than One Thousand ($1,000.00)
Dollars, and in addition, shall pay the costs and expenses of
prosecution. Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
(b) Abatement of Violation. The imposition of the
penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the Village
Attorney from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
structure or premise, or to stop an illegal act, the conduct of
business or the utilization of the structure or premises.
Chapter 37
oRDINANCE NO. 382 SUPPLEMENTING ORDINANCE NO. 70-(L967' )
AUTHORIZING THE TSSUANCE AND AWARDING THE SALE OF
$1,150,000 SEWAGE SYSTEM REVENUE REFUNDING BONDS AND
PROVIDING FOR THE PAYMENT OF SUCH BONDS AND OTHER
DETAILS AND COVENANTS WITH RESPECT THERETO
t
Passed: July 18, L99L
Published: July 20, L99t
ORDINA}.ICNE O, .JtL
ORDINAI{CE SUPPLEMENTING
ORDINAI {CEN O. 70- (1957) ; AUTHORIZINGT HE
ISSUAI{CEA I.IDA WARDINGT HE SAIE OF S1r1501000
SEVf,AGES YSTEMR EVENUER EFI]NDINGB ONDS
ATiIDP ROVIDTNGF OR THE PAY:MENTO F SUCH BONDSA I{D OTHER
DETAILS AI{D COVENANTSW ITH RESPBCTT HERETO
WHEREAS, the Village of Paddock Lake, Kenosha County,
Wisconsin (the "Village"
) owns and operates a sewage system (the
"System"
) which is operated for a public purpose as a public
utility by the Village;
WHEREASt,h e Vi l lage has heretofore issued i ts $755r000
Sewage System Mortgage Revenue Bonds, Series of L967, dated
November L, L967 (the'1957 Bonds") pursuant to Ordinance No. 70-
(1957) entj.tled: "An Ordinance Providing for the Issuance and
Sale of $7551000 'sewage System Mortgage Revenue Bonds, Series of
L967 t' of the Village of Paddock Lake, Kenosha County, Wisconsin,
and Providing for the Payment of Said Bonds and Other Details
with Respect Thereto" (the "1.957 Ordinance" ) to pay the cost of
constructing the System (the "L967 ProJect" );
VI I IEREASt,h e Vi l lage has also heretofore issued 91r150r000
General Obligation Promissory Notes, dated April L, 1988 (the
'1988 Notes") pursuant to a Resolution adopted by the Village
Board on March L6, 1988 entitled: "Resolution Authorizing the
Borrowing of 91rL50r000i Providing for the Issuance and Sale of
General Obligation Pronissory Notes Therefor; and Levying a Tax
in Connection Therewith" (the "1988 Resolution" ) to provide
interim financing for extensj.ons, additions or improvements to
the System, to wit: constructing and equipping a wastewater
treatment facility and paying financing costs, including a
portion of the interest cost (the "1988 ProJect" );
WHEREAS,t he 1988 NoteE mature on October 1, L99Ii
WHEREASS, ect ion 55.066(2) (b) , Wisconsin Statutes, provides
that revenue bonds, payable only from the revenues of the System,
may be issued pursuant to the provisions of Sect,ion 66.066,
Wisconsin Statutes, to provi.de funds to refund any outstanding
bonds or notes issued for projectE such as the 1988 Project;
WHEREAS, Section I of the L967 Ordinance provides that
additional bonds may be issued on a parity with the L967 Bonds
upon compliance with certain conditions;
WHEREAS, the Village Board deems it to be necessaty,
desirable and in the best, interest of the Village to issue
additional revenue bondsr orr a parity with the L967 Bonds, .
pursuant to Section 55.055 of the Wisconsin Statutes and
Section I of the 1967 Ordinance to pay the cost of refinancing
the 1988 Notes with the proceeds of bonds payable only from the
revenues of the Systen to provide permanent financing for the
I98I Project (the "Refunding"
) ;
WHEREAS, to the best of the Village's knowledge, information
and belief, and in reliance upon the Certificate of Banc One
Capital Corporation, attached hereto as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein by this reference, the Village complies with
the conditions precedent to the issuance of additional bonds;
WHEREAS, other than the 1967 Bondsr Do other bonds or notes
payable from the revenues of the System are now outstanding;
WHEREAS, for the purpose of paying the cost of the Refunding
(including paying legal, financing, engineering and other
professional iees in connection therewith and funding a reserv'e
account), the Village Board deems it to be necessary, desirable
and in the best interest of the Village to authorize and sell
sehrage system revenue refunding bonds of the Village on a parity
with the L967 Bonds payable solely from the revenues of the
System, which bonds are to be authorized and issued pursuant to
the provisions of Section 55.055, Wisconsin Statutes and Section
8 of the 1967 Ordinance and which bonds are to be additionally
secured by a mortgage lien upon the Systemi and
WHEREAS, the Village Board now deems it, to be necessary,
desirable and in the best interest of the Village t,o supplement,
the L967 Ordinance to provide for the issuance and sale of sehrage
system revenue refunding bonds on a parity with the L957 Bonds
and to award the sale of such bonds to Banc One Capital
Corporation, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAfNED by the Village Board of the
Village that:
Section l(al. Definitions. The definitions in the L967
Ordin porated into this Ordinance
except as expressly amended below or unless the context expressly
or by necessary implication requires otherrpise. References in
the L967 Ordinance to "Bonds" and "Additional Bonds" ghall apply
t,o the Bonds being issued pursuant, to this Ordinance unless
othe::rrise .rmended herein. All references to specific sections in
the L957 Ordinance also apply to the Bonds being issued pursuant
t,o this Ordinance unless other*rise amended herein.
Section 1(b). Additional and Arnended Definitions. fn
aAait n
subsection (a) hereof, the following terrns shall have the
following meanings in this Ordinance unless the text expressly or
by implication requires otherwise:
"Act" means Section 56.055 of the Wisconsin Statutes;
- 2 -
"Annual Debt Service Requirement" means the total amount of
principal and interest due on the L967 Bonds, the Bonds or any
Parity Bonds in any Bond Year whether at maturity or pursuant to
mandatory redemption thereof;
"Bond Year" means the one-year period ending on a principal
palzment dat,e f or the Bonds;
"Bonds" means $1r150r000 Sewage Systern Revenue Refunding
Bonds of the Village dated August 1, 1991, authorized to be
issued by this Ordinance;
"Code" means the Internal Revenue Code of 1985r €rs amended;
"Depository" means The Depository Trust, Company, New York,
New York or its nominee or successor which shall act as
securities depository for the Bonds;
"Ordinance" means an ordinance entitled: "Ordinance
Supplementing Ordinance No. 70-(1957) ; Authorizing the Issuance
and Awarding the SaLe of $111501000 Sewage System Revenue
Refunding Bonds and Providing for the Payment of Such Bonds and
Other Details and Covenants with Respect Thereto" adopted by the
Village Board on July 17, 1991;
"Regulations" means the income tax regulations promulgated
under the Code;
'1957 Bonds" means the outstanding balance of the 97551000
Sewage System Mortgage Revenue Bonds, Series of L967, of the
Village, dated November L, L967i
"1957 Ordinance" means Ordinance No. 70-(1957) entitled:
"An Ordinance Providing for the Issuance and SaIe of 'Sewage S7551000 System Mortgage Revenue Bonds, Series of L967r' of the
Village of Paddock Lake, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, and Providing
for the Payment of Said BondE and Other Details with Respect
Thereto" adopted by the Vl1lage Board on October 11, L967, which
authorized the L967 Bonds;
'1988 Notes" means $1r150r000 General Obligation Promissory
Notes of the ViIIage dated April 1, 1988, maturing on October L,
1 9 9 1 ;
"1988 Project" means congtructing and equipping a wastewater
treatment facility and paying financing costs, including a
portion of the interest cost. All elements of the L988 ProJect
are owned and operated by the Vlllage as part of the System as
described in the preanble hereto;
"Original Purchaser" means Banc One Capital Corporation,
Milwaukee, Wisconsini
- 3 -
Parit'y Bonds " means any additional bonds issued pursuant to
the Act, and Section 8 of the L967 Ordinance;
"Refunding" means refinancing the village's 1988 Notes;
funding a reserve account and paying costs of financing;
"Reserve Account'r means a separate account in the Redemption
Fund created by the L967 Ordinance, as amended and supplemenled
by the ordinance. There has been deposit,ed in the Reserve
Account, from revenues of the System the sum of $62 t982 and there
shall be deposited frorn available village funds the sum of
$107,828. No Bond Proceeds will be used to fund the Reserve
Account. The Reserve Account shart be used sorely for the
purpose _of paying principal of and interest on tha Lg67 Bonds,
the Bonds and any Parity Bonds at any time when there sharl b;
insufficient money in the Special Redenption Fund; -
"Reserve Requirement" means the sum of S1z0rB10 or such
lesser amount which at no t,ime exceeds an amount equal to the
lesser of maximum amount of principal and interest-due on the
outst,anding L967 Bonds and the Bonds in any Bond year whether at
maturity or pursuant t,o mandatory redemption thereof or an amount
not greater than 125t of the average annual debt service on the
outstanding L967 Bonds and the Bonds. rf parity Bonds are
issued, the Reserve Requirement, shall be an amount equal to the
lesser of the maximum amount of principal and intereJt due on the
outstanding L957 Bonds, the Bonds and the parity Bonds in any
Bond Year or an amount not greater than 125t of the average
annual debt service on the outstanding L967 Bonds, the Aoias and
the Parity Bonds; and
'lsystem" means the entire sewage system of the village
specificllly including that portion of Lhe t967 proJect, ana the
1988 ProJect owned by the virlage including all property of every
nature now or hereafter owned by the Village for-the collection,
transmission, treatment and disposal of domestic and industrial
sewage _and waste, including all improvements and extensions
thereof made by the virlage while lny of the 1967 Bonds, the
Bonds and Parity Bonds remain out,standing, including ali real and
personar property of every nature compri-ing part oi or used or
useful in connectj.on with such sewage system lnd including al1
appurtenances, contracts, leases, franchises and other
intangibles.
Section 2. Au zation of the . For the purpose of
paying the cost of the ( inc paying legal and
finalcing- fees in connection therdwith and-piying-the cosr of
funding the Reserve Account), there shall be boriowed on the
credit of the income and revenue of the system the sum of
91rr50r000, ald registered revenue bonds of the viltage are
hereby authorized to be issued in evidence thereof to Banc One
capital corporat,ion, Mirwaukee, wisconsin (the "original
Purchaser" ) in accordance with the terms arid conditions of its
- 4 -
Section 3. Terms of the Bonds. The revenue bonds shall be
desig efunding Bonds " (the "Bonds',
) ;
shall be dated August L, 1991; shalL be in the denomination of
$5r000 or any integral multiple thereof; shall bear interest at
the rates set forth below; and shall mature serially on
November I of each year, in the years and principal amounts as
follows:
bond purchase proposal attached hereto as
incorporated herein by this reference.
Exhibit B and
Interest Rate
7 . 5 0 t
7 . 5 0
5 . 5 s
6 . 2 0
5 . 4 0
5. s 0
5 . 5 0
5. 7 0
5 . 8 0
5 . 9 0
7 . 0 0
7 . 1 0
7 . 5 0
semi-annually on
on May 1, L992.
Year
L992
19 93
r.994
1 9 9 5
1 9 9 6
L997
19 9 8
1 9 9 9
2000
200 1
2002
200 3
2008
Principal Amount
$ 1 5 , 0 0 0
4 0 , 0 0 0
4 5 , 0 0 0
4 5 , 0 0 0
50 r 000
55 r 000
5 5 , 0 0 0
5 0 , 0 0 0
6 5 , 0 0 0
7 0 , 0 0 0
7 5 , 0 0 0
8 0 , 0 0 0
4 9 5 , 0 0 0
Interest on the Bonds shall be payable
May 1 and November 1 of each year commencing
It is hereby determined and declared that the above schedule
of maturities of the Bonds is such that the requirernents each
year to pay both the principal of and interest on the Bonds is
reasonable in accordance with prudent, municipal utility
management practices.
At the option of the Villdge, the Bonds maturing on
November 1, 2008 shall be subJect to redemption prior to
maturityr as a whole or in part by lotr orr November Lt 2003 or on
any interest payment date thereafter, at the principal amount
thereof), plus accrued interest to the date of redemption.
In addition, the Bonds due on November Lt 2008 (the',Term
Bonds" ) are subJect to redemption prior to rnaturity at a
redemption prj-ce equal to One Hundred Percent (100t) of the
principal amount to be redeemed, plus accrued interest to the
date of redempt,ion, from redemption fund deposits which are
required to be made in an amount sufficient to redeem on
November 1 of each year the respective amount of Term Bonds
specified below:
- 5 -
Redemption Date
2004
20 05
2006
2007
2008
Amount
s 85,ooo
9 0 , 0 0 0
1 0 0 , 0 0 0
1 0 5 , 0 0 0
1 1 5 , 0 0 0 *
*Maturity
Before the redemption of any of the Bonds, the Village shall
give notice to the Depository by registered or certified mail not
less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (50) days prior to the
date fixed for redemption or in the case of an advanced
refunding, the date the proceeds are deposited in escrow. The-
Bonds shall cease to bear interest on the specified redemption
date, provided that federal or other immediately available funds
sufficient for such redemption are on deposit at the office of
the Depository at that time. Upon such deposit of funds for
redemption the Bonds shall no longer be deemed to be outstanding.
The Vil}age shall enter into an agreement with BAI.IK ONE
WISCONSINT RUST CO!,IPAIIY,N ATIONAIJA SSOCfATIONw ith respect to the
redemption of the Term Bonds. The appropriate officers of the
Village are hereby authorized and diiectad to execute such
agreement on behalf of the ViIIage.
Section 4. Paritv with 1967 Bonds. The Bonds shall be
aaait Section 8 of the L967
Ordinance; are issued on a parity with the 1957 Bondsl and are
secured by an equal lien and claim to the revenues and properties
of the System, the statutory mortgage lien upon the System and
the monies on deposit in the Special Redemption Fund all as set
forth in the L967 Ordinance.
Section 5. Form, Execution, Reqlstration and Palrment of the
Bqndq. The Bonds shall be issued in book-entry form only, shall
EGgistered in the nane of the Depository ani shall Ue- nunlered,
from 1 consecutively upward. lf, for any reason, the
relationship with the Depository is terminated, the Village may
at its sole discretion establish a relationship with another
depository in order to maintain the Bonds in book-entry form. If
the Village does not appoint another depository, it shaLl
Prepare, authent,icate and deliver at its expense fully registered
certificated Bonds in the denomination of $5r000 or any multiple
thereof in the aggregate principal amount then outstanding t,o the
beneficial owners of the Bonds, as shown upon the records of the
Depository. The book-entry Bonds shall be in the form attached
heret,o as Exhibit C and incorporated herein by this reference.
The Bonds shall be executed in the narne of the Village by
the manual or facsimile signatures of the President and Village
Clerk provided that at least one of those signatures shall be a
- 5 -
manual signature or if both of those signatures shall be
facsimile, the Bonds shall be authenticated by the manual
signature of an authorized officer of a bond registrar, and shall
be sealed with its official or corporate seal or a facsimile
thereof.
As long as the Bonds are in book-entry form, the Bonds are
payable as to principal by wire transfer to the Depository or it,s
nominee upon their presentation and surrender to the Villdger who
shall be the Registrar and Paying Agent with respect, to the bookentry
Bonds. Payment of each installment of interest shall be
made by wire transfer to the Depository or its nominee shown in
the registration books on the Record Date on the payment date in
Iawful money of the United States of America by the Villalle. The
Village shall not be obliged to make any transfer of the Bonds
(i) after the Record Date, (ii) during the fifteen (15) caLendar
days preceding the date of the publication of notice of any
proposed redemption of the Bonds, or (iii) with respect to any
particular Bond, after such Bond has been called for redemption.
With respect to (iii) above, in the event that less than all of
the principal amount of a specific interest rate is redeemed, the
Registrar shaLl issue a nesr Bond in the principal amount
outstanding after redemption on the redemption date.
In the event that the Vtllage exercises it,s rtght to issue
fully registered certificated Bonds, it shall appoint a registrar
and fiscal agent pursuant, to the provisions of Section 67.L0(2),
Wisconsin Statutes (the "Bond Registrar").
The Bonds when in certificated form shall be payable as to
principal by check or draft issued upon their presentation and
surrender at the principal office of the Bond Registrar. Payment
of each installment of interest shall be payable by check or
draft mailed to the registered owner shown in the registration
books on the Record Dat,e at the owner's address as it appears in
the registration books kept for such purpose. The Registrar
shaLl not be obliged to make any transfer of the Bonds (i) after
the Record Date, (ii) during the fifteen (15) calendar days
preceding the date of the publication of notice of any proposed
redemption of the Bonds, or (iii) with respect to any particular
Bond after such Bond has been called for redemption. With
respect to (iii) above, in the event that less than all the
principal amount of a specific interest rate is redeemed, the
Bond Registrar shall issue a new Bond or Bonds in the principal
amount outstanding aft,er redemption on the redenption date. The
principal of and interest on the Bonds shall be paid by the
Village Treasurer or his agent in lawful money of the United
Stat,es.
Both the principal
payable in lawful money
Bond Registrar.
and interest on the Bonds shall be
the United States of America by the
of
o f
- 7 -
The principal of and premium, if any, on the Bonds wilt be
payable upon presentatj.on and surrender thereof at the principal
corporate office of the Bond Registrar.
Payment of each installment of interest shall be made to the
registered owner of each Bond who shall appear on the
registration books of the Villdgor maintained by the Bond
Registrar, on the Record Date and sha1l be paid by check or draft
of the Bond Registrar nailed to such registered owner at his
address as it appears on such registrat,ion books or at such other
address as may be furnished in writing by such registered owner
t,o the Bond Registrar.
$ection 5. Security for the Bonds. The Bonds, together
with tute an indebtediess of
the Village nor a charge against its general credit or taxing '-
pohrer. The Bonds, together with interest thereon, shall be
payable only out of the Special Redernption Fund created and
established pursuant to the L967 Ordinance, as amended and
supplemented by the Ordinance, and shall be a valid claim of any
holder thereof only against said Special Redemption Fund and the
revenues of the Systen pledged to such fund. Sufficient revenues
have been heretofore pledged to said Special Redemption Fund, and
shall be used for no other purpose than to pay the principal of,
premium, if dny, and interest on the L967 Bonds, the Bonds and
any Parity Bonds as the sreuneb ecomes due. It is the express
intent and determination of the Village Board that the amount of
revenues to be set aside in the Special Redemption Fund
(incruding the Reserve Account) shalL be sufficient, in any event
to pay the principal of and interest on the L967 Bonds, the Bonds
and any Parity Bonds and to provide any amounts required to be
paid into the Reserve Account to maintain the Reserve
Requirement.
Section 7. Fqnds and Accognts. In accordance with the Act,
for t and proper allocation of the
revenues of the System, and to secure the payment of the
principal of and interest on the L967 Bonds, the Bonds and any
Parity Bonds, certain funds of the System have been created and
established pursuant to Section 3 of the L967 Ordinance which
shall be used solely for the purposes set forth in the L967
Ordinance as amended by the Ordinance as follows:
The fourth paragraph of Section 3 of the L967 Ordinance is
hereby amended and supplemented to read as folLows:
"85t of the income and revenues therefrom is
necessary and shall be set aside in the fund known
and designated as the "Sewage System Mortgage
Revenue Bond and Interest Special Redemption Fund"
(referred to herein as the "Special Redemption
Fund" ) and applied to the payment of the principal
of and interest on the L967 Bonds, the Bonds and any
Parity Bonds as the same becomes due (whether at
- 8 -
maturity or pursuant to mandatory redemption
thereof ) . "
The sixth paragraph and the remainder of section 3 of the
L967 ordinance are hereby amended and supplemented t,o read as
follows:
"It is the express intent and determj.nation of the
Village Board that the amount, of said income and
revenues to be set aside and paid into the Special
Redemption Fund shalI, in any event,, be sufficient
to pay the interest upon the Lg67 Bonds, the Bonds
and any Parity Bonds as the same accrues and the
principal of said L967 Bonds, the Bonds and any
Parity Bonds as the sane rnatures, notwithstanding
the fixed proportion thereof temporarily allocated
to such purposes in the manner above provided; and
the Village shaIl, from year to year and out of the
income and revenues received from the operation of
the System, deposit at, least suffici.ent funds in the
Special Redemption Fund to pay promptly a1l
principal and interest falling due on said L967
Bonds, the Bonds and any parity Bonds.
' The total income and revenues so set aside for
Payment of the principal of and interest on the L967
Bonds, the Bonds and any parity Bonds shall, from
month to monthr ds the same shall accrue and be
received, be_ set apalt and shall, on the last day of
each month, be paid into the Special Redemption
Fund. The arnount so deposited each month itratt be
not less than one-twelfth (L/LZ) of the minimum
amount so required to be deposited for each year
ending NovembeE 1, such annual minimum amounl ( the
Annual Debt, Service Requirement,) for the L967 gonds
to be as set forth on Schedule i attached to the
L967 ordinance and for the Bonds to be as set forth
on Exhibi! D attached to this Ordinance and the
combEEiE6unts are set forth on Exhibit E. said
Fund sharr be kepr apart from otheffi6t@ and the
same shall be used for no purpose other Lhan the
gayment of the interest on and principal of said
L967 Bonds, the Bonds and any pirity gonds promptly
as the same becomes due and payable-. AII rnoney- insaid
Fund shall be deposited in a speciar account in
the bank(s) ar which rhe Lg67 Bondsl the Bonds and
any Parity Bonds are payable, and such monthly
payments above described shalr be made directly to
such b a n k ( s ) .
Th?! portj.on of the Special Redemption Fund set,
aside for the payment of the prinlipal of and
interest on the L967 Bonds, the gonds and any parity
Bonds shall be used primarily to achieve proper
- 9 -
matching of revenues and debt service within each
Bond Year. Amounts deposited in such fund will be
depleted at, Ieast once a year except for a
reasonable carryover amount which shal1 not exceed
the greater of (a) one year's earnings on such fund,
or (b) one-twelfth of the annual debt service of the
L967 Bonds, the Bonds and any Parity Bonds. Other
than such fund, the Village has not created or
established, and does not expect to create or
establish, any other sinking or similar account
which is reasonably expected to be used to pay debt
service on the L967 Bonds, the Bonds or any Parity
Bonds or which is pledged as collateral for the L967
Bonds, the Bonds or any Parity Bonds or to replace
funds that will be used to pay debt service on the
L967 Bonds, the Bonds and any Parity Bonds. It is
the intent of the Village that at all times such
fund constitute a "bona fide debt service fund" as
def ined in the Regulat,ions.
To additionally secure the payment of principal of
and interest on the L967 Bonds, the Bonds and any
Parity Bonds herein authorized, there has been
established a separate account in the Special
Redenption Fund to be known as the "Reserve
Account". The Village has heretofore deposited the
sum of $62,982 in the Reserve Account. When the
Bonds herein authorized shall have been delivered
under the provisions of the 1957 Ordinance, as
amended and supplemented by this Ordinance, the
additional sum of $107,828 shall be deposit,ed in the
Reserve Account from Vlllage funds. No Bond
Proceeds will be deposited in the Reserve Account.
The Village has hereby covenanted and agreed that
there wil,l be paid monthly into said Reserve
Account, beginning as of November L, 1959, not less
than one-twelfth (L/L2) of a sum equal to L2-l/21 of
the maximum principal and interest, requirements for
any twelve months' period on the L967 Bonds, the
Bonds and any Parity Bonds, provided that no such
palzments need be made into the Reserve Account at
such times as the funds in said account are equal to
the maximum principal and interest requirements for
any twelve months' period on the L967 Bonds, the
Bonds and any Parity Bondsr or the remaining
princS-pal and interest requirements on the L967
Bonds, the Bonds and any Parity Bonds, then
outstanding, whichever shall be the Lesser.
If for any reason there shall be insufficient funds
on hand in the Special Redemption Fund to meet
principal or interest becoming due on the L967
Bonds, the Bonds and any Parity Bonds, all sums then
held in the Reserve Account shall be used to pay the
-1 0 -
portion of interest on or principal of such Lg67
Bonds, the Bonds and any plrity Eonds becoming due
as t'o which there wourd othe::wise be defaurt;
-and
thereupon, payments as required by the next
preceding paragraph of this section shall again be
made into said Reserve Account until said, Reserve
Account equals the Reserve Reguirement.,,
At no time shalr the amounts in the Reserve Account
exceed 91701810 or such lesser amount which at no
time exceeds the lesser of the maximum amount of
principal and interest due on the outstanding Lg67
Bonds, the Bonds and any parity Bonds in any-Bond
Year or 125t of the Average annuar Debt seririce on
the outstanding L967 -Bon9i, the Bonds and any parity
Bonds. Any amounts in the Reserve Account wirictr
could cause the amount therein to exceed the arnount
set forth above will be transferred annually to the
interest and principat account of the special
Redemption Fund and expended within one year of
receipt. rt is the intent of the vilrag-e that at
all times "reasonably the Reserve Account constitut6s a required reserve fund" under the
applicable Regulations and section 14g of the code.
Section 8. Application of nevenues. After the delivery of "tty o "r;;;; Ji-tr," sysrern have been and will continue to be deposited as-coliected, j.n the
Revenue Fund and shall be transferred, monthly to the funds listed in the L967 ordinance, as amended and suppleirented by the
ordinance in the proportion, the order o?-prioiiiy aira in the manner set forth in the L967 ordinance, as-amended, and
supplemented by the Ordinance.
9Ar_o_lnra. ncer the . As stated in the Lg67 reasonable cost End-villue of services rendered to the villaqe by !!re systen by furnishing se!iler facirities and services for public purpgsei, sharl be-chargta igii"st the
village and shall be-paid by it in monthfy instiif.""t" asr rhe service accrues, out of the current revenues of the village
collected during the process of collection, "*"f""ine of ievenues derived from the.system, and out of the tax rewy oi the virl;;;--
P3id !y it to raise.money to neet its necessary current expenses.
The L967 ordinance is heieby amended to provia-e tnat the
reasonabLe cost and varue oi such service to the villate in any year shall be in an amount not to exceed s222r053 ;; such amount
as.may be necessalY in that year to pay the bilance of an amount which, together with the othEr revenie-s of trre sysiern, will produce earnings equivalent to not less than 1.3'0 times annual principal and interest- requirernents on the Lg67 Bonds, the Bonds and any Parity Bonds then outstanding after deduction of all operation and maintenance expenses oi the system but before
deduction of depreciation chirges or local-t;;divalents. such compensation for such service inatt be paid into the separate and
- 1 1 -
special funds created by section 3 of the Lg67 ordinance and,
shall be subJect to apportionment to the Operation, Depreciation
and Redennpti;n Funds iir ttre manner therein'prooia"i.
iection 10. SaIe of the Bonds. The Bonds shall be sold to
ttre o f or.rg !fiLLroN oNE HUNDRED
TWENTY-SEVENT HOUSA}IDT HTRTY-TIIREEA }ID 7O/LOO DOLI,ARS
($1,t27,033.70) plu? accrued interest to the date of deriver!l
resulting in a net interest cost of NrNE HITNDREDF oRTy-Two
THousAl{D oNE AND 93/100 DoLr,ARs ($9e2r001.93) and an average ner
interest rate of 7 . 4 1 t .
Section 11.- Aqplication of Pond Proceeds. The proceeds of
*" s cfuaing any premium
and accrued interest from their date to the'date of Ielii"=yi
--
shall be deposited and applied as followss _
(1) to the special Redenption Fund, the anount of any
accrued interest received from-the sale of the Bonds and airy
Parity Bonds;
premi-u (nb ) to the special Redenption Fund, the amount of any received from the sale of the Bonds and any parity-Bonds;
and
. (c)- -to the Refuldpg Fund, a special fund hereby created
and estabrished, the balance of the lroceeds of the Bond,s. said
Refundilg Fund sharr be adequatery slcured and. shall be used
?9lgry for the purpose of repayin! tne tggg Nores on ocrober 1,
r.?91'-a nd paying issuance expenles-in connection with the issuance
of the Bonds - Any -balance -iemal.ning in said, Refunding Fund af ter paying_ the costs of the Refunding sf,au be transferiea to the
s?ecial Redemption Fund for use in the payment of the principar
of or interest on the L967 Bondg, the g6n&s and iny naiity Bbnds.
The sun o-f s107 t82g from funds of the vilrage Ehall be
deposited in the Reserve Account of the Special fi,edenption Fund
so that the amount in the Reserve Account is in cornpfiance with
Sect,lon 7 above.
Section 12. Arbitraqe Covenant. The Village shall not, take
any a
-priceeds
which, if said action
had been reasonablv-expected to have been taken, oi had been
deliberately and intenLionally taken on the aat6 of delivery of
:aiq payment for the Bonds (tire',closing,,) wourd, have caused the
Bonds to be "arbitrage bondi' within th5 ieaning of Section 14g of
the Code and the negulations.
The Bond Proceeds may be tenporarily invested until needed in legal invesrments, provided howevir, trtaf ah" viiiafl rrereuy
covenants and agrees that so long as the Bonds and iny parity Bonds
remain outstanding, moneys on delosit in any fund or account
created or maintained in- connectLon with th-e gonds and any parity
Bonds, whether or not such moneys were derived from Bond proceeds
-r2-
i t
(.
or from any other source, will not be used or invested in a manner
which would cause the Bonds and any Parity Bonds to be "arbitrage
bonds" within the meaning of the Code and any applicable
Regulat,ionsr €ls the same exist on this dater oE may from time to
time hereafter be amended, supplernented or revised.
An officer of the Villdger charged with the responsibility for
issuing the Bonds or any Parity Bonds, shall provide an appropriate
certificate of the Villd9€, for inclusion in the transcript of
proceedings, settj.ng forth the reasonable expectations of the
Village regarding the amount and use of the Bond Proceeds and the
fact,s and estimates upon which such expectations are based, alL as
of the date of delivery and palznent for the Bonds or any Parity
Bonds (the "Closing") and also setting forth the covenantg and
agreements of the Village with respect to various other requirements
of the Code.
o n L onal Tax Covenants; Six Month
on trom The V age
urther covenants anct agrees t,ake all necessary steps
and perform all obligations required by the Code and Regulations
(whether prior to or subsequent to the issuance of the Bonds) to
assure that the Bonds or any Parity Bonds are obligations described
in Section 103(a) of the Code, the interest on which is excluded
from gross income for federal lncome tax purposes throughout their
term. An officer of the.Village charged with the respongibility of
issuing the BondE or any Parlty Bonds, shall provide an appropriate
certificate of the Villdger for inclusion in the transcript of
proceeditrgsr as of the Closing, certifying that it can and
covenanting that it will conply with the provisions of the Code and
Regulations.
Further, it, is the intent of the Village to take all
reasonable and lawful actiong to comply with any new tax laws
enacted so that the Bonds or any Parity Bonds will continue to be
obligat,ions described in Section 103(a) of the Code, the interest
on which is excluded from gross income for federal income tax
purposes throughout their term.
The Village hereby covenants that it is a governmental unit
with general taxing powers and that the Bonds are not "private
activity bonds" as defined in Section 141 of the Code.
AII of the proceeds of the Refunding issue will be expended
on or about October l, 1991 to pay the cost of the Refunding.
Since the proceeds of the Refunding issue will be spent within 90
days after the date of issuance of the Bonds, such proceeds will
not be subJect to rebate under the six month expenditure
exemption.
If for any reason the Village did not qualify for the six
nonth expendi.ture exemption fron the rebate requirements of the
Code, the Village covenants that it would take all necessary
steps to comply with such requirements.
--
-1 3-
The Village Board hereby designates the Bonds to be
"qualified tax-exempt, obligations" pulsuant, to the provisions of
Section 265(b)(3) of the Code and in support of such designation,
the village Clerk or other officer of the Village charged with
the responsibility for issuing the Bonds, shall provide an
appropriate certificate of the Villi9e, all as of the Closing.
Section 14. Utilization of The Trust C
Book-En In order to e g
the DepositorT, the Village agrees
e for
services Prov to
the applicable provisions set forth in the Letter of
Representations on file in the Village Clerk,s office. The
Village Clerk is authorized and directed to execut,e such Letter
of Representations, and deliver it to the Depository on behalf of
the Village.
Section 15. Dtaturitv of 1988 Notes. The L988 Notes mature
on Oc s hereby authorized and
directed to take all actions necessary to provide for the palzment
of the 1988 Notes at maturity.
Section 15. Ordinance a Contract. The provisions of this
OrOin ance, ihalt constitute a
contract between the village and the holder or holders of the
L967 Bonds, the Bonds and any Parity Bonds, and after issuance of
any Bond or any Parity Bond no change or alteration of any kind
in the provisions of this Ordinance may be made until all of the
L957 Bonds, the Bonds and any Parity Bonds have been paid in full
as to both principal and interest. The holder or holders of any
Bond or any Parity Bonds shall have the right in addition to all
other rights, by mandamus or other suit or action in any court of
competent JurisdS.ction, to enforce his or their rights against
the villd9€, the village Board thereof, and any and alr officers
and agents thereof, including, but without linitation, the right,
to require the Village, its Village Board and other authorj,zed
body, to fix and collect rates and charges fully adequate to
carry out all of the provigions and agreements contained in this
Ordinance and the L967 Ordinance.
Section 17. Ratification of 1967 Ordinance. Except as
expre sions oi this
Ordinance, the provisions of the L967 Ordinance shall remain in
full force and effect.
Section 18. Confli Resolutions, Ordi.nances, Severabili
CIosi ective Date.
ruLes or o r
DAt,e. AII prior ordinances, resolutions,
acffi;s ;Fthe vitiage Board, or any parrts trherecof in
conflict' with the provisions hereof shall be and ttre satne are hereby
rescinded insofar as they may so conflict. fn the event that any
one or more provisions hereof shall for any reason be held to be
illegal or invalid, such illegality or invilidity shall not affect
any other provisions hereof. The appropriate officers and agents of
the Village are hereby directed and authorized to do aII acts and
- 1 4 -
execute and deliver all documents as may be necessar1r and conveni.ent
to effectuate the closing of this transaction. The foregoing shall
take effect irnmediately upon adoption and approval in the manner
provided by Iaw.
Adopted and recorded this day of Ju1y, 1991.
Attest s
Village Clerk
) '
0sEAr)
t y
vftn
,tz
orman H. Krueger
- 1 5 -
EXHIBIT A
CERTIFTCATE OT BAI{C ONE CAPTTAI, CORPORATTON
The undersigned, a duly authorized officer of Banc One
Capital Corporation, Milwaukee, Wisconsin ( "Banc One" ), hereby
certifies as follows:
1. Banc One serves as underwriter to the Village of
Paddock Lake, Kenosha County, Wisconsin (the "Village" ).
2. As the undenuriter of the Bonds, I have reviewed and am
familiar with the provisions of Ordinance No. 70-(L967 ) (the
"1957 Ordinance") adopted by the Village t,o authorize the
issuance of S755r000 Sewage System Mortgage Revenue Bonds, dated
November t, L967 (the 'L957 Bonds").
3. To the best of my knowledge, information and belief,
the Village meets the conditions set forth j.n Section 8 of the
L967 Ordinance necessaa-lz to issue additional bonds on a paritlr
and eguality of rank with the 1957 Bonds, to wit:
(i) Net, Earninss. As set, forth on the attached Schedule I,
the Net Earnings (as defined in the 1967 Ordinance) for 1990
(based on the Village's audited financial statement) as adJusted
for sewer rate increases which became effective January 1, 1991
have been at least equal t,o 130t of (i) the highest annual total
principal and interest requirements on all the Bonds outstanding,
payable from the revenue of the System, plus (ii) the maximum
annual principal and interest requirements on the additional
bonds.
(ii) No Defau1t. The payments required to be made into the
various funds provided in the 1957 Ordinance are current and the
Village is not in default under any of the terms of the L967
Ordinance.
(iii) Pavment Dates. The additional bonds will be payable
as to principal as of November 1 of each year and payable as to
interest semi-annually on May I and November I of each year.
(iv) Purpose. The proceeds of the additional bonds are
being used for the purpose of providing permanent financing for
extensions, additions or improvements to the System.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have executed
official capacity effective this day
this Certificate in my
of _, 1 9 9 1 .
I hereby certify
certi.fications and to
belief, they are true
Name: Eugene Schulz
fitle: Vice President
CERTIFICATE OF CLERK
that f have reviewed the foregoing
the best of my knowledge, information and
and correct.
Doris E. Raditz
Village Clerk
07/L7/0L 1 t : l t FAI 4r1 785 2E5? FINAI{CIAL XETS +++ Q B ua0o2/002
EXt{tBtIAS. eHtDUlIt
1990N rt Rannuero l €dlr.dgdtb r rllcr lotr Incrcon
efirsnMeJonuol.rlyg 0l
Hl0h{t-qnlqcl prhdpol ond tntrrut on nmofntng
1967B onds09el)
Hlghecotn nuolpfidpctq rd lfitred on $l,t6O'0
oddltlmofB ondr@ 6)
Tsfol Detr
Coreroge noUo
92iE,2n
s,790
y24nm
tl74 a?0
r.6t4fi
o7/L7/9L 13r03 FAI 414 ?83 2 t t ? FINANCIAL If,TS +++ 0 B
EXHIBIT B
E! ootzool
BONDP URCHAASCER EEMENT
UUAEEO FP ADDOCI-KA IG
KcnoilxrCqnfy,ffiicongh
$ I . I S]@ Smaoc $tgtcm Rarcruc htundlng Bqrct!
July1 7.1991
Wooc Eocld
V0lorpo f Foddod(Lofe
6eO $6ttr Awnue
PoddockL okcW. bcorFh5 ill68
bdh qnd GentlEmen:
BorpO neC opttolCorpootlon0 he'Underwfit')h crcbyo ffcat o entg lnfot hbt urchora
Agr€emenwt lth the Vllogo d Podcl3ckL olte,h bnorhoC orrnlyl,l llroruln GheV Ulrrgelt br the
purchorcb Vt hc Unclsruilloor nd cde by the Vllbge.d your $l.l$It(I} Scrrogr SystcmP rnrnr.n
RcfundlngBoncb(lhe'BondT$h.h offorbmodesuQccttooccepilobrrycteh cV[bgnarJulyl7.l99f.
ForihrMlloer'rS l.l50.mEoncl,we wlllp oyon oggrpgotcpur€hosper lceo f St.127,0311.70
plur occrurd Intrct ftonr Augut l, l99l io lhe doie of clogne. lhe Bondr are morr fulty drcdbcd
I'1n9fh9r2P rellmlncryOflldolStqtomofnhfe. Bondsshotlmoturrecd olyonNovenrbeIr l ncoetrofttryco6 through^ m3. onclc r o trtm bond rnoturlr€i {cnnmber| , 2ff18l,n the omounfro nd st the rgtel
ot t.l iotth brbvr. lnilotst b poldla commcrrlng iloy I . | 99ilo nd semlonnuslVth enofter.
Novgttbtl
1gr2
lgql
logt
'lt09e056
1n7
Amaurrf
3l5,m
40.m
45.m
45,m
50m
56,0
Patc
7.50L
7.9
655
620
6{0
460
Novcmbcr I
1008
looo
2m
201
2CIl
2m
loqsot.
955.@
60.ql
65,@
70.q)
76m
90,@
-Bdr-
6.6411
6.70
6.s
6.s
7.m
7.10
8ll96.m 7"&t lerm BonOD r,rel. lovenrbe?l. Ug
Iho Bondr or. bclng purchoccd rubjcct to thc tUorrdng condltlonr of clolngr
l, llrc unqudlflodopprcvng oplnlroot€uoicc C Brody, BonCCound. Mlhcukr,
Wsmln. $othg fhot tho Bondr hqvr bern duty oulhorbd, cpctrtcd sncl ddhclE
by tho Vllogr ond cor,rrtthJiwr ttd qrd Undhg oblgrrtlmr sf thc Vlllogc snd turifier
rHlngfhctundrdthrglotrltrtcr$m ftp BorE! b qcrnfi ltonrlbdcrol lrcnp
imtlon (acrpt to thr cdrrt thot wch lntcr* lr lrludcd h ltro qlfgnqtf,o mlnlmum
tcxsbhlncomcqfgcorporutlonurdcrScqllcnSo5f lhelntcmolRcvrnuccodco1f 986
$hr'Codrl a lhr modl?lcd stbnEthrrr mldmum ffiblncmrcolocorprqtbn
undor0cetlar5eAofthcCodc.) Sotsoplnlonlriroboccomponlcdbythccurlromory
nen.lftlggtloncedlfleqtqconccrnlngmetioowhbh\redddlrsttl'pqufhsilfysr.relldlty
or cntrorcaqbllltcyf thc Bondr.lhc Odhmsc qlfib PurshsscA gtc€mfit
a a$vcaotE
gAllc oxE cAFtTlL €roilAnoH
111 E. WisconsiAn venucr MiirnukaaW irconsin
414 765€207
07/t7i9L lt:00 FAtr 4r4 768 2E57 FINAI'ICIAL XETS +++ Q B
A co|t mcste Jgneo uy rm ullogc ftrflclcnt ono urcge qeil( rc me €fll|cr ?ncm
s. ?hcP rullmlnsoy fflclols lqtqrlcnrI occtlrfil fnot cr of m oatot or pupotrf of gEc
Rulo1 !dl-12:
D. tno ofnc|C$l|l c't€mqts {tDsfoffovh moform€ fiocncdn aulo, EC !o f mc oofQo f
purcnoscondcFofthoclotcofcloohglluconclconrcthollrrrtsrlq|rctpoctEondcbo
notc or\ito|onn untrje$ (ltemefits t o motedcticl tcto ro m[l o slotoo mqtedcl!l] gt noe
6ory InO rdCfiOm okefig$gterneffir nodctnerehh. llghtotth.c lrcums?orrc'Gunder
wNcht hqf werem odor pt mld€odngo, nclo uru rco f SuchE fslorncnlnt ofredngth c
Eonoto nvcgtoFE o urlottrtcl;o no,
c. tnc villogp!R nqncE$t cncflEnt!t u mc yoorr Eco DcccmDcrls, I 990o olvQilrcl
to w praontloldythcflunclqlp odlton0 r fii vlhge qt ot ?ncc rcfqih cllccrtodr,o lo
finonclol stqtsfncnn no\'O Dcsr proporfil |n conromfiy srlttl gencrollyoccapt€cl
occounflngp flncpolrconss?enotpv pl|eccln d$ me D€cefnber311,9 90f,i ershot
be€n no mqtslolo r qchrcnrc hongch thot lnondglp o$|qr orrusunosf opcrsthil
qf the Vlltogp,n or fr5 thov lllqgc hcured qnym qfoilol[l obllllbco ltrcr thcrnIn lhc
otdlnayc ouFeo f brJslnGor,r G setbrfh lns contsndsbcl bylfE OfltcldS tolern€nt
d. thcVlllogcogpdionsllfyihUrdawdterqofr y rngtdoldc\ralopmmlnll poctlno
thc Vlllqgpo rtfic Bond!o fwhhh tfrc Mllqgpbccsru olvsp wlthln0dotcofs
dellrreroyf tha Bfidr
Ihqt lficrar ho[ frqrpb cqr nom qtodolloyd \rcreq ontr offcstltr eltficrt hol egdltya
br c-omoquancasthf cBondh iruc.
Accrfltlcqtcd€ncdbylhsUflogePieslclett|ondWClhegmec orftrmlrythcrtt?leBoqtcb
hore been( btlgrEtcrl'q.Em€d Td€(e|rpt obllggflms forp ulposeol f Eecthn2 65
of the Inlenrl Roonuc Co& of lg8a
Ihe Vllloger hqllp cryfh c folorlng sp€nte! ttornB oncpl tocscch
o. Bond Couruelbc
b, Prhthgc nd dbfrlbr,rlbonf OftlcldS toturlrrt
B^NGO NEC AHTAC ORrcRAT1ON
Gcne Schlf
Vlor Poddent
ACCEPIED:
VITIACEB OARD
VII,IAOES PADDOCKIA TG
KE{OSHAC OuNlY,W tSCOt\|SlN
[l oolzoot
z
4,
NormonH .K ruegei.Vl[oggP mrlcbnt Ddtl e RodlFzV. llloge Oed(
REGISTERED
NO.
DOLI,ARS
MATURITY DATE:
November 1, 19_
DEPOSITORY OR ITS
PRINCIPAL A}IOUNT: THOUSAND DOLI,ARS
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that the Village of Paddock
Lake, Kenosha County, Wisconsin (the "Village',), hereby
acknowledges itself to owe and for value received promises to pay
t9 the_Depository or its Nominee Name (th€ ,'Depository") -
identified above (or to registered assigns) r on the maturity date
identified above, the prin-ipal amount iaeirtitied, above, to pay
interest thereon at the rate of interest per annum identified
-
above' al1 subJect to the provisions set forth herein regarding
redemptio! Prior to maturity. Interest is payable conrnrencing on
May 1, L992 and semi-annually thereafter on May I and Novenber 1
of each year unt,il the aforesaid principar arnount is paid in
fulr. Both the principal of and interest on this Bond are
payabre in lawful money of the united states. rnterest payable
on any interest payment date shall be paid by wire transfer to
the Depository in whose na,me this Bond is registered in the Bond
Register maintained by the Village Clerk or Village Treasurer at
the close of business 15 calendar days next preceding the semiannual
interest palzment date.
This Bond is one of an issue of Bonds aggregating the
principal amount of $111501000, all of which are of like tenor,
except as to denomination, lnterest rate, maturi.ty date and
redemption provision, issued by the virlage pursu-nt to the
provi.sions of Section 56.055 of the Wisconsin Statutes, for the
purpose of paying the cost of refinancing the Vitlage,s
outstanding General obligation promissory Notes dated Apri1 Ll
L988 ( the "Refunding',
) .
At the opt,ion of the Villa9€r the Bonds maturing on
November Lt 2008 are subJect to redemption prior to maturity on
November L | 2003 or on any interest payment date thereafter.
Said Bonds are redeemable as a whole or in part by lot (as
selected by the Depository), dt the principll amount thdreof,
plus accrued interest to the date of redemption.
EXHTBIT C
(Form of Bond)
UNITED STATES OF AMERICS,
STATE OF WISCONSTN
KENOSHA COI'NTY
VTLI,AGE OF PADDOCK I,AKE
SEWAGE SYSTEI4 REVENUE REFI'NDING BOND
ORIGINAL DATE OF ISSUE: INTEREST RATE: CUSIP:
August 1, 1991
NOMINEE NAME: CEDE & CO.
CffiMY
I
( s
Bonds maturing on November L, 2008 are also subJect to
mandatory redemption prior to maturity at the t,imes, in the
amounts and upon the terms set forth in the Supplemental
Ordinance.
In the event the VilLage exercises its option to redeem the
Bonds -prior to maturity, as long as the Bonds are in book-entryonly
form, official notice of the redemption will be given by
mailing a notice by registered or certified mailr or overnight
express delivery, to the Depository not less than thirty (30)
days nor more than sixty (50) days prior to the redempt,j.on date.
If less than all of the Bonds of a maturity are to be called for
redemption, the Bonds of such maturity to be redeemed will be
selected by lot,. Such notice will include but not be limited to
the following: the designation, date and maturities of the Bonds
called for redemption, CUSIP nurnbers; and the date of redemption.
Any notice mailed as provided herein shall be conclusively
presumed to have been duly given, whether or not the regiitered
owner receives the notice. The Bonds shall cease to bear
interest on the specified redemption date provided that federal
or other immediately available funds sufficient for such
redemption are on deposit at the office of the Depository at that
tirne. Upon such deposit of funds for redemption the Bonds shall
no longer be deemed to be outstanding.
This Bond is issued pursuant to Section 55.055 of the
Vlisconsin Statutes and an ordinance adopted by the Governi.ng Body
on october 11, L967 entitled: "An ordinance providing for the
rssuance and sale of $7551000 'sewage system Mortgage Revenue
Bonds, series of L967r'of the village of paddock Lake, Kenosha
county, wi.sconsin, and Providing for the palznent, of said Bonds
and other Details with Respect rhereto" (the ,1957 ordinance,')
and an ordinance adopted by the Governing Body on Jury 1?, 1991,
entitled: "Ordinance Supplementing Ordinance No . 70-( 19GZ ) ;
Authorizing the Issuance and Awarding the SaIe of Slr150r00O
sewage system Revenue Refunding Bonds and providing for the
Payment of such Bonds and other Details and covenants with
Respect, Thereto" (the "Ordinance") (hereinafter the L967
Ordinance and the Ordinance shall be referred to as the
ordinance" ). The village has heretofore issued its S755r000
Sewage System Mortgage Revenue Bonds, Series of L967, dated
November L, L967 (the "1957 Bonds") pursuant to the 1967
ordinance. The Bonds are issued on a parity with the L967 Bonds
and are secured by an equal lien and claim to the revenues and
properties of the Sewage System and the moneys on deposit in the
Special Redemption Fund (referenced below).
A statutory mortgage rien, which is hereby recognized as
varid and binding on the village's sewage system, together with
all extensions and improvements thereto, has been created and
granted by wisconsin statutes and in favor of the horder or
holders of the L967 Bonds and this Bond and the issue of which
this Bond forms a part and in favor of the holder or holders of
any interest couPons attached to the L967 Bonds; and said Sewage
- 2 -
System and all extensions and improvements thereto shall remain
subject t,o such_ statutory mortgage lien until the payment in full
of the principal of and interest on the L967 Bonds and this Bond
and the issue of which it, forms a part.
This Bond' together with interest thereon, shall be payable
only out of the special Redemption Fund created by the Lg67-
ordinance, as amended and suppremented by the ordinance, and
shall be a valid claim of the holder theieof only against said
Special Redemption Fund and the revenues pledged to such fund on
a parity with the horders of the Lg67 gonds and does not
constitute an indebt,ednesa of the Village within the meaning of
any_ state constitutj.onal provlsion or statutoly limitation. The
Village hereby certifies that sufficient revenues have been
pledged to said Redemption Fund, and shall be used for no other
purpose than to pay the principal and interest of this Bond as
the same falls due.
rt is hereby certified and recited that alr conditions,
things and acts required by law to exist or to be done prior to
and in connection with the issuance of this Bond have been done,
have existed and have been performed in due form and time; and
that the issuance of this Bond has been duly authorized by the
Village and does not exceed or violate any Lonstitutional-or
statutory limitation. It is hereby further certified that the
village has designated this Bond to be a ',qualified tax-exempt
obligation"-pursuant, to the-provisions of Section 26s(b)(3) af
the fnternal Revenue Code of l98dr ae amended.
This Bond is transferable only upon the books of the Village
kept for that purpose at, the office ol the virlage clerk, onry in
the event that the Depository does not, continue fo act aE
depository for the Bonds, and the Village Board appoints another
depository, upon_surrender of the Bond io the viliige clerk, and
thereupo! a new furly registered Bond in the same aigregate
principar amount shalr be issued to the new depository in
exchange therefor, and upon the payment of a chlrge suificient to
reimburse the village for any tax, fee or other governmental
gllarg?_leguired !o be paid with respect ro such iegistrarion.
The vilrage clerk shalr not be obliged to make any transfer of
the Bonds -(i) afrer rhe Record Date; (ii) during ihe fifteen (15)
caLendar days preceding the date of ariy lublication of notice'of'
any propose$ redemption of the Bonds, or- (iii) with respect to
any part,icular Bond, after such Bond has been'calred foi
redemption. Th. Village may treat and consider the Depository in
whose name this Bond is registered as the absolute owner here6f
for tle purpose of receiving payment of, or on account of, the
principal or Redemption Price hereof and interest d,ue hereon and
for all other purposes whatsoever.
- 3 -
rN wrrNEss WHEREOF, the village of paddock Lake, Kenosha
county, wisconsin, by its governing body, has caused this Bond to
be executed for it and in its name by the manual signatures of
its duly qualified President and Village C1erk; and to be sealed
with the official sear of the virldg€, all as of the Lst day of
August, L991.
VILI,AGE OF PADDOCK I,AKE,
KENOSHA COI'NTY, WISCONSTN
By:
( sEAr )
1 ; r i By:
Village Clerk
l t
) r ' l
-4-
ASSIGNMENT
FOR VAI,UE RECEfVED, the undersigned selIs, assigns and
transfers unt,o
(Name a s of Assignee)
( Soc Security or Identi ng of Assignee)
the within Bond and a1l rights thereunder and hereby irrevocably
constj.tutes and appoints
Legal Repres-ntatiie, to ior
registration thereof, with full power of substitution in the
premises.
Dated:
Signature Guaranteed:
(e.9. Bank, Trust Company
or Securities firm)
(Authorized Office-;
(Depositoly or Nominee Name)
NOTICE: This signature must
correspond with the name of
the depository as it appears
upon the face of the within
Bond in every particular,
without alteration or enlargement
or any change whatever.
- 5 -
OT|LT/gL II: IJ T-AI {I{ 705
u , t , I
t*
$,
U .
Itf
It t, t tqcL|' v u ]
ut u ) :11o,f:
Irttr0o,E
Itfttt
Irlrr00.00
rcll|ttrl
IE57 FINANCIALil f,TS
EXHIBIT D
fl,ts,00l ',ltqq 0f ilruB rf!, frstr s*ilra EHEnnrrln
lFcrlrrE-r Hr t[Yttr tout
+ + + Q l
lAttt! l
It rts.t
I$r0.o
lg,t[.o
tet alJ.[
[a 003/00t
:'- . l
' ! l
i
mrE ptnilil, clttil tnErG, foro r0nt fitcf, rorr, _€.-p --a*.__
a _ viW - - - q - - u!.ili_ rr,000.070.! 0000., t:,{.i i,t,t'*? il un $rgi.r, ur,frr.a, ru uul t0,0o.mr .!00000 r',i[.,J a u{ ,i.,3-! rjd;; t$,..r.s i;r!r; ;',il:;
nt utt| rt.000.o t.!!oo illp:! F,t,t.t,n r!!rffr.5f u un lrrtl.r fr,|5a.c tt!,rffi ts,000..o.e sffi ,r,T?.! i;fr; ltrttrr.r
ut iii ;r,0o.0o0,r fro ;,'tr'l g,'tr.il ru,lrr.o
vtm ,rtiil sioocr..o$ru {,'fri i,,Ei ra,s.f
u!.y1- s,on.oL r0.rf fi,'#.'l ffr:i u?,,!.r v un ?irr.r ;Ili:;
,yrrffi t0,06... f,rftoo !,1:{ r,l.t..r rarc'[
t!,tl,i, .+fo.r ..,.r0 i,,S-J i,,Si? rqs.o
ut rt | il,oo.oo.. r!rto s,'tri ,T,'ffg ta,F.o
U t r l r r m a u . - - ,l!,i,i ?r1orr..o0 en ,i,'Ei fl,'fr.i ra,0!.0f
ty tt. torn.oz rm fi,,fit $l,'fif ut,l;.il u tt I rwr.i
-ii:fii
t.lf0r
tlr5€.1 lo,tltc
llrtill.l E,tt!.o
ltrl'l.[ t6r&'! o
&fo.f tt.co.r
ter80.o lllr0.r
trEl.f 1O.! trat o trt,s.o
frll|.] tr3ll.l
?.$0r riln.ll ttt"ill^g
1",ffiffiffi
IrtgJ! lrt!.a!
ilt,t0l.o tr0at,tf!.tl
r--=-r3
rr4urf !t lfr G apttl cutmnt
luor7El o.t?-lflt I t0rfrF FItilEr pf llr: t.t!
o | / L | / g L l t : 0 5 FAI 4 1 { ? 0 t lE3 7 FINAT.ICIALX KIS + + + 0 8 Oo ol zoog
EXHIBIT E
AHfrO
na+9aJtl
Yoor
tr! 9l,ls$
DttSea*rl
0 llo.gil
r?o,/6,7
1?2,,A8
ll9,ED
l2l,7s0
lass
llg,s
t2ttit
f22t6
tn,/,E
t23SC
122ft
lzr,l4,
120J50
1e4.6
t2lto
--Jeg
la^us
Totd
Cotnltrrd
DrbrlbUer
E s.lto
t6r5c
16t.ffi
Eer$
tEoro
f 70ts
t70fi0
l656tt
170100
l6elt6
160.145
ld,,/f,g
rg72U'
1l,,rc
r@910
t2fgt
l2l.g
. l23i^-
8;4e
CovfEf lsrcO Ca
qr il9l AntEtgstaO t{Cr
Hlrrnur { t2Ar ^n}
, .
5.2E
l.6l
t.50
r.5t
l.5t
t.57
1.67
1,02
t,0
l5t
t4
l6l
l.5t
l.6l
1.66
2.lO
z2l
Lt7
t99l
tw}
lql
t99f
rs
t996
r907
t9r0
t999
2m
20t
?oal
203
u
2q5
2m0
u,
D
s s,m
e#
4t,l.l0
46115
E/S
4g,m
47fr
1S&
49!.0
17,19
4ffi
1SJ70
4N
,,.34
4il.l00
-
soil2s
ts
Chapter 38
LAND DIVISION
38.01 Introduction
38.02 General Provisions
38.03 Land Division Procedures
38.04 Preliminary Plat
38.05 Final Plat
38.06 Certified Survey Map
38.065 Condominium Plats
38.07 Design Standards
38.08 Required Public improvements
38.09 Construction
38.10 Fees
38.11 Definitions
LAND DIVISION ORDINANCE
of the
VILLAGE OF PADDOCK LAKE
KENOSHA COUNTY, WISCONSIN
CHAPTER 38, VILLAGE CODE OF ORDINANCES
April 1992
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Section 38.01 INTRODUCTION
38.01(a) Authority............................... 1
38.01(b) Purpose................................. 1
38.01(c) Intent.................................. 1
38.01(d) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions..... 2
38.01(e) Interpretation.......................... 3
38.01(f) Severability............................ 3
38.01(g) Disclaimer of Liability................. 3
38.01(h) Repeal.................................. 3
38.01(i) Title................................... 3
Section 38.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
38.02(a) Jurisdiction............................ 3
38.02(b) Compliance.............................. 4
38.02(c) Dedication and Reservation of Lands for
Public Purposes......................... 5
38.02(d) Improvements............................ 9
38.02(e) Variances............................... 12
38.02(f) Land suitability........................ 13
38.02(g) Determination of Adequacy of Public
Facilities and Services for All Land
Divisions............................... 16
38.02(h) Lot Sizes............................... 16
38.02(i) Remedies and Penalties.................. 16
38.02(j) Appeals................................. 16b
Section 38.03 LAND DIVISION PROCEDURES
38.03(a) Pre-Application Conference.............. 16b
38.03(b) Neighborhood Sketch Plan................ 16b
38.03(c) Conceptual Plan Review.................. 17
38.03(d) Preliminary Plat Review................. 19
38.03(e) Preliminary Plat Approval............... 22
38.03(f) Final Plat Review....................... 23
38.03(g) Final Plat Approval..................... 26
38.03(h) Minor Land Division (Certified Survey
Map) Review and Approval................ 28
38.03(i) Review and Approval of Extraterritorial
Plats and Certified Survey Maps......... 30
38.03(j) Replat.................................. 31
38.03(k) Extraterritorial Land Divisions......... 31
Section 38.04 PRELIMINARY PLAT
38.04(a) General................................. 31
38.04(b) Plat data............................... 31
38.04(c) Street Plans and Profiles............... 34
38.04(d) Testing................................. 34
38.04(e) Soil and Water Conservation............. 35
38.04(f) Covenants............................... 35
38.04(g) Surveyor's Certificate.................. 35
Section 38.05 FINAL PLAT
38.05(a) General................................. 35
38.05(b) Additional Information.................. 36
38.05(c) Recorded Restrictions................... 36
38.05(d) Survey Accuracy......................... 36
38.05(e) Surveying and Monumenting............... 37
38.05(f) State Plane Coordinate System........... 37
38.05(g) Certificates............................ 38
38.05(h) Recordation............................. 38
Section 38.06 CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP
38.06(a) General................................. 38
38.06(b) Required Information.................... 39
38.06(c) Additional Information.................. 39
38.06(d) State Plane Coordinate System........... 40
38.06(e) Certificates............................ 40
38.06(f) Recordation............................. 41
38.06(g) Frequency of Divisions.................. 41
38.06(h) Correction Instruments.................. 41
Section 38.065 CONDOMINIUM PLATS
38.065(a) General................................. 41a
38.065(b) Required Information.................... 41a
38.065(c) Certificate............................. 41a
38.065(d) Recordation............................. 41a
38.065(e) Fees.................................... 41a
38.065(f) Extraterritorial Condominium Plat....... 41a
Section 38.07 DESIGN STANDARDS
38.07(a) Street Arrangement...................... 41a
38.07(b) Limited Access Highway Treatment........ 43
38.07(c) Street and Pedestrian Way Design
Standards............................... 44
38.07(d) Street Improvements..................... 47
38.07(e) Blocks.................................. 48
38.07(f) Lots.................................... 49
38.07(g) Building and Setback Lines.............. 50
38.07(h) Easements............................... 50
Section 38.08 REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
38.08(a) Survey Monuments........................ 51
38.08(b) Grading................................. 51
38.08(c) Surfacing............................... 51
38.08(d) Curb and Gutter......................... 54
38.08(e) Rural Street Sections................... 55
38.08(f) Urban Street Sections................... 55
38.08(g) Public Sanitary Sewerage System
Facilities.............................. 55
38.08(h) Storm Sewer and Drainage System
Facilities.............................. 57
38.08(i) Water Supply System Facilities.......... 59
38.08(j) Other Utilities......................... 61
38.08(k) Street Lights........................... 61
38.08(l) Street Signs............................ 61
38.08(m) Street Trees............................ 61
Section 38.09 CONSTRUCTION
38.09(a) Commencement............................ 62
38.09(b) Building Permits........................ 62
38.09(c) Plans................................... 62
38.09(d) Erosion Control......................... 63
38.09(e) Existing Flora.......................... 65
38.09(f) Inspection and Construction Related
Services................................ 65
Section 38.10 FEES
38.10(a) General................................. 65
38.10(b) Neighborhood Sketch Plan Fee............ 65
38.10(c) Conceptual Plan Review Fee.............. 65
38.10(d) Preliminary Engineering Cost Estimate
Fee..................................... 65
38.10(e) Certified Survey Map Review Fee......... 66
38.10(f) Preliminary Plat Review Fee............. 66
38.10(g) Final Plat Review Appeal................ 66
38.10(h) Public Park Site Fee.................... 66
38.10(i) Repeal.................................. 67
38.10(j) Engineering and Inspection Fees......... 67
38.10(k) Administrative Fee...................... 67
38.10(l) Storm Sewer Trunk Fee................... 67a
38.10(m) Sanitary Sewer Trunk Fee................ 67a
38.10(n) Water Trunk Fee......................... 67a
38.10(o) Effect on Nonpayment of Fees............ 67a
Section 38.11 DEFINITIONS
38.11(a) General Definitions..................... 68
38.11(b) Specific Words and Phrases.............. 68
Section 38.12 ADOPTION AND EFFECTIVE DATE............. 74

38.01 INTRODUCTION
(a) Authority. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to
the authority granted by Sections 236.45 and 61.354 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to
regulate and control the division of land within the corporate
limits of the Village of Paddock Lake, Wisconsin, and within its
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction, in order to promote
the public health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics, and
general welfare of the Village and its environs.
(c) Intent. It is the intent of this ordinance to
regulate the division of land so as to:
(1) Promote the wise use, conservation,
protection and development of the soil, water,
wetland, woodland, and wildlife resources within
the Village and its extraterritorial jurisdiction
area and to achieve an appropriate relationship
between land use and the supporting and sustaining
natural resource base;
(2) Lessen congestion in the streets and
highways;
(3) Further the orderly layout and appropriate
use of land;
(4) Secure safety from fire, panic and other
dangers;
(5) Provide the best environment for human
habitation;
(6) Conserve the value of buildings place upon
land;
(7) Provide for proper ingress and egress;
(8) Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid
undue concentration of population;
(9) Provide adequate light and air, including
access to sunlight for solar collectors and to
wind for wind energy systems;
(10) Facilitate adequate provision for
transportation, water supply, stormwater,
wastewater, schools, parks, playgrounds, and other
public facilities and services;
(11) Secure safety from flooding, water pollution,
disease and other hazards;
(12) Prevent flood damage to persons and
properties and minimize expenditures for flood
relief and flood control projects;
(13) Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation,
and other pollution of surface and subsurface
waters;
(14) Preserve natural vegetation and cover and
promote the natural beauty of the Village;
(15) Restrict building sites in areas covered by
poor soils or in other areas poorly suited for
development;
(16) Facilitate the further division of larger
tracts into smaller parcels of land;
(17) Ensure adequate legal description and proper
survey monumentation of divided land;
(18) Provide for dedication and reservation of
appropriately located sites for streets (including
adequate right-of-way for anticipated future
widening of streets); water supply, stormwater and
sewerage systems and facilities; schools, parks
and playgrounds; and other desirable public
facilities and services;
(19) Provide for the administration and
enforcement of this ordinance;
(20) Provide penalties for the violation of this
ordinance; and
(21) Assist in the implementation of the Village's
comprehensive plan.
(d) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. Except as is
specifically provided herein, it is not the intent of this
ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with
any existing easements, covenants, agreements, ordinances, rules,
regulations, permits, or approvals previously adopted or issued
pursuant to law. However, where this ordinance imposes greater
restrictions, and such restrictions do not contravene rights
vested under law, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern.
(e) Interpretation. The provisions of this ordinance
shall be interpreted to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the Village.
(f) Severability. In the event that any section,
provision, or portion of this ordinance is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
(g) Disclaimer of Liability. The Village does not
guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas delineated
as floodlands on plats and certified survey maps will be subject
to periodic inundation, nor does the Village guarantee, warrant,
or represent that the soils shown to be unsuited for a given land
use from tests required by the ordinance are the only unsuited
soils within the jurisdiction of this ordinance; and thereby
asserts that there is no liability on the part of the Village,
its agencies, or employees for flooding problems, sanitation
problems, or structural damages that may occur as a result of
reliance upon, and conformance with, this ordinance.
(h) Repeal. This ordinance shall repeal and recreate
any prior ordinance of the Village of Paddock Lake regulating
land divisions.
(i) Title. This ordinance shall be known as, referred
to, and cited as the "Land Division Ordinance of the Village of
Paddock Lake, Kenosha County, Wisconsin" and as "Chapter 38 of
the Village Code of Ordinances."
38.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(a) Jurisdiction. This ordinance shall apply to all
lands within the corporate limits of the Village of Paddock Lake,
Wisconsin, and to all lands within the extraterritorial plat
jurisdiction of the Village as established by Sections 236.10 and
66.32 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The provisions of this
ordinance, as it applies to land divisions resulting in less than
five (5) lots or parcels, shall not apply to:
(1) Transfers of interests in land by will or
pursuant to court order.
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years,
mortgages, or easements.
(3) Sale or exchange of parcels of land between
owners of adjoining property if additional lots
are not thereby created and the lots resulting are
not reduced below the minimum sizes required by
this ordinance, the zoning ordinances, or other
applicable law, ordinances or regulations.
(4) Cemetery plats made under Section 157.07 of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
(5) Assessor's plats made under Section 70.27 of
the Wisconsin Statutes, but such assessors' plats
shall comply with Sections 236.15(1)(a) to (g) and
236.20(1) and (2)(a) to (e) of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(b) Compliance. Except as is specifically provided
for herein, it shall be unlawful to, and no person shall: (1)
convey or divide any land located within the jurisdictional
limits of this ordinance, or (2) record any conveyance or any
plat, certified survey map or other evidence of a land division
made in violation of this ordinance, or (3) construct, assemble
or place any building, structure, or improvement upon any lot or
parcel of land created by a conveyance or land division made in
violation of this ordinance; and no Village zoning, building or
occupancy permit or approval shall be granted with respect to any
lot or parcel of land created in violation of this ordinance;
unless and until such time as there has been full compliance with
all requirements of this ordinance and with the following
statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances and documents, as
amended from time to time:
(1) Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes and all
other applicable state and federal statutes.
(2) Rules of the Wisconsin Department of
Industry, Labor and Human Relations regulating lot
size and lot elevation, if the land to be divided
is not served by a public sewer and provisions for
such service have not been made, and regulating
the extension of sewers.
(3) Rules of the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation relating to safety of entrance upon
and departure from abutting state trunk highways
or connecting streets, and the preservation of the
public interest and investment in the highway
system, if the land owned or controlled by the
divider abuts on a state trunk highway or
connecting street.
(4) Rules of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources relating to the prevention and abatement
of pollution, regulating development activities
within floodland, wetland, and shoreland areas and
within navigable waters, and regulating the
extension of sewers.
(5) Rules of United States Army Corps of
Engineers relating to wetlands.
(6) Rules of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency relating to the prevention and
abatement of pollution and to wetlands.
(7) The Village of Paddock Lake zoning ordinance
and all other applicable village, town and county
ordinances.
(8) Applicable intergovernmental cooperative
agreements.
(c) Dedication and Reservation of Lands for Public
Purposes.
(1) Sites for public purposes, open spaces. In
the design and approval of any plat or certified
survey map, due consideration shall be given to
the establishment of, or the preservation of
appropriate sites for, necessary or desirable
streets, schools, parks, playgrounds, drainageways
and other public facilities or uses, and the
preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands
of fine trees, marshes, lakes, ponds, watercourses
or other desirable, unusual or environmentally
sensitive natural features.
(2) Mandatory dedications.
(a) Dedication of land for streets: The
divider of any proposed land division within
the Village of Paddock Lake shall dedicate to
the Village, without compensation, any land
necessary for public streets or alleys
required or proposed to serve such land
division.
(b) Dedication of easements for other public
improvements. The divider of any proposed
land division within the Village of Paddock
Lake shall dedicate to the Village, without
compensation, appropriate easements for all
sanitary sewerage systems facilities, water
system facilities, storm sewer or drainage
system facilities or drainageways, sidewalks
or pedestrian walkways or other similar
public improvements required or proposed to
serve such land division and not located
within public streets or alleys, together
with any construction or access easements
required in connection with such public
improvements or facilities.
(c) Dedication of easements for private
utilities. The divider of any proposed land
division within the Village shall dedicate to
the Village or other appropriate entity,
without compensation, appropriate easements
for all electric power, gas, telephone and
other private utility or communications
improvements or facilities required or
proposed to serve such land division and not
located within public streets or alleys.
(3) Dedication or reservation of land for other
public purposes.
(a) Public facilities shown on comprehensive
plan component. Whenever a proposed land
division within the Village of Paddock Lake
encompasses all or any part of the site of a
proposed arterial or collector street, public
way, park, playground, school, sanitary
sewerage system facility, water system
facility, storm sewer or drainage system
facility or drainage or any other public
facility or use, the location of which has
been designated on a comprehensive plan
component, the appropriate interest in a
suitably located site of adequate size and
shape for the intended purpose shall be
dedicated or temporarily reserved for
possible public acquisition, as a condition
to final approval of any plat or certified
survey map, unless the Village Board
expressly waives or modifies this
requirement. Whether requiring the
dedication or such a site necessitates the
payment of just compensation shall be
determined by the Village Board prior to
final approval of the plat or certified
survey map.
(b) Other public facilities. The Village
Board may require, as a condition to final
approval of any proposed plat or certified
survey map within the Village, the dedication
or temporary reservation for possible public
acquisition of an appropriate interest in a
suitably located site of adequate size and
shape for any public facility or use.
Whether requiring the dedication of such a
site requires the payment of just
compensation shall be determined by the
Village Board prior to final approval of the
plat or certified survey map.
(c) Preservation easements or restrictive
covenants. The Village Board may require, as
a condition of final approval of any proposed
plat or certified survey map within the
Village, the dedication or temporary
reservation for possible public acquisition
of preservation easements, or the imposition
of restrictive covenants running with the
land, to preserve and protect scenic and
historic sites, stands of fine trees,
wetlands, marshes, lakes, ponds, watercourses
or other desirable, unusual or
environmentally sensitive natural features,
or otherwise to accomplish the purpose and
intent of this Ordinance. Whether the
requirement of such dedications or covenants
necessitates the payment of just compensation
shall be determined by the Village Board
prior to final approval of the plat of
certified survey map.
(4) Temporary reservations for possible public
acquisition.
(a) Statement of reservation. Whenever any
interest in land is reserved on a plat or
certified survey map for possible acquisition
for a public purpose or use, the plat or
certified survey map shall show the
boundaries of the reserved land and shall
contain a statement of the purpose of the
reservation, the interest reserved and the
conditions upon which the land will be
released from such reservation.
(b) Duration of reservation. Interests in
land reserved for public acquisition on an
approved final plat or certified survey map
shall automatically be released from such
reservation eighteen (18) months after the
last required approval of such plat or
certified survey map, unless the reserved
interest in land shall have been acquired
within such period; or unless a
jurisdictional offer to acquire such interest
shall have been made and a Lis Pendens
recorded in the Office of the Register of
Deeds for Kenosha County pursuant to Section
32.05 of the Wisconsin Statutes within such
period; or unless a petition for condemnation
proceeds shall have been filed in the Circuit
Court for Kenosha County and a Lis Pendens
recorded pursuant to Section 32.06 of the
Wisconsin Statutes within such period; or
unless the reservation period shall have been
extended by written agreement signed by the
divider and owner, if the owner and divider
are not the same, and recorded within such
period. In the event that the Village
determines not to acquire the reserved
interest in land, or receives an official
communication from the public body having
authority to acquire such land for the
contemplated purpose that it has determined
not to acquire such interest, the Village
Board shall promptly cause an appropriate
document to be recorded releasing the land
from the reservation.
(c) Conditional approval. To reduce the
hardship on a divider imposed by a
reservation of land or an interest in land
for possible public acquisition, the Village
Board may permit the plat or the certified
survey map to show the ultimate treatment of
such reserved land in the event that the
reserved interest is not acquired for the
public purpose or use. Such ultimate
treatment shall be expressly conditioned, on
the face of the plat, upon the expiration or
removal of the reservation with no public
acquisition having taken place while the land
was under reservation.
(5) Compensation for dedications or acquisitions.
(a) Amount of Compensation. Whenever land
or interests in land are to be dedicated or
acquired after reservation, under
circumstances requiring the payment of just
compensation, the amount of compensation
shall be determined in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 32 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, as amended from time to time.
(b) Disagreement on amount of compensation.
Whenever the Village Board shall have
determined that the payment of just
compensation is required, but the amount of
compensation to be paid for lands or
interests in land to be dedicated or acquired
after reservation cannot be agreed upon by
the Village Board and the divider (and the
owner, if the divider is not the owner) prior
to the Village Board's final approval of the
plat or certified survey map, such lands or
interests in land shall be temporarily
reserved for possible public acquisition, and
any acquisition shall be made in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 32 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time to
time.
(6) Statement of dedication. Whenever land or
interests in lands are dedicated on a plat or on a
certified survey map, the plat or certified survey
map shall show and describe the boundaries of the
dedicated land and shall contain a statement of
the purpose of the dedication and the interest
dedicated.
(7) Credit for dedications. The fair market
value of any dedications made for purposes of
schools or for parks or playgrounds shall be
credited by the Village against any amounts owed
by the divider for the public school site fee
under Section 38.10(i) of this Ordinance or the
public park site fee under Section 38.10(h) of
this Ordinance, respectively.
(8) Environmental investigations. The Village
Board may, as a condition to approval of any
proposed plat or certified survey map, make or
cause to be made, at the divider's cost, such
investigations, tests, representations or
warranties with respect to possible environmental
contamination or pollution of any land proposed to
be dedicated for public facilities which will
serve the proposed land division, or may itself
cause such investigations or tests to be made at
the cost of the divider, as the Board deems
reasonable and prudent under the circumstances.
If such investigations or tests demonstrate that
the land is contaminated or polluted, the Board
may require the divider, as a condition to final
approval of the plat or the certified survey map,
to take reasonable appropriate remedial action.
(d) Improvements.
(1) As a condition of final approval of any final
plat or certified survey map relating to land
located within the Village of Paddock Lake, the
divider shall sign and file with the Village Board
a land division agreement with the Village
agreeing to install all required public
improvements in accordance with the provisions of
this Ordinance and plans and specifications
approved by the Village Board, and shall file with
such agreement a surety bond or irrevocable letter
of credit in an amount one hundred fifteen (115)
percent of the estimated cost of the required
improvements, as a guarantee that such
improvements shall be completed in accordance with
the approved plans and specifications and within
the prescribed time. The divider's agreement and
the surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit
shall be drafted by the Village Attorney and shall
be subject to approval as to form by the Village
Attorney and shall be approved by the Village
Board prior to granting final approval. The
estimated cost of the required improvements shall
be determined by the Village Board, with advice
from such other Village officials or consultants
as may be deemed appropriate by the Board.
(2) Approval of contracts, contractors. All
proposed contracts for the construction and
installation of required public improvements shall
be subject to the approval of the Village Board,
as shall all contractors proposed to do or oversee
such construction or installation.
(3) Installation. After final approval of any
final plat or certified survey map, and after
receiving written authorization from the Village
to proceed, the divider shall install all public
improvements required by this Ordinance, in
accordance with plans and specifications approved
by the Village Board, and at the cost of the
divider except as is otherwise expressly provided
by this Ordinance.
(4) Completion. The divider shall complete the
installation of all underground sanitary sewerage
system facilities, all underground storm sewer or
drainage system facilities, all underground water
system facilities, all underground private
utilities and the base course on the roadways of
all public streets and public alleys during the
first twelve (12) month period following the last
required approval of a final plat or certified
survey map, or of a particular phase of a final
plat, except as may be otherwise required by the
Village Board. All other required public
improvements shall be completed not later than
twenty-four (24) months after the last required
approval of a final plat or certified survey map,
unless the Village Board shall otherwise require.
(5) Phasing. The Village Board may permit the
divider to construct or install required public
improvements in subdivisions or large lot
subdivisions in phases corresponding to the phases
of final plat approval. If a divider shall file a
phasing plan with the preliminary or final plat,
the phasing plan shall number, depict the
boundaries of and describe each phase and shall
state the deadline for submission of a final plat
for each such phase. All such phasing plans shall
be subject to approval by the Village Board.
Phasing shall proceed from existing streets and
utilities, unless a different phasing pattern is
specifically approved by the Village Board. The
approval of a phasing plan by the Village Board
shall permit the divider to obtain building
permits for each approved phase after approved
contracts for the installation of all required
first year public improvements are awarded.
Timely compliance by a divider with an approved
phasing plan shall extend the six (6) months
period within which a final plat is entitled to
approval if it conforms substantially to the
approved preliminary plat, including any
conditions of that approval, and to local plans
and ordinances authorized by law.
(6) Staking and engineering field inspection.
All construction staking and engineering field
inspection shall be conducted by the Village.
(7) Stop work orders. The Village Building
Inspector and/or the Village Engineer shall have
the authority to issue stop work orders on any
required improvement whenever the design,
location, materials, workmanship or manner of
performance is not in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance and the approved
plans and specifications.
(8) Dedication and acceptance. Subject to the
provisions of this Ordinance, the divider shall,
upon completion of the required public
improvements, unconditionally give, grant, convey
and dedicate all required public improvements to
the Village, its successors and assigns forever,
free of charge to the Village, free and clear of
any encumbrances whatsoever. Such dedication
shall include, without limitation, all buildings,
structures, mains, pipes, conduits, lines,
machinery, equipment and appurtenances which is in
any way forms a part of or pertains to such
improvements, together with any easement necessary
for access or maintenance. Dedications of
improvements shall be accepted by the Village at
such time as the improvements shall be accepted by
the Village and are completed in accordance with
the provisions of this ordinance and approved
plans and specifications and acceptance, the
Village shall have the right to connect to or to
integrate with such improvements other facilities
or improvements with no payment or award to the
divider and without the dividers consent.
(9) Guarantee and indemnification. The divider
shall guarantee all required public improvements
against defects due to faulty materials or
workmanship which appear, and of which the divider
is notified, within a period of one (1) year from
the date of acceptance; and shall agree to
indemnify the Village for and hold the Village
harmless against the costs of any repairs required
by such defects, any resulting damage to Village
property and any resulting liability incurred by
the Village.
(e) Variances.
(1) The Village Board shall have the authority in
specific cases, upon application by a divider, and
after a public hearing noticed by a Class I notice
under Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 985, to grant
such variances from the requirements of this
Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where, owing to special conditions,
which are not generally applicable to other
properties and which are not of such a recurrent
nature as to suggest that this Ordinance should be
amended, a literal enforcement of the provisions
of this Ordinance will result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the
spirit of this Ordinance shall be observed, public
safety and welfare secured, and substantial
justice done. Unnecessary hardship shall not be
considered as grounds for a variance if the
hardship was created by the acts or omissions of
the person or entity seeking the variance.
(2) The Village Board shall grant such variance
only after making express findings, which shall be
recorded in the minutes, that each requirement of
subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, and
only upon the affirmative vote of four (4) members
of the Village Board.
(3) The granting of a variance under this section
shall be unnecessary if specific authority is
granted elsewhere in this Ordinance to waive or
modify a requirement of this Ordinance.
(f) Land suitability.
(1) No land shall be divided for residential,
commercial, industrial, governmental,
institutional or any other land use if the land is
determined to be unsuitable for such use by the
Village Board, after receiving the recommendation
of the Village Plan Commission and any other
Village official or consultant as may be
determined by the Board, for reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock
conditions, unfavorable topography, contamination,
erosion potential, inappropriate compaction or any
other feature, characteristic or condition likely
to be harmful to the public health, safety or
welfare or the health, safety or welfare of the
future residents or users of the land in question
or of adjacent properties.
(2) Filled lands shall not be divided into
building sites which are proposed to be served by
on-site soil absorption sewage disposal systems,
except where soil borings, soil percolation tests,
and any other appropriate tests or investigations
conducted by a certified soil tester demonstrate
that such soils are suited to the use of such
systems. Such testing conducted at a minimum of
one appropriate location per building site shall
be required. The Village Board or Village Plan
Commission may require additional testing or
information.
(3) Lands filled within twenty (20) years shall
not be divided into building sites except where
soil borings, other appropriate tests, or
investigations and the opinion of a recognized
expert demonstrate that the compaction, bearing
capacity and other relevant characteristics of the
filled material makes it structurally suitable for
the proposed use. Such testing and expert
investigation of a minimum of one appropriate
location per building site shall be required. The
Village Board or Village Plan Commission may
require additional testing or information.
(4) Lands having a slope of twelve (12) percent
or more shall be maintained in permanent open
space use. No lot shall have more than fifty (50)
percent of its minimum required area in slopes of
ten (10) percent or greater.
(5) Lands having bedrock within six (6) feet of
the natural undisturbed surface shall not be
divided into building sites to be served by onsite
soil absorption sewage disposal systems.
(6) Lands having groundwater (constant water
table) within five (5) feet of the natural
undisturbed surface shall not be divided into
building sites to be served by a on-site soil
absorption sewage disposal system. Lands having
the seasonal high water table within two (2) feet
of the natural undisturbed surface shall not be
divided into building sites to be served by a
mound system. (Ref. ILHR Chapter 83).
(7) Lands covered by soils having a percolation
rate slower than sixty (60) minutes per inch or
faster than ten (10) minutes per inch shall not be
divided into building sites to be served by onsite
soil absorption sewage disposal systems.
(8) Lands drained by farm drainage tile or farm
ditch systems shall not be divided into building
sites to be served by on-site soil absorption
sewage disposal systems.
(9) The Village Board, in applying the provisions
of this Section, shall, in writing, recite the
particular facts upon which it bases its
conclusion that the land is unsuitable for a
particular use or uses. The Village Board may
prescribe remedial action, if appropriate. The
Village Board shall afford the divider an
opportunity to present evidence to rebut the
Board's findings of unsuitability if the divider
so desires. Thereafter, the Village Board may
affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of
unsuitability.
(g) Determination of Adequacy of Public Facilities and
Services for All Land Divisions.
(1) Except as stated herein, a certified survey
map, preliminary plat, final plat, or condominium
plat shall not be approved unless the Plan
Commission and the Village Board determine that
adequate public facilities and public services are
available to meet the needs of the proposed land
division. The Plan Commission and the Village
Board may approve a certified survey map,
preliminary plat, final plat or condominium plat
in the A-2 district which is not serviced by
municipal sanitary sewer and/or a public water
distribution system.
(2) The applicant shall furnish any data
requested by the Village staff. The Village
Administrator shall transmit this information to
the appropriate Village bodies for review and
shall act as coordinator for their reports to the
Plan Commission and the Village Board on the
adequacy of water, sanitary and storm sewers, fire
service, police, parks and open space and
recreation facilities, and transportation
facilities.
(3) Public facilities and public services for a
proposed plat or certified survey map may be found
to be adequate when the following conditions
exist:
(a) That the capacity of the sanitary sewage
collection system and treatment system
necessary to serve the proposed development
is available, presently under construction or
budgeted for by the Village and/or developer,
as determined by the Public Works Committee.
(b) That the capacity of the public water
distribution system and treatment system
necessary to serve the proposed development
is available, presently under construction or
budgeted for by the Village and/or developer,
as determined by the Public Works Committee.
(c) That the capacity of the stormwater
management system necessary to serve the
proposed development is available, presently
under construction or budgeted for by the
Village and/or developer, as determined by
the Public Works Committee.
(d) That the capacity of the public parks,
open space, and recreation facilities and
services necessary to serve the proposed
development is available, presently under
construction or budgeted for by the Village
and/or developer, as determined by the Park
Board.
(e) That timely and adequate public
protection service can be provided to the
development as determined by the Police
Department.
(f) That timely and adequate fire protection
and rescue service can be provided to the
development as determined by the Fire
District.
(g) That the proposed land division is
accessible by existing publicly maintained,
all weather roads adequate to accommodate
both existing traffic and that traffic to be
generated by the proposed land division, or
necessary additional roads and road
improvements are budgeted for construction
with public or private financing, or public
transportation service sufficient to serve
the land division in combination with the
foregoing is available or programmed for the
area, as determined by the Plan Commission.
The Plan Commission shall consider the
recommendations of other commenting agencies
and jurisdictions, and such factors as level
of service, average and peak use, and any
other information presented.
(h) If the Plan Commission or the Village
Board determine that one or more public
facilities or services are not adequate for
the proposed development, but that a portion
of the area could be served adequately, or
that careful phasing of the development could
result in all public facilities and public
services being adequate, conditional approval
may include only such portions or may specify
phasing of the development.
(4) Failure to comply with the requirements of
this ordinance shall invalidate purported
transfers of titles at the option of the purchaser
in accordance with the provisions of Section
236.31(3), Wisconsin Statutes.
(5) A building permit shall be refused for any
site violation of this ordinance.
(h) Lot Sizes. In the case of all subdivisions and
minor subdivisions, including all plats and certified survey
maps, lot sizes shall conform to the area and width requirements
of this Zoning Code, unless otherwise modified by the provisions
of this Ordinance.
(i) Remedies and penalties.
(1) The Village may institute appropriate actions
or proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance and of Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin
Statutes by means of injunction, forfeitures or
penalties or otherwise as provided by law.
(2) Any person who violates the provisions of
this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not less than ten ($10.00) Dollars nor
more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars for each
violation, unless more specific amounts are
provided herein, plus the costs of prosecution.
The penalty for default of payment of any such
forfeiture and costs shall be imprisonment in the
Kenosha County Jail until payment thereof, but not
exceeding six (6) months. Each day a violation
exists or continues shall constitute a separate
violation. Any specific forfeitures or penalties
provided in Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
including without limitation the following, shall
be applicable:
(a) Recordation of a subdivision plat
without submitting such plat for approval, or
failure to present such plat for recording
within the time prescribed after approval: a
forfeiture of not less than One Hundred
($100.00) Dollars nor more than One Thousand
($1,000.00) Dollars, pursuant to Section
236.30 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Violations of Section 236.31(1) of the
Wisconsin Statutes relating to conveyances,
or offers or contracts to convey subdivisions
or lots in subdivisions, with knowledge that
the final plat has not been recorded: a fine
of not more than Five Hundred ($500.00)
Dollars or imprisonment in the Kenosha County
jail for not more than six (6) months, or
both.
(c) Violations of Section 236.32 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, relating to failure to
place monuments as required, or the knowing
removal or disturbance of monuments, or the
failure to replace monuments properly when
ordered to do so: a fine of not more than
Two Hundred Fifty ($250.00) Dollars or
imprisonment in the Kenosha County Jail for
not more than one (1) year.
(3) An assessor's plat made under Section 70.27
of the Wisconsin Statutes may be ordered as a
remedy by the Village, at the expense of the
divider, when a subdivision is created by
successive land divisions.
(j) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an objection to
a subdivision plat or by a failure to approve a plat or certified
survey map, or by a discretionary condition imposed upon the
approval of a plat or certified survey map, may appeal such
objection, failure to approve, or condition as provided in
Section 236.13(5) of the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time
to time, within thirty (30) days of notification of such
objecting authorities objection, failure to approve or condition.
When the appeal is from an objecting authorities objection to a
subdivision plat, or from a failure to approve a subdivision plat
based on an unsatisfied objection of an objecting authority to a
subdivision plat, the agency making the objection shall be made a
party to the appeal.
38.03 LAND DIVISION PROCEDURES
(a) Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the filing
of an application for the approval of a preliminary plat or a
certified survey map, the divider shall meet and consult with the
Village Building Inspector. This consultation is intended to
inform the divider of the purposes, objectives, and requirements
of this Ordinance and of the various components of the Village's
comprehensive plan; to identify at the earliest possible time any
significant policy issues that may require conceptual plan
review; to identify the need for neighborhood sketch planning; to
identify problems or potential adverse impacts that will need to
be addressed in the planning and approval process; and otherwise
to assist the divider and the Village in making sound landdivision
decisions.
(b) Neighborhood Sketch Plan. If the Village Building
Inspector determines at the pre-application conference that no
detailed neighborhood development planning exists for the area in
which the proposed land division will be located, then prior to
filing any conceptual plan, preliminary plat or certified survey
map, the divider shall pay to the Clerk/Treasurer the required
neighborhood sketch plan fee pursuant to Section 38.10(b) and
submit an appropriate neighborhood sketch plan or participate
with the Village in the preparation of an appropriate
neighborhood sketch plan which shows how the proposed land
division will relate to the surrounding area, particularly in
terms of required municipal facilities and services and
compatibility of land uses. The neighborhood sketch plan is
intended to provide the Village Building Inspector, the Village
Plan Commission and the Village Board with the means of reviewing
the pattern of existing and probable future development in and
around the area proposed for land division, access and internal
traffic movement and the practicability of providing municipal
facilities and services to serve such area. The neighborhood
sketch plan, which shall be drawn to a recognized engineering
scale, shall include the following information:
(1) Topographic contours at two (2) foot
intervals.
(2) Public street layout pattern, existing and
proposed.
(3) Lot or parcel layout, existing and proposed.
(4) Zoning, existing and proposed.
(5) Land uses, existing and proposed.
(6) Sanitary and storm sewer, a drainage plan and
water main facilities, existing and proposed, and
related existing or proposed easements.
(7) Lands reserved or dedicated for streets,
parks, playgrounds, schools and other public
purposes, existing or proposed.
(c) Conceptual Plan Review.
(1) If the Village Building Inspector determines
in the pre-application conference, or as a result
of reviewing the neighborhood sketch plan, that
the proposed land division raises significant
policy issues, then prior to filing a preliminary
plat or certified survey map with the Village, the
divider shall pay to the Village Clerk/Treasurer
the required conceptual plan review fee pursuant
to Section 38.10(c) and shall submit a conceptual
plan of the proposed land division for review and
comment by the Building Inspector, the Village
Plan Commission, and the Village Board. Without
limitation, conceptual plan review shall be
required if the proposed land division will create
more than ten (10) buildable lots, will require a
rezoning or will require the installation or
construction of infrastructure to be paid for by
the Village or if there is a lack of agreement
between the divider and the Plan Commission
regarding appropriate dedications or reservations
for public acquisition, or regarding appropriate
waivers of or variances from the requirements of
this Ordinance.
(2) The conceptual plan is intended to provide
the Village Building Inspector, Plan Commission
and the Village Board with an early opportunity to
review policy issues relating to the proposed
development and its possible adverse effects on
the adjacent neighborhood and community.
(3) The conceptual plan, which shall be drawn to
a recognized engineering scale, shall include the
following information:
(a) Neighborhood sketch plan, if required.
(b) Graphic scale and north arrow.
(c) Project name.
(d) Name, address, and telephone number of
developer, engineer, and architect.
(e) Topographic contours at two (2) foot
intervals.
(f) Public/private street layout pattern.
(g) Lot or parcel layout, including the
dimensions and area of each.
(h) Lands to be dedicated or reserved for
streets, parks, schools, or other public
purposes.
(i) Proposed conceptual landscaping.
(j) Number of dwelling units per acre.
(k) Proposed techniques for handling on-site
stormwater, retention/detention facilities.
(l) Conceptual building layouts and parking
areas for all uses, other than single family
residential uses.
(m) Location of existing and proposed
sanitary and storm sewer and water facilities
and existing and proposed utility and
drainage easements.
(n) Artist renderings of structures and
facilities, floor plans, if available.
(o) Identification of existing and proposed
zoning districts.
(p) Significant environmental features,
including without limitation, navigable
waters, wetlands, floodlands, and woodlands.
(q) Any other information which the divider
or the Village Building Inspector, Plan
Commission or Village Board believes will be
helpful in reviewing the conceptual plan.
(4) Any comments of the Village Plan Commission
and of the Village Board upon completion of their
conceptual review shall betaken into account in
any further proceedings relating to the proposed
land division.
(d) Preliminary Plat Review.
(1) Before submitting a final plat of any
proposed subdivision or large lot subdivision for
approval, the divider shall prepare and file with
the Village Building Inspector a preliminary plat
of such proposed subdivision or large lot
subdivision together with sufficient copies for
distribution in accordance with this section, a
list of the applicable approving authorities under
Section 236.10 of the Wisconsin Statutes and of
the applicable objecting authorities under Section
236.12 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and a letter of
application, and shall pay the preliminary plat
review fee to the Village Clerk/Treasurer. The
preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance
with this Ordinance, and the divider shall file
the plat, the list of approving and objecting
authorities and the application with the Village
Building Inspector at least 40 days prior to the
public hearing held by the Village Plan Commission
at which consideration is desired.
(2) No preliminary plat shall be submitted for
approval until after the divider shall have fully
complied with Sections 38.03(1) and 38.03(3) of
this Ordinance and until after any required
conceptual plan review has been completed.
(3) The village building inspector shall, within
five (5) normal working days after the filing of
the preliminary plat for a proposed subdivision,
transmit four (4) copies of the plat, the list and
the application to the Kenosha County Planning and
Development Office; two (2) copies to the
Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and
Consumer Protection with two (2) additional copies
for the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, if
the subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk
highway or a connecting street; two (2) additional
copies for the Wisconsin Department of Industry,
Labor and Human Relations if the subdivision is
not served by public sewer and provision for such
sewer has not been made; and two (2) additional
copies to the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources if shorelands, floodlands or any lands
within five hundred (500) feet of the ordinary
high water mark of any navigable stream, lake or
other body of navigable water are included in the
preliminary plat involving areas within the
extraterritorial plat jurisdiction area, the
Village Building Inspector shall also, within five
(5) normal work days after filing, transmit two
(2) copies of the plat to the Town Board of the
Town of Bristol, Salem or Brighton, as
appropriate.
(4) The Kenosha County Planning and Development
Office, Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade
and Consumer Protection, the Wisconsin Department
of Transportation, the Wisconsin Department of
Industry, Labor and Human Relations and the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources shall
hereinafter be referred to as "objecting
authorities". Upon the receipt of the preliminary
plat, these objecting authorities shall have
twenty (20) days to review the plat and transmit
comments concerning matters within their
jurisdiction to the Village Building Inspector.
(5) The Village Building Inspector may, but shall
not be required to, transmit the specified number
of copies of the preliminary plat for a proposed
large lot subdivision to the objecting authorities
for such informal comment as they choose to make.
(6) In lieu of the procedure set forth in
subsection (1) above, the divider of any proposed
subdivision may, pursuant to Section 236.12(6) of
the Wisconsin Statutes, submit the original
drawing of the preliminary plat directly to the
Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and
Consumer Protection, which will prepare and
forward copies of the plat at the divider's
expense to the objecting authorities. When the
divider elects to use this alternative procedure,
the divider shall submit to the Village Building
Inspector the additional copies of the preliminary
plat provided for by this section and shall
otherwise comply with subsection (1).
(7) The Village Building Inspector shall promptly
transmit eight (8) copies of the preliminary plat
of any subdivision or large lot subdivision to the
Village Plan Commission, eight (8) copies to the
Village Board and one (1) copy each to the Village
Engineer, Attorney, Sanitary Sewer Department and
Highway Foreman.
(8) The Village Building Inspector shall also
transmit one (1) copy of each of the preliminary
plat of any subdivision or large lot subdivision
to the Kenosha County Land Conservation Committee,
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission, Wisconsin Natural Gas Company,
Wisconsin Electric Power Company, and Wisconsin
Bell or General Telephone and Electronics and the
Village cable television franchisee for their
review and recommendation concerning matters
within their jurisdiction (five (5) copies total).
(9) The objecting authorities shall, within
twenty (20) days of the date of receiving their
copies of the preliminary plat, notify the divider
and all other approving and objecting authorities
of any objections or informal comments. If there
are no objections to the preliminary plat of a
proposed subdivision, the objecting authority
shall so certify on the face of a copy of the plat
and shall return that copy to the Village Building
Inspector. If an objecting authority fails to act
within twenty (20) days, it shall be deemed to
have no objection to the plat. If it is unclear
from the face of any objection received by the
Village when the objecting authority received a
copy of preliminary plat and when it acted, any
objection, received by the Village within thirty
(30) days of the date of original transmission of
copies of the preliminary plat to or for such
authority, shall be deemed timely.
(10) No plat of subdivision shall be approved or
deemed to be approved until any timely objections
from objecting authorities shall have been
satisfied.
(11) The Village Building Inspector shall certify
on the preliminary plat the date on which it was
filed, the date on which the copies were
transmitted to objecting authorities, the date on
which any timely objections were received from
objecting authorities or that none were received,
and whether the objections were satisfied.
(12) The Village Plan Commission shall promptly
review the proposed preliminary plat, after the
appropriate objections or comments have been
received, for conformance with the Ordinance and
all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules,
regulations, intergovernmental agreements, and
comprehensive plan components. The Plan
Commission shall comment on and recommend action
on the proposed preliminary plat. The Plan
Commission shall promptly transmit the plat and
its comments and recommendations to the Village
Board.
(13) Notification. The Village Plan Commission,
at the time it recommends approval, conditional
approval, or rejection of a preliminary plat,
shall cause notice of its recommendation to be
given to the clerk of any municipality or town
within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundary
of the land included within the land division.
(Failure to give such notice shall not invalidate
any action under this Ordinance, however).
(e) Preliminary Plat Approval.
(1) The Village Board shall, within one hundred
twenty (120) days of the date of filing of a
preliminary plat, unless the time has been
extended by agreement with the divider, approve,
approve conditionally, or reject such plat.
(2) Written statement. If the preliminary plat
is approved conditionally or rejected, the
conditions of approval or reasons for rejection
shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and
a written statement of the conditions of approval
or reasons for rejection shall be promptly
forwarded to the divider.
(3) One (1) copy each of the preliminary plat as
acted on by the Village Board, and of the written
statement of the conditions of approval or reasons
for rejection, if any, shall be placed in the
Village Office permanent file.
(4) Failure of the Village Board to act on the
preliminary plat within one hundred twenty (120)
days from the date of filing shall constitute an
approval of the plat as filed, unless the review
period is extended by agreement with the divider,
or unless timely objections of objecting
authorities to a subdivision plat have not been
satisfied. In the event a preliminary plat has
not been approved or rejected within ninety (90)
days of the date of filing and no agreement
extending the review period has been entered into
with the divider, then the Village Board shall
schedule a meeting for reviewing the status of the
preliminary plat not more than one hundred five
(105) days from the date of filing.
(5) Approval or conditional approval of a
preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic
approval of the final plat, but if the final plat
is submitted within six (6) months of the last
required preliminary plat approval and conforms
substantially to the preliminary plat as approved,
including any conditions of approval, and to local
plans and ordinances adopted as authorized by law,
the final plat shall be entitled to approval.
(f) Final Plat Review.
(1) No final plat of any proposed subdivision or
large lot subdivision shall be submitted for
approval until after a preliminary plat of such
subdivision or large lot subdivision shall have
been duly approved in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) The divider shall prepare and file with the
Village Building Inspector a final plat of any
proposed subdivision or large lot subdivision,
together with sufficient copies for distribution
in accordance with this section, a list of the
applicable approving authorities under Section
236.10 of the Wisconsin Statutes and the
applicable objecting authorities under Section
236.12 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and a letter of
application, and shall pay the final plat review
fee pursuant to Section 38.10(g) to the Village
Clerk/Treasurer. The final plat shall be prepared
in accordance with this Ordinance, and the divider
shall file the plat, the list, and the application
with the Village Building Inspector at least forty
(40) days prior to the public hearing held by the
Village Plan Commission at which consideration is
desired.
(3) The Village Building Inspector shall, within
five (5) normal working days after the filing of a
final plat, list and application for a proposed
subdivision, transmit four (4) copies to the
Kenosha County Planning and Development Office;
two (2) copies to the Wisconsin Department of
Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection; with
two (2) additional copies for the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation, if the subdivision
abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway or a
connecting street; two (2) additional copies to
the Wisconsin Department of Industry, Labor and
Human Relations if the subdivision is not served
by a public sewer and provision for such service
has not been made; and two (2) additional copies
to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
if shorelands, floodlands or lands within five
hundred (500) feet of the ordinary high water mark
of any navigable stream, lake or other body of
navigable water are included in the final plat.
For any final plat involving areas within the
extraterritorial plat jurisdiction area, the
Village Building Inspector shall also, within five
(5) normal work days after filing, transmit two
(2) copies of the plat to the Town Board of the
Town of Bristol, Salem or Brighton, as
appropriate.
(4) The Kenosha County Planning and Development
Office, the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture,
Trade and Consumer Protection, the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation, the Wisconsin
Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations
and the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
shall hereafter be referred to as "objecting
authorities". Upon the receipt of the final plat,
these objecting authorities shall have twenty (20)
days to review the plat and transmit comments
concerning matters within their jurisdiction to
the Village Building Inspector.
(5) The Village Building Inspector may, but shall
not be required to, transmit the specified number
of copies of the final plat for a proposed large
lot subdivision to the objecting authorities for
such informal comment as they may choose to make.
(6) In Lieu of the procedure set forth in
subsection (2) above, the divider of any proposed
subdivision may, pursuant to Section 236.12(6) of
the Wisconsin Statutes, submit the original
drawing the final plat directly to the Wisconsin
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer
Protection, which will prepare and forward copies
of the plat at the divider's expense to the
objecting authorities. When the divider elects to
use this alternative procedure, the divider shall
submit to the Village Building Inspector the
additional copies of the final plat provided for
by this Section and otherwise fully comply with
subsection (2).
(7) The Village Building Inspector shall promptly
transmit eight (8) copies of the final plat to the
Village Plan Commission, eight (8) copies to the
Village Board and one (1) copy each to the Village
Engineer, Attorney, Sanitary Sewer Department and
Highway Foreman.
(8) The Village Building Inspector shall also
transmit one (1) copy of each of the final plat to
the Kenosha County Land Conservation Committee,
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission, Wisconsin Natural Gas Company,
Wisconsin Electric Power Company, and Wisconsin
Bell or General Telephone and Electronics and the
Village cable television franchisee for review and
recommendation concerning matters within their
jurisdiction (five (5) copies total).
(9) The Kenosha County Land Conservation
Committee, Southeastern Wisconsin Regional
Planning Commission, Wisconsin Natural Gas
Company, Wisconsin Electric Power Company and
Wisconsin Bell or General Telephone and
Electronics and the Village cable television
franchisee shall hereafter be referred to as
advisory authorities. Upon the receipt of the
final plat, these advisory authorities shall have
twenty (20) days to review the plat and transmit
comments to the Village Plan Commission.
(10) The objecting authorities shall, within
twenty (20) days of the date of receiving their
copies of the final plat, notify the divider and
all other approving and objecting authorities of
any objections or informal comments. If there are
no objections to the final plat of a proposed
subdivision, the objecting authority shall so
certify on the face of a copy of the plat and
shall return that copy to the Village Building
Inspector. If an objecting authority fails to act
within twenty (20) days, it shall be deemed to
have no objection to the plat. If it is unclear
from the face of any objection received by the
Village when the objecting authority received a
copy of the final plat and when it acted, any
objection received by the Village within thirty
(30) days of the date of the original transmission
of copies of the final plat to or for such
authority shall be deemed timely.
(11) The Village Building Inspector shall certify
on the final plat the date on which it was filed,
the date on which copies were transmitted to
objecting authorities, the date on which any
timely objections were received from objecting
authorities
or that none were received, and whether the
objections were satisfied.
(12) Plan Commission recommendation. The Village
Plan Commission shall, within forty (40) days of
the date of the filing of the proposed final plat
review the proposed final plat as to its
conformance with the approved preliminary plat;
any conditions of the approval of the preliminary
plat, this Ordinance and other applicable
statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations,
intergovernmental agreements and comprehensive
plan components and shall comment and recommend
action on the proposed final plat. The Plan
Commission shall promptly transmit the plat and
its comments and recommendations to the Village
Board.
(13) Phased final platting. If permitted by the
Village Board, the approved preliminary plat may
be final platted in phases, with each phase
encompassing only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which the divider proposed to
record at one time and with respect to which the
divider proposes to install all required public
improvements in one phase. Each such phase shall
be designated as a phase of the approved
preliminary plat. Timely compliance by a divider
with an approved phasing plan (see Section
38.02(4)(e) of this Ordinance) shall extend the
six (6) months period within which a final plat is
entitled to approval if it conforms substantially
to the approval, and to the local plans and
ordinances authorized by law.
(g) Final Plat Approval.
(1) Submission. If the final plat is not
submitted for approval within thirty-six (36)
months of the last required approval of the
preliminary plat, the Village Board may refuse to
approve the final plat, unless the divider shall
have timely complied with an approved phasing
plan. (See Sections 38.03(6)(m) and 38.02(4)(e)
of this Ordinance.)
(2) Village Board action. The Village Board
shall, within one hundred twenty (120) days of the
date of filing of a final plat, unless the time
has been extended by agreement with the divider,
approve, conditionally approve or reject the plat.
Ten (10) days prior written notice shall be given
to the clerk of any municipality or town whose
boundary is within one thousand (1,000) feet of
any land included within a proposed final plat of
the Village Board's intention to consider approval
of such a plat, but failure to give such notice
shall not invalidate any action taken under this
Ordinance.
(3) Written statement. If the final plat is
approved conditionally or rejected, the conditions
of approval or reasons for rejection shall be
stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written
statement shall be promptly forwarded to the
divider.
(4) Failure to act. Failure of the Village Board
to take action on a proposed final plat within one
hundred twenty (120) days of the filing of the
plat, the time having not been extended by
agreement with the divider and no unsatisfied
objections from objecting authorities having been
filed, the plat shall be deemed approved, and upon
demand, a certificate to that effect shall be made
on the face of the plat by the Village
Clerk/Treasurer. In the event a preliminary plat
has not been approved or rejected within ninety
(90) days of the date of filing and no agreement
extending the review period has been entered into
with the divider, then the Village Board shall
schedule a meeting for reviewing the status of the
preliminary plat not more than one hundred five
(105) days from the date of filing.
(5) Satisfying of conditions. The divider shall
submit to the Village Board proof of satisfaction
of all conditions imposed by the Board within six
(6) months, or such other time period as the Board
may prescribe, after notification of the
conditional approval. The Village Board shall
grant final approval when all such conditions are
satisfied. Until all such conditions are
satisfied, and the Board has granted final
approval, the final plat shall not be certified as
approved and shall not be recorded.
(6) Final approval. Upon granting final
approval, the Village Board shall cause the
Village President and the Village Clerk/Treasurer
to so certify on the face of the original plat and
promptly return the plat to the divider for
recording.
(7) Recordation. The divider shall record the
finally approved final plat with the Kenosha
County Register of Deeds within twelve (12) months
after the last required approval and within
thirty-six (36) months of preliminary plat
approval or such final plat shall be void.
(h) Minor Land Division (Certified Survey Map) Review
and Approval. (See Section 38.11(7) of these Ordinances)
(1) The divider shall prepare a certified survey
map of any proposed minor land division, a list of
approving authorities and a letter of application,
in accordance with this Ordinance, and shall file
the original and three (3) copies of the certified
survey map, the list and the letter of application
with the Village Building Inspector, and shall pay
to the Village Clerk/Treasurer the required
certified survey map fee pursuant to Section
38.10(e), at least thirty (30) days prior to the
meeting of the Plan Commission meeting at which
action is desired.
(2) No certified survey map shall be submitted
for approval until after the divider shall have
fully complied with Sections 38.03(a), 38.03(b)
and 38.03(c) of this Ordinance and until after any
required conceptual plan review has been
completed.
(3) The certified survey map shall include all of
the contiguous land which is owned or controlled
by the divider (or the owner if the divider and
the owner are not the same) even though only a
portion of such land is proposed for immediate
development or conveyance, except that if the land
division results in a residual parcel in excess of
ten (10) acres which is not intended for immediate
development or conveyance. The Village Board may
waive this requirement, provided that a
supplementary map of reasonable accuracy shall be
attached showing the relationship of the land
division to such contiguous land.
(4) The Village Building Inspector shall promptly
transmit eight (8) copies of the certified survey
map, a list of approving authorities and letter of
application to the Village Plan Commission and
eight (8) copies to the Village Board, as well as
one (1) copies each to any other approving
authority.
(5) The Village Building Inspector shall also
promptly transmit copies of the certified survey
map to all affected Village Departments and
agencies including, but not limited to, the
Village Engineer, Attorney, Sanitary Sewer
Department and Highway Foreman, for their comments
and recommendations concerning matters within
their jurisdiction. Copies may also be
transmitted to the Kenosha County Land
Conservation Committee and to the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission for review
and comment.
(6) The Village Building Inspector shall promptly
transmit copies of the certified survey map to the
Kenosha County Planning and Development Office to
verify and/or complete an affidavit of
verification of holding tank rights for the
property, where applicable.
(7) Plan Commission review. The certified survey
map shall be reviewed by the Village Plan
Commission for conformance with this Ordinance and
with all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules,
regulations, intergovernmental agreements, and
comprehensive plan components.
(8) Plan Commission recommendation. The Village
Plan Commission shall, within forty (40) days from
the date of filing of the certified survey map,
recommend approval, conditional approval or
rejection of the map, and shall promptly transmit
the map along with its recommendations to the
Village Board.
(9) Village Board action. The Village Board
shall approve, approve conditionally or reject the
certified survey map within sixty (60) days from
the date of filing of the map unless the time is
extended by agreement with the divider.
(10) Written statement. If the certified survey
map is approved conditionally or rejected, the
conditions of approval or reasons for rejection
shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and
a written statement shall be promptly forwarded to
the divider.
(11) Satisfaction of conditions. The divider
shall submit to the Village Board proof of
satisfaction of all conditions imposed by the
Board within six (6) months, or within such other
period of time as the Board may prescribe, after
notification of the conditional approval. The
Village Board shall grant final approval when all
such conditions are satisfied. Until all such
conditions are satisfied, the certified survey map
shall not be certified as approved and shall not
be recorded.
(12) Certification of approval. Upon granting
final approval of the certified survey map, the
Village Board shall cause the Village President
and the Village Clerk/Treasurer to so certify on
the face of the original map and promptly return
the map to the divider for recording.
(13) Recordation. The divider shall record the
finally approved certified survey map with the
Kenosha County Register of Deeds within thirty
(30) days after the last required approval.
(14) Copies. The divider shall file three (3)
copies of the recorded certified survey map with
the Village Building Inspector for the permanent
records of the Village within thirty (30) days
after the last required approval of the certified
survey map.
(15) Failure to act. Failure of the Village Board
to take action on a proposed certified survey map
within sixty (60) days of the filing of the map,
the time having not been extended by agreement
with the divider, the map shall be deemed
approved, and upon demand, a certificate to that
effect shall be made on the face of the map by the
Village Clerk/Treasurer.
(i) Review and Approval of Extraterritorial Plats and
Certified Survey Maps. When a divider proposes to divide lands
located in the unincorporated area within one and one-half (1½)
miles of the corporate limits of the Village of Paddock Lake, the
following exceptions to the provisions of this Ordinance shall
apply:
(1) Transmittal responsibility. If a plat of
subdivision is first submitted to the Town of
Bristol Clerk or to the Town of Salem Clerk or the
Town of Brighton Clerk, or to the Kenosha County
Planning and Development Office, the Town or
County shall be responsible for transmitting
copies of the plat or map to designated objecting
authorities unless the divider has specifically
requested that the Village assume the
responsibility of transmitting all review copies.
The divider shall specify in his letter of
application to whom the original application is
being submitted.
(2) Improvements. The divider shall not be
required to make any improvements other than those
required by the Town or County.
(3) Dedications. The divider shall not be
required to dedicate land to the Village nor shall
the divider be required to pay a public site fee
to the Village.
(j) Replat. When a divider proposes to replat or
vacate a recorded plat or certified survey map, or part thereof,
the divider shall first comply with Sections 236.36 through
236.44 of the Wisconsin Statutes to the extent applicable. The
divider shall then proceed in accordance with the provisions of
this Ordinance.
(k) Extraterritorial Land Divisions.
(1) Extraterritorial land division policies. The
following policies shall specifically govern the
Village’s review of divisions of land within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction area in order to
promote the intent and those purposes set forth in
this Chapter:
(a) No such land divisions will be
permitted, without approval of the Village,
in accordance with the procedures in this
Chapter as applicable to land divisions
within the Village.
(b) Such land divisions will be permitted
if not exceeding an overall density of one
(1) dwelling unit for 35 acres, exclusive of
the farmstead demonstrated by the land
divider to the satisfaction of the Village to
be existing as of the effective date of this
Chapter. Lots for non-residential use will
be handled on a case-by-case basis. The
standards used to review these land divisions
will be the same as the standards contained
in the Kenosha County Agricultural Zoning
District Ordinances that are used for
considering rezonings. The only exception to
this policy is that lots resulting in the
infill of existing subdivisions may be
permitted.
(c) The minimum lot size within the
Village’s extraterritorial limits of the
Village of Paddock Lake shall be one (1)
acre. A smaller lot size may be allowed if
also approved by the respective Town Board.
In all instances, the density provisions of
paragraph 1.b., immediately above, shall also
apply.
(d) The Village will attempt to seek
consistency between its Plans and locally
adopted Town Plans. To the extent that the
policies of the Village are more restrictive
in regard to the protection of the public
health, safety, welfare, environmental
quality, or in terms of implementing the
Village’s Comprehensive Plan or Official Map,
the Village's policies shall prevail. All
land divisions within the extraterritorial
limits will be subject to the land
reservation or dedication requirements of
this Chapter. This specifically means the
following:
(1) Any public right-of-way area
identified on the Village Master Plan or
Official Map shall be dedicated in
conformance with requirements of this
Chapter.
(2) Any waterway or storm water
management area identified on the
Village Master Plan or Official Map
shall be dedicated in conformance with
requirements of this Chapter.
(3) If any lands fall within the limits
of an environmental corridor, as mapped
by the Village or Kenosha County, the
land divider shall record a public open
space easement specifying that the
development shall be consistent with
conservancy area zoning in the Village’s
Zoning Code.
(e) Such land divisions shall meet all of
the development layout design standards
contained in this Chapter.
(f) Such land divisions shall follow the
erosion control requirements established by
the Village in this Chapter or in any other
ordinance or regulation.
(g) Such land divisions shall pay the
required review fees contained in this
Chapter prior to initial placement on the
Plan Commission agenda.
(h) The plat, condominium plat, or certified
survey map shall include the entire original
parcel of land from which any new lots or
parcels are created, and a note shall be
placed on the face of the plat or certified
survey map indicating areas necessary for
compliance with the density standard
established herein.
(2) Extraterritorial land division procedures.
(a) In all cases, the time period within
which action is required shall not begin
until the Town Board, the staff serving the
Kenosha County Land Use Committee, and the
Village of Paddock Lake have received all
maps, drawings and data required for plat,
condominium plat, or certified survey map
approval.
(b) No person shall divide any land located
within the Village’s extraterritorial land
division approval without first filing an
application and paying the Village’s standard
land division review fees contained in this
Chapter. The timing for filing the
application and paying the Village’s review
fees shall be the same as otherwise required
per land division within the Village.
(c) Before filing an application for
approval of a plat or certified survey, the
subdivider shall consult with the Village
Building Inspector and shall prepare the
following:
(1) Prepare a preliminary sketch for
review and approval.
(2) Complete a Environmental Assessment
Checklist, or when required, an expanded
Environmental Assessment Report required
by this Chapter, for review and
approval.
(3) This procedure is intended to
assist the developer in appraising the
objectives of these regulations, the
Master Plan, the Official Map and other
pertinent Village ordinances. The
pre-application information shall be
submitted to the Plan Commission for
review and approval.
(d) Submittal requirements for land
divisions within the Village’s
Extraterritorial Land Division Jurisdiction
shall be identical to those required for land
division within the Village Limits.
38.04 PRELIMINARY PLAT
(a) General. A preliminary plat shall be required for
all subdivisions and large lot subdivisions. The preliminary
plat shall be based upon a survey by a registered land surveyor
and shall be prepared on tracing cloth, reproducible drafting
film, or paper of good quality at a map scale of not more than
100 feet to the inch.
(b) Plat data. All preliminary plats shall show each
of the following:
(1) Title or name under which the proposed
subdivisions or large lot subdivision is to be
recorded. Such title shall not be the same as or
similar to a previously approved and recorded
plat, unless it is an addition to a previously
recorded plat and is so stated on the plat.
(2) Location of the proposed subdivision or large
lot subdivision by: government lot, quartersection,
township, range, county and state.
(3) General location sketch showing the location
of the subdivision or large lot subdivision within
the U.S. Public Land Survey section.
(4) Date, graphic scale and north arrow.
(5) Names and addresses of the owner, divider and
land surveyor preparing the plat.
(6) All contiguous land which is owned or
controlled by the divider (or the owner, if the
divider and the owner are not the same) shall be
included in the land division even though only a
portion of said land is proposed for immediate
development. The Village Board may waive this
requirement where it is unnecessary to fulfill the
purposes and intent of the Ordinance and severe
hardship would result from strict application
thereof.
(7) Exact length and bearing of the exterior
boundaries of the proposed subdivision or large
lot subdivision referenced to a corner established
in U.S. Public Land Survey and the total acreage
encompassed thereby.
(8) Existing and proposed contours at vertical
intervals of not more than two (2) feet where the
slope of the ground surface is less than ten (10)
percent, and of not more than five (5) feet where
the slope of the ground surface is ten (10)
percent or more. Elevations shall be marked on
such contours based on National Geodetic Vertical
Datum of 1929 (mean sea level).
(9) Water elevations of lakes and streams at the
date of the survey and approximate high and low
water elevations, all referred to mean sea level
(1929) datum.
(10) Floodland limits as a contour line showing
the elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval
flood, or where such data is not available of the
maximum flood of record.
(11) Location, right-of-way width and names of all
existing streets, alleys or other public ways,
easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way and
all section and quarter section lines within the
exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately
adjacent thereto.
(12) Type, width and elevation of any existing
street pavements within the exterior boundaries of
the plat or immediately adjacent thereto together
with any legally established centerline
elevations, all referenced to mean sea level (1929
datum).
(13) Location and names of any adjacent
subdivisions, parks and cemeteries, and owners of
record of abutting unplatted lands.
(14) Location, size and invert elevation of any
existing sanitary or storm sewers, wells, culverts
and drain pipes, the location of manholes, catch
basins, hydrants, power and telephone poles, and
the location and size of any existing water and
gas mains within the exterior boundaries of the
plat or immediately adjacent thereto. If no
sanitary or storm sewers or water mains are
located on the or immediately adjacent to the
lands being platted, the nearest such sewers or
water mains which might be extended to serve such
lands shall be indicated by their direction and
distance from the nearest exterior boundary of the
plat, and their size and invert elevations.
(15) Proposed lot grades shall be shown on the
preliminary plat or grading plan. Lot grades
shall be one and one-half (1½) to two (2) feet
above the roadway center line grade or as other
wise recommended by the Village Building
Inspector.
(16) Locations of all existing property boundary
lines, structures, drives, streams and
watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded
areas, railroad tracks and other similar
significant natural or man-made features within
the tract being divided or immediately adjacent
thereto.
(17) Location, width and names of all proposed
streets and public rights-of-way such as alleys
and easements. To the extent practicable, all
street names shall conform to the existing system
of numerical streets and avenues.
(18) Approximate dimensions of all lots together
with proposed lot and block numbers.
(19) Location and approximate dimensions of any
sites to be reserved or dedicated for streets,
schools, parks, playgrounds, drainageways, or
other public purposes or uses.
(20) Approximate radii of all curves.
(21) Existing and proposed zoning on the proposed
subdivision or large lot subdivision.
(22) Any proposed lake or stream access with a
small drawing clearly indicating the location of
the proposed subdivision or large lot subdivision
in relation to the access.
(23) Any proposed lake and stream improvement or
relocation.
(24) Soil type, slope and boundaries as shown on
the detailed operational soil survey maps prepared
by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.
(25) Location of soil boring tests, where required
by Section ILHR 85.06 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, made to a depth of six (6)
feet, unless bedrock is at a lesser depth. The
number of such tests shall be adequate to portray
the character of the soil and the depths of
bedrock and groundwater from the natural
undisturbed surface. To accomplish this purpose,
a minimum of one (1) test per three (3) acres
shall be made initially. The results of such
tests shall be submitted along with the
preliminary plat.
(26) Location of soil percolation tests where
required by Section ILHR 85.06 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, taken at the location and
depth in which soil absorption waste disposal
systems are to be installed (if applicable). The
number of such tests initially made shall not be
less than one (1) test per three (3) acres or one
(1) test per lot, whichever is greater. The
results of such tests shall be submitted along
with the preliminary plat.
(c) Street Plans and Profiles. The Village Board,
after determining from the preliminary plat that the engineering
design characteristics are such that the site will require
stormwater management engineering design and calculations for
retention or detention facilities, or substantial grading and
other earthmoving operations for the installation of public
improvements, including public sanitary sewer, public water,
storm sewer, and curb and gutter; shall require the divider to
provide street plans and profiles showing existing ground
surface, proposed and established street grades, including
extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the
proposed subdivision or large lot subdivision when requested.
All elevations shall be based upon mean sea level (1929) datum,
and plans and profiles shall be designed in conformance with the
Village's engineering design specifications.
(d) Testing. The Village Board, after determining
from a review of the existing engineering studies or previous
soil boring completed for the preliminary plat that the soil,
slope, vegetation, or drainage characteristics of the site are
such that the installation of public improvements will require
additional engineering design studies or investigations, may
require that borings and soundings be made in specified areas to
ascertain subsurface soil, rock and water conditions. Where the
subdivision or large lot subdivision will not be served by public
sanitary sewer service, the provisions of Chapter ILHR 85 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code shall be complied with, and the
appropriate data shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
(e) Soil and Water Conservation. The Village Board,
after determining from a review of the preliminary plat that the
soil, slope, vegetation, and drainage characteristics of the site
are such as to require substantial cutting, clearing, grading,
and other earthmoving operations in the development of the land
division or otherwise entail a severe erosion hazard, shall
require the divider to provide soil erosion and sedimentation
control plans and specifications. Such plans shall generally
follow the guidelines and standards set forth in the U.S.
Conservation Service Technical Guide, adopted by the Kenosha
County Land Conservation Committee, and shall be in accordance
with standards set forth in Section 38.09(d) of this Ordinance.
(f) Covenants.
(1) Whenever the divider proposes to regulate
land use, density, environmental protection,
street access, landscaping, building materials, or
other matters in the proposed land division by
means of restrictive covenants, the divider shall
submit all such proposed covenants. The covenants
shall be subject to approval of the Village Board.
Such covenants shall not conflict with and shall
not be less restrictive than any applicable
village, town, county, state or federal statutes,
ordinances, rules or regulations.
(2) The divider shall be required to create
appropriate and satisfactory mechanisms to ensure
that common areas, outlots, retention and
detention facilities and other similar areas are
properly maintained. The Village of Paddock Lake
shall be granted appropriate authority to enforce
the maintenance of such areas, or perform such
maintenance itself, and to recover the cost of
performing such maintenance.
(g) Surveyor's Certificate. The surveyor preparing
the preliminary plat shall certify on the face of the plat that
it is a correct representation of all existing land divisions and
features and that the surveyor has fully complied with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
38.05 FINAL PLAT.
(a) General. A final plat prepared by a registered
land surveyor shall be required for all subdivisions and large
lot subdivisions. Such plat shall comply in all respects with
the requirements of Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as
amended from time to time, and the provisions of this Ordinance.
(b) Additional Information. The final plat shall show
correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by
Section 236.20 of the Wisconsin Statutes, each of the following:
(1) Exact length and bearing of the centerline of
all streets;
(2) Exact street width along the line of any
obliquely intersecting street;
(3) Railroad rights-of-way within or abutting the
plat;
(4) Setbacks or building lines required by the
Village Board in accordance with the guidelines
set forth in Section 38.07(g) of this Ordinance;
(5) Utility and/or drainage easements;
(6) All lands to be dedicated or reserved for
future public acquisition, or reserved for the
common use of property owners within the plat;
(7) Special restrictions required by the Village
Board relating to access control along public ways
or to the provision of planting strips.
(c) Recorded Restrictions. The Village Board may
require that restrictions be filed with the final plat to
accomplish the purpose and intent of this Ordinance and that such
restrictions shall be recorded with the approved plat and run
with the land.
(d) Survey Accuracy. The Village Building Inspector
shall examine all final plats within the Village and may make, or
cause to be made by a registered land surveyor under the
supervision or direction of the Village Building Inspector, field
checks for the accuracy and closure of survey, the proper kind
and location of monuments and the legibility and completeness of
the drawing. In addition:
(1) Maximum error of closure before adjustment of
the survey of the exterior boundaries of the final
plat shall not exceed, in horizontal distance or
position, the ratio of one (1) part of ten
thousand (10,000), or in azimuth, of four (4)
seconds of arc per interior angle. If field
measurements exceed this maximum, new field
measurements shall be made until a satisfactory
closure is obtained. When a satisfactory closure
of the field measurements has been obtained, the
survey of the exterior boundary shall be adjusted
to form a closed geometric figure.
(2) All street, block and lot dimensions shall be
computed as closed geometric figures based upon
the control provided by the closed exterior
boundary survey. If field checks disclose an
error for any interior line of the plat greater
than the ratio of one (1) part in five thousand
(5,000) or an error in measured angle greater than
one (1) minute of arc for any angle where the
shorter side forming the angle is three hundred
(300) feet or longer, necessary corrections shall
be made. Where the shorter side of a measured
angle is less than three hundred (300) feet in
length, the error shall not exceed the value of
one (1) minute multiplied by the quotient of three
hundred (300) divided by the length of the shorter
side; however, such error shall not in any case
exceed five (5) minutes of arc.
(3) Where the plat is located within a U.S.
Public Land Survey quarter-section the corners of
which have been relocated, monumented and
coordinated by the Village of Paddock Lake,
Kenosha County or the Southeastern Wisconsin
Regional Planning Commission, the tie required by
Section 236.20(3)(b) of the Wisconsin Statutes
shall be expressed in terms of grid bearing and
distance; and the material and Wisconsin state
plane coordinates of the monument marking the
relocated section or quarter corner to which the
plat is tied shall be indicated on the plat. The
grid bearing and distance of the tie shall be
determined by a closed survey meeting the error of
closure herein specified for the survey of the
exterior boundaries of the subdivision.
(4) The Village Board shall receive the results
of the Village Consulting Engineer's examination
prior to approving the final plat.
(e) Surveying and Monumenting. All final plats shall
meet all the surveying and monumenting requirements of Section
236.15 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time to time.
(f) State Plane Coordinate System. Where the final
plat is located within a U.S. Public Land Survey quarter-section,
the corners of which have been relocated, monumented and
coordinated by the Village of Paddock Lake, Kenosha County or the
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission, the plat
shall be tied directly to one (1) of the section or quarter
corners so relocated, monumented and coordinated. The exact grid
bearings and distances of such tie shall be determined by field
measurements, and the material and Wisconsin state plane
coordinates of the monument marking the relocated section or
quarter corner to which the plat is tied shall be indicated on
the plat. All distances and bearings shall be referenced to the
Wisconsin Coordinate System, South Zone, and adjusted to the
Kenosha County control survey.
(g) Certificates. All final plats shall provide all
the certificates required by Section 236.21 of the Wisconsin
Statutes; and, in connection with the owner's or mortgagee's
certificate, the owner shall submit as a condition of approval of
the final plat, an abstract of title certified to the date of
submission for approval, or a policy of title insurance brought
up to the date of submission. In addition, the surveyor shall
certify that he has fully complied with all of the provisions of
this Ordinance.
(h) Recordation. The final plat shall only be
recorded with the Kenosha County Register of Deeds after final
approval by the Village Board and after all required certificates
are attached to or inscribed thereon. The approved final plat
shall be recorded by the divider within twelve (12) months after
its last required approval and within thirty-six (36) months of
preliminary plat approval or such final plat shall be void.
38.06 CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP.
(a) General.
(1) A certified survey map prepared by a
registered land surveyor shall be required for all
minor land divisions. It shall comply in all
respects with the requirements of Section 236.34
of the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time to
time. The certified survey map shall comply with
the design standards and improvement requirements
set forth in Sections 38.07 and 38.08 of this
Ordinance, except as provided in Section 38.03(i)
of this Ordinance with respect to extraterritorial
certified survey maps.
(2) A certified survey map may be used to change
boundaries of lots, blocks and outlots within a
recorded final plat or certified survey map if the
redivision does not result in a subdivision or a
large lot subdivision, or alter areas dedicated to
the public or violate any provision of this
Ordinance. A certified survey map may not alter
the exterior boundaries of a recorded plat or
certified survey map, alter areas previously
dedicated to the public or a restriction placed on
platted or mapped land by covenant, easement, or
by any other means.
(b) Required Information. The certified survey map
shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information
required by Section 236.34 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended
from time to time, the following:
(1) All existing structures, watercourses,
drainage ditches and other features pertinent to
proper land division;
(2) Setbacks or building lines if required by the
Village board in accordance with the guidelines
set forth in Section 38.07(g) of the Ordinance;
(3) Utility and/or drainage easements;
(4) All lands to be dedicated or reserved for
future acquisition.
(5) Date of map.
(6) Floodland limits and the contour line
representing the elevation of the 100-year
recurrence interval flood, or where such data is
not available, a contour line showing the
elevation of the maximum flood of record;
(7) Graphic scale and north arrow.
(8) Name and address of the owner, divider and
surveyor.
(c) Additional Information. The following additional
information shall be provided by the divider unless the Village
Board decides that such information is not necessary for the
proper review and consideration of the certified survey map:
(1) Existing contours at vertical intervals of
not more than two (2) feet where the slope of the
ground surface is less than ten (10) percent, and
of not more than five (5) feet where the slope of
the ground surface is ten (10) percent or more.
Elevations shall be marked on such contours based
on National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929
(mean sea level). The requirement to provide
topographic data may be waived if the parcel(s)
created are fully developed.
(2) Soil type, slope and boundaries as shown on
the detailed operational soil survey maps prepared
by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.
(3) Location of soil boring tests, where required
by Section ILHR 85.06 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code. The number of such tests
shall be adequate to portray the character of the
soil and the depth of bedrock and groundwater from
the natural undisturbed surface. To accomplish
this purpose, a minimum of one (1) test per three
(3) acres shall be made initially. The results of
such tests shall be submitted along with the
certified survey map.
(4) Location of soil percolation tests where
required by Section ILHR 85.06 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, taken at the location and
depth in which soil absorption waste disposal
systems are to be installed. The number of such
tests initially made shall not be less than one
(1) test per three(3) acres or one (1) test per
lot, whichever is greater. The results of such
tests shall be submitted along with the certified
survey map.
(5) Location of the ordinary high water mark as
defined by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
(d) State Plane Coordinate System. Where the
certified survey map is located within a U.S. Public Land Survey
quarter section, the corners of which have been relocated,
monumented and coordinated by the Village of Paddock Lake,
Kenosha County or the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission, the map shall be tied directly to one (1) of the
section or quarter corners so relocated, monumented and
coordinated. The exact grid bearings and distances of such tie
shall be determined by field measurements, and the material and
Wisconsin State Plane coordinate of the monument marking the
relocated section or quarter corner to which the map is tied
shall be indicated on the map. All distances and bearings shall
be referenced to the Wisconsin Coordinate System, South Zone, and
adjusted to the Kenosha County's control survey.
(e) Certificates. The surveyor shall certify on the
face of the map that he has fully complied with all of the
provisions of Section 236.34 of the Wisconsin Statutes and this
Ordinance. The Village Board, upon final approval of the map,
shall cause its approval to be certified on the face of the map.
In addition, if streets or other public areas are to be
dedicated or reserved, an owner's certificate and the mortgagee's
certificate, if applicable, in substantially the same form as
required by Section 236.21(2)(a) of the Wisconsin Statutes shall
be required. In connection with the owner's or mortgagee's
certificate, the owner shall submit, as a condition of approval
of the certified survey map, an abstract of title insurance to
the date of submission for approval, or a policy of title
insurance brought up to the date of submission.
(f) Recordation. The certified survey map shall only
be recorded with the Kenosha County Register of Deeds after final
approval by the Village Board and after all required certificates
are attached to or inscribed thereon. The approved map shall be
recorded by the divider within thirty (30) days after its last
required approval.
(g) Frequency of Divisions. No more than four (4)
lots or parcels, each of one and one-half (1½) acres or less in
area, shall be created from a single lot or parcel by successive
certified survey map land divisions within a period of five (5)
years.
(h) Correction Instruments. Correction instruments
relating to plats or certified survey maps may be received in the
Kenosha County Register of Deeds Office and may include:
(1) Affidavits or Warranty Deeds to correct
distances, angles, directions, bearings, chords,
block or lot numbers, street names or other
details shown on a recorded plat or certified
survey map. All affidavits or warranty deeds
shall be approved by the Plan Commission and
Village Board prior to recording. Correction
instruments shall not create new buildable lots
and shall not create nonconforming lots.
(2) Ratifications of a recorded plat or a
certified survey map signed and acknowledged in
accordance with Section 706.07 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(3) Certificates of owners and mortgagees of
record at the time of recording.
38.065 CONDOMINIUM PLATS.
(a) General. A condominium plat shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 703, Wisconsin Statutes, and the
requirements of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter
governing subdivision plats shall apply to condominium plats.
(b) Required Information. A condominium plat shall
show the required particulars enumerated in §703.11, Wis. Stats.
(c) Certificate. A condominium plat shall be recorded
with the County Register of Deeds only after the certificates of
the Village Board and the surveyor are placed on the face of the
map. The map shall be recorded by the Village Clerk/Treasurer
within ninety (90) days of its approval by the Village Board.
(d) Recordation. A condominium plat shall contain the
surveyor’s certificate required in §703.11(4), Wis. Stats., and a
certificate by the Village Clerk/Treasurer indicating compliance
with this section.
(e) Fees. An application fee of Twenty-five ($25.00)
Dollars shall be required in conjunction with the submittal
review and approval of a condominium plat.
(f) Extraterritorial Condominium Plat. Any
condominium plat which falls within the Village’s
extraterritorial jurisdiction for the review of divisions of land
shall conform to the requirements of this chapter including, but
not limited to, §38.03(k) of these ordinances.
38.07 DESIGN STANDARDS.
(a) Street Arrangement. In any new land division the
street layout shall conform to the arrangement, width and
location indicated on the comprehensive plan component of the
Village of Paddock Lake, Wisconsin. In areas for which such
plans have not been completed, the street layouts shall recognize
the functional classification of the various types of streets and
shall be developed and located in proper relation to existing and
proposed streets, to the topography, to such natural features as
streams and tree growth, to public convenience and safety, to the
proposed use of the land to be served by such streets, and to the
most advantageous development of adjoining areas. The land
division shall be designed so that to provide each lot with the
required frontage access on a public street. In addition:
(1) Arterial Streets, as hereinafter defined,
shall be arranged so as to provide ready access to
centers of employment, centers of governmental
activity, community shopping areas, community
recreation, and arterial streets beyond the
boundaries of the Village. They shall also be
properly integrated with and related to the
existing and proposed system of collector streets
and shall be, insofar as practicable, continuous
and in alignment with existing or planned streets
with which they are to connect in a linear
fashion.
(2) Collector streets, as hereinafter defined,
shall be arranged so as to provide ready
collection of traffic from residential areas and
the conveyance of this traffic to the arterial
street system and shall be properly related to
special traffic generators such as schools,
churches and shopping centers and other
concentrations of population and to the arterial
and collector streets to which they connect.
(3) Minor streets, as hereinafter defined, shall
be arranged to conform to the topography, to
discourage use by through traffic, to permit the
design of efficient storm and sanitary sewerage
systems, and to require the minimum street area
necessary to provide safe and convenient access to
abutting properties.
(4) Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary
lines of the parcel or tract being divided unless
prevented by topography or other physical
conditions or unless, in the opinion of the
Village Board, such extension is not necessary or
desirable for the coordination of the layout of
the land division or for the advantageous
development of the adjacent parcels or tracts.
(5) Arterial street protection. Whenever the
proposed land division contains or is adjacent to
an arterial street, adequate protection of
residential properties, limitation of access and
separation of through and local traffic shall be
provided by reversed frontage, with screening or
landscape planting contained in a nonaccess area
along the rear property line, or by the use of
frontage streets.
(6) Stream or lake shores shall have a minimum of
sixty (60) feet of public access platted to the
low water mark at intervals of not more than onehalf
(½) mile as required by Section 236.16(3) of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
(7) Nonaccess areas shall not be provided on any
plat or certified survey map to control access to
streets or alleys, except where control of such
areas is placed with the Village under conditions
approved by the Village Board.
(8) Access shall be provided in commercial and
industrial areas for off-street loading and
service areas unless otherwise required by the
Village Board.
(b) Limited Access Highway Treatment. Whenever the
proposed land division contains or is adjacent to a limited
access highway, the design shall provide the following treatment:
(1) When lots within the proposed land division
back upon the right-of-way of an existing or
proposed limited access highway, a planting strip
at least twenty (20) feet in depth shall be
provided adjacent to the highway in addition to
the normal lot depth. This strip shall be a part
of the platted lots and shall have the following
restriction lettered on the face of the plat or
map: "This strip is reserved for the planting of
trees and shrubs, and the building of structures
hereon is prohibited".
(2) Commercial and industrial properties shall
have provided, on each side of the limited access
highway, streets approximately parallel to and at
a suitable distance from such highway for the
appropriate use of the land between such streets
and highway, but not less than one hundred fifty
(150) feet.
(3) Streets parallel to a limited access highway,
when intersecting an arterial street or collector
street which crosses said highway, shall be
located at a minimum distance of two hundred fifty
(250) feet from said highway. Such distance,
where desirable and practicable, shall be
determined with due consideration of the minimum
distance required for the future separation of
grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
(c) Street and Pedestrian Way Design Standards. The
minimum right-of way and roadway pavement width of all proposed
streets shall be as specified by applicable comprehensive plan
components, including without limitation, neighborhood sketch
plans, or the County jurisdictional highway system plan, or if no
width is specified therein, the minimum widths shall be as shown
on Table 1, below, which is incorporated by reference.
Street cross sections shall be in accordance with Table
1, below, which is incorporated by reference.
Table 1
REQUIRED STREET CROSS SECTIONS IN THE VILLAGE
OF PADDOCK LAKE AND THE VILLAGE'S EXTRATERRITORIAL
PLAT REVIEW JURISDICTION
Minimum
Type of Street Right-of-Way
or Public Way To Be Dedicated Minimum Dimensions
Arterial Streets 130 ft. *Dual 24 ft. pavement
(four-lane) or *18 ft. median
2-lane divided *10 ft. outside shoulders
* 6 ft. inside shoulders
*16 ft. roadside ditches
Arterial Streets 100 ft. *24 ft. pavement
(two-lane) *10 ft. shoulders
*28 ft. roadside ditches
Collector Streets 100 ft. *24 ft. pavement
*10 ft. shoulders
*28 ft. roadside ditches
Minor Streets 66 ft. *24 ft. pavement
* 4 ft. shoulders
*17 ft. roadside ditches
Minimum Cul-de-Sac 66 ft. *45 ft. radius pavement
(w/o center island; radius * 5 ft. shoulders
Tear-drop Design) *16 ft. roadside ditches
Minimum Cul-de-Sac To be determined To be determined on a
(w/center island; on a case-by-case case-by-case basis
Tear-drop Design) basis
(1) Cul-de-Sac streets designed to have one end
permanently closed shall not exceed eight hundred
(800) feet in length measured along their
centerlines from the centerline of the adjoining
street to the end of their rights-of-way. All
urban cul-de-sac streets designed to have one end
permanently closed without a center planting
island shall terminate in a tear-drop turn-around
having a minimum right-of-way radius of seventyfive
(75) feet and a minimum outside curb radius
of forty-eight (48) feet, and all urban cul-de-sac
streets designed to have one end permanently
closed with a center planting island shall
terminate in a tear-drop turn-around having a
minimum right-of-way radius of seventy-five (75)
feet and a minimum outside curb radius of sixty
(60) feet.
(2) Temporary termination of streets intended to
be extended at a later date shall be accomplished
with a temporary construction of a "T"
intersection thirty-three (33) feet in width and
thirty-three (33) feet in length abutting the
right-of-way lines of the access street on either
side.
(3) Street grades. All residential streets shall
be centered within the right-of-way. Unless
necessitated by exceptional topography, and
subject to the approval of the Village Board, the
maximum vertical centerline grade of any street or
public way shall not exceed the following:
(a) Arterial streets: five (5) percent.
(b) Collector streets: seven (7) percent.
(c) Minor streets, alleys and frontage
streets and cul-de-sacs: ten (10) percent.
(d) Pedestrian ways: ten (10) percent
unless steps or stairs of acceptable design
are provided.
(e) The grade of any street shall in no case
exceed ten (10) percent or be less than onehalf
of one percent (0.5).
Street grades shall be established wherever
practicable so as to avoid excessive grading, the
removal of ground cover and tree growth, and
general leveling of the topography.
(4) Radii of curvature. When a continuous,
horizontal street centerline deflects at any one
point by more than two (2) degrees, a circular
curve shall be provided having a radius of
curvature on said centerline of not less than the
following:
(a) Arterial streets and highways: five
hundred (500) feet.
(b) Collector streets: three hundred (300)
feet.
(c) Minor streets and cul-de-sacs: one
hundred fifty (150) feet.
A tangent of at least one hundred (100) feet in
length shall be provided between reverse curves on
arterial and collector streets.
Cul-de-sac shall be connected to the approach
street by reverse curvatures having a radius of
not less than thirty (30) feet per curve.
(5) Centerline profile. When there is a change
in street centerline profiles of more than one (1)
percent, a vertical curve shall be provided.
Vertical curve requirements shall be in accordance
with Wisconsin Department of Transportation
requirements. Minimum vertical curve lengths
shall provide a sight distance of not less than
three hundred (300) feet, measured from an eye
level of four (4) feet high, with a clear view of
an obstacle not over two (2) feet high.
Unless otherwise approved, residential streets
shall have a centerline crown. Offset crowns, or
continuous cross slope shall be considered on a
case by case basis.
(6) Roadway elevations. Elevations of roadways
passing through floodplain areas shall be designed
in the following manner:
(a) Arterial streets and collector streets
shall be designed so that they will not be
overtopped by the 50-year recurrence interval
flood.
(b) Minor streets shall be designed so that
they will not be overtopped by the 10-year
recurrence interval flood.
(7) New and replacement bridges and culverts.
All new and replacement bridges and all culverts
over navigable waterways, including pedestrian and
other minor bridges, in addition to meeting other
applicable requirements shall be designed so as to
accommodate the 100-year recurrence interval flood
event without raising the peak stage, either
upstream or downstream, more than 0.01 foot above
the peak stage or the 100-year recurrence interval
flood, as established in the applicable federal
flood insurance study. Larger permissible flood
stage increases may be acceptable for reaches
having topographic land use conditions which could
accommodate the increased stage without creating
additional flood damage potential upstream or
downstream of the proposed structure providing
that flood easements or other appropriate legal
measures have been secured from all property
owners affected by the excess stage increases.
Such bridges and culverts shall be so designed and
constructed as to facilitate the passage of ice
flows and other debris.
All new and replacement bridges shall be
constructed in accordance with all applicable
statutes and state and federal rules and
regulations and plans shall be submitted to the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to
assure compliance therewith.
(8) Half-streets. Where an existing dedicated or
platted half-street is adjacent to the tract or
parcel being divided, the other half of the street
shall be dedicated and improved by the divider.
The platting of new half-streets shall not be
permitted.
(d) Street Improvements. Streets shall intersect each
other at as nearly right angles as topography and other limiting
factors of good engineering design permit. In addition:
(1) The number of streets converging at one
intersection shall not exceed two (2).
(2) The number of intersections along arterial
streets shall be held to a minimum. Whenever
practicable, the distance between such
intersections shall not be less than one thousand
two hundred (1,200) feet.
(3) Property lines at street intersections shall
be rounded with a minimum radius of fifteen (15)
feet. Radii of twenty (20) feet are desirable.
Radii at intersections of minor or collector
streets with arterial streets shall be determined
on a case-by-case basis with a radius of twenty
(20) feet being the minimum.
(4) Minor streets shall not necessarily continue
across arterial or collector streets; but if the
centerline of such minor streets approach arterial
or collector streets from opposite sides within
two hundred fifty (250) feet of one another,
measured along the centerlines of the arterial or
collector street, then the location shall be so
adjusted that the joinder across the arterial or
collector street is continuous and a jog is
avoided.
(5) Alleys shall not be allowed in residential
subdivisions.
(e) Blocks. The widths, lengths and shapes of blocks
shall be suited to the planned use of the land, zoning
requirements, need for convenient access, control and safety of
street traffic, and the limitations and opportunities of
topography. In addition:
(1) The length of blocks in residential areas
shall not as a general rule be less than six
hundred (600) feet nor more than one thousand five
hundred (1,500) feet unless otherwise dictated by
exceptional topography or other limited factors of
good design.
(2) Pedestrian ways or sidewalks of not less than
four (4) feet in width may be required near the
center and entirely across any block over nine
hudnred (900) feet in length where deemed
essential by the Village Board to provide adequate
pedestrian circulation or access to schools,
parks, churches or transportation facilities or
similar places used by the public. Pedestrian
ways or sidewalks of not less than ten (10) feet
in width may be required near shopping centers or
other commercial uses.
(3) The width of blocks shall generally be wide
enough to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of
appropriate depth except where otherwise required
to separate residential development from through
traffic or where good urban planning design
provides other acceptable alternatives. Width of
lots or parcels reserved or laid out for
commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to
provide for off-street service and parking
required by the use contemplated and the area
zoning restrictions for such use.
(4) Utility easements for electric power, gas
service, telephone service and other communication
services shall, where practical, be placed on midblock
easements along rear lot lines.
(f) Lots. The size, shape and orientation of lots
shall be appropriate for the location of the land division and
for the type of development and use contemplated. The lots shall
generally be designed to provide an aesthetically pleasing
building site and a proper architectural setting for the building
contemplated. In addition:
(1) Side lot lines shall generally be at right
angles to straight street lines or radial to
curved street lines on which the lots face. Lot
lines shall follow municipal boundary lines rather
than cross them.
(2) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots
shall generally be prohibited except where
necessary to provide separation of residential
development from through traffic or to overcome
specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation.
(3) Access. Every lot shall front or abut for a
distance consistent with the applicable Village
Zoning Ordinance or other applicable ordinance.
(4) Area and dimensions of all lots shall conform
to the requirements of the Village of Paddock Lake
or applicable town or county zoning ordinance,
whichever is more stringent. Those building sites
in the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction
not served by a public sanitary sewerage system or
other approved system shall be sufficient to
permit the use of an on-site soil absorption
sewage disposal system designed in accordance with
Chapter ILHR 83 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code. In addition, the width and area of lots to
be served by on-site soil absorption sewage
disposal systems shall not be less than one
hundred fifty (150) feet in width and forty
thousand (40,000) square feet in area.
(5) Depth of lots. Excessive depth in relation
to width shall be avoided and a proportion of two
to one (2:1) shall be considered a desirable ratio
under normal conditions. Depth of lots or parcels
reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial
use shall be adequate to provide for off-street
service and parking required by the use
contemplated.
(6) Width of lots shall conform to the
requirements of the Village Zoning Ordinance, or
other applicable ordinance.
(7) Corner lots shall have an extra width of
twenty (20) feet to permit adequate building
setbacks from side streets.
(8) Shape of lots shall generally be rectangular,
with the exception of lots located on curves or
cul-de-sacs.
(9) Cul-de-Sac lots may reduce the frontage on a
public street as outlined in each zoning district
in the Village's Zoning Ordinance.
(10) Lands lying between the meander line and the
water's edge, and any otherwise unplattable lands
which lie between a proposed land division and the
water's edge shall be included as part of lots,
outlots or public dedications in any plat or
certified survey map abutting a lake or stream.
(g) Building and Setback Lines. Building setback
lines appropriate to the location and type of development
contemplated, which are more restrictive than the regulation of
the zoning district in which the land division is located, may be
required by the Village Board to provide aesthetically consistent
site lines for structures and shall be shown on the final plat or
certified survey map. Examples of the application of this
provision would include requiring greater setbacks on cul-de-sac
lots to achieve the necessary lot width at the setback line,
requiring greater setbacks to conform to setbacks of existing
adjacent development, or setting yard requirements to protect
natural resource elements.
(h) Easements. The Village Board shall require
utility easements of widths deemed adequate for the intended
purpose on each side of all rear lot lines and on side lot lines
or across lots where necessary or advisable for electric power
and communication lines, cable television wires, conduits, storm
and sanitary sewers, and gas, water and other utility lines.
Where a land division is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway
channel or stream, an adequate drainageway easement shall be
provided. The location, width, alignment and improvement of such
drainageway easements shall be reviewed by the Village Building
Inspector; and parallel streets or parkways may be required in
connection therewith. Where necessary, storm water drainage
shall be maintained by landscaped open channels of adequate size
and grade to hydraulically accommodate maximum potential volumes
of flow. These design details are subject to review and approval
by the Village Board and shall be based on Village engineering
plans and specifications.
38.08 REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
(a) Survey Monuments.
(1) The divider shall, at the divider's cost,
install survey monuments placed in accordance with
the requirements of Chapter 236.15 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) The Village Board may waive the placing of
monuments under Section 236.15(b), (c) and (d) for
a reasonable time, not to exceed one (1) year, on
condition that the divider files an irrevocable
letter of credit in a sufficient amount (to be
determined by the Village Board with the advice of
the Village Engineer and such other Village
officials or consultants as the Board may
determine) and in a form satisfactory to the
Village Attorney, to insure the placing of such
monuments within the prescribed time. Additional
time may be granted by the Board upon a showing of
just cause.
(b) Grading. After installation of temporary block
corner monuments by the divider and the establishment of street
grades by the Village's detailed engineering plans and
specifications, the divider shall, at the divider's cost, grade
the full width of the right-of-way of all dedicated streets in
accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the
Village board. The divider shall grade the roadbeds in the
street rights-of-way to subgrade.
Cut and Filled Lands shall be graded to a maximum slope
of one to four (1:4) and shall be covered with permanent
vegetation.
(c) Surfacing.
(1) New roadways and underground improvements and
facilities shall be constructed, at the divider's
cost, and be in accordance with the following
schedule:
First 12-month period following the last required
approval of final plat or certified survey map:
Install all underground sanitary sewerage system
facilities, all underground storm sewer system
facilities and all underground water system
facilities, as well as all underground private
utility facilities, followed by the installation
of a crushed stone base course on all public
streets.
(If compacted granular material is used for
backfilling the sanitary sewers, water mains,
storm sewers and related facilities the Village
Building Inspector may permit the finish grading
of the base course, installation of concrete curb
and gutter and the installation of the binder
course of paving on roadways during the first 12-
month period. This will permit the completion of
improvements within two (2) years.)
Second 12-month period: Finish grading and
compact the crushed stone base course, install
concrete curb and gutter, install binder course of
pavement on roadways and restore terrace areas.
Third 12-month period: Replace damaged binder
sections and install surface course of bituminous
pavement.
(2) After the installation of all underground
improvements and facilities, the divider shall
surface all roadways in dedicated streets to the
widths prescribed by this Ordinance.
(3) The use of geotextile fabrics to establish
adequate subgrades shall be reviewed on a case-bycase
basis when determined to be necessary by the
detailed engineering design specifications and
standards prepared for the site.
(4) Upon the completion of subgrade work, and
prior to placing crushed aggregate base material,
the Village shall be contacted and shall inspect
and approve the subgrade.
(5) All residential and commercial collector and
minor street roadways, including cul-de-sacs,
shall have a ten (10) inch aggregate base course
of crushed limestone, consisting of four (4)
inches of #2 stone (1 to 1½ inches), four (4)
inches of ¾ inch traffic bond and two (2) inches
of ¼ inch stone screenings.
(6) All arterial street roadways shall have a
crushed aggregate base course of crushed
limestone, consisting of eight (8) inches of #2
stone (1 to 1½ inches), four (4) inches of ¾ inch
traffic bond and two (2) inches of ¼ inch stone
screenings.
(7) All industrial street roadways shall have a
crushed aggregate base course of crushed
limestone, consisting of six (6) inches of #2
stone (1 to 1½ inches).
(8) The base course shall be placed and compacted
in four (4) inch maximum lifts. Compaction shall
consist of compacting each layer of base course
until no further appreciable consolidation is
evidenced under the action of compaction
equipment, which shall consist of vibratory
rollers, tamping rollers and pneumatic tire
rollers.
(9) The Village shall be contacted and shall
inspect and approve the base course prior to
construction of the concrete curb and gutter and
installation of bituminous concrete or concrete
pavement.
(10) Three (3) inch bituminous concrete pavement
shall be place over the compacted crushed
aggregate base for residential and commercial
collector and minor street roadways. The three
(3) inch pavement shall consist of a one and
three-quarter (1¾) inch binder course and a one
and one-fourth (1¼) inch surface course.
Bituminous concrete pavement, aggregate, asphalt
cement and mix shall be in accordance with Village
standards and specifications.
(11) A minimum of four (4) inches of bituminous
concrete pavement shall be placed over the
compacted aggregate base for arterial street
roadways. The four (4) inch pavement shall
consist of two and one-half (2½) inch surface
course. The actual pavement thickness shall be
subject to a detailed design evaluation by the
Village. Bituminous concrete pavement, aggregate,
asphalt cement and mix shall be in accordance with
Village standards and specifications.
(12) All industrial street roadway surfaces shall
consist of eight (8) inches of concrete base
course place over the compacted crushed aggregate
base with a one and one-half (1½) inch bituminous
concrete surface course placed over the concrete
base. Concrete pavement shall be in accordance
with Village standards and specifications. A tack
coat shall be applied over the concrete base prior
to final surfacing.
(13) Curb and gutter shall not be constructed
until the second 12-month period following the
last required approval of the final plat or
certified survey map, unless compacted granular
backfill is used for all underground improvements
and facilities and approval is given by the
Village Building Inspector. Curb and gutter shall
be completed by the end of the second 12-month
period. The Village shall be contacted and shall
inspect and approve the curb and gutter prior to
the installation of the binder course.
(14) The binder course on roadways shall not be
installed under the second 12-month period
following the last required approval of the final
plat or certified survey map, unless compacted
granular backfill is used for all underground
improvements and facilities and approval is given
by the Village Building Inspector. In no case
shall the binder course be placed until after the
construction of the concrete curb and gutter.
(15) The surface course shall be constructed after
seventy-five (75) percent of the residential lots
have been developed, or within the third 12-month
period after the last required approval of the
final plat or the certified survey map, whichever
occurs first. The Village shall be contacted and
shall inspect and approve the binder course to the
installation of the surface course.
(16) Sanitary and storm sewer manhole frames and
water main valve boxes shall be raised prior to
constructing the surface course. Any distressed
areas of binder or base shall be repaired prior to
installation of the surface course. All roadways
shall be swept clean and a tack coat applied prior
to installation of the surface coat.
(17) The Village Board, upon a showing of good
cause, may alter any of the time requirements
stated in this section.
(d) Curb and Gutter. Except in the A-2 district, in
all land divisions which do not currently abut an improved public
street, the divider shall, at the divider's cost, construct
concrete curb and gutters in accordance with plans an
specifications approved by the Village Board. Concrete curb and
gutters for all new residential streets where curb openings for
driveways cannot be determined shall be thirty (30) inch-wide
"Mountable Type" in accordance with the typical residential
street cross section. Concrete curb and gutters in existing
residential areas, or where curb openings can be determined prior
to construction, shall be thirty (30) inch-wide Wisconsin
Department of Transportation "Type D". Curb openings at all
intersections shall be provided for handicap accessibility ramps.
Curb and gutters shall be installed in accordance with the time
requirements of Section 38.08(h) of this Ordinance.
Four (4) inches of topsoil with Madison Parks seed or
equivalent, fertilizer and mulch in accordance with the Village
requirements shall be placed between the curb lines and right-ofway
lines, and maintained for a one (1) year period, at the
divider's cost.
(e) Rural Street Sections. Except as stated herein,
permanent rural street cross sections shall not be installed in
subdivisions or large lot subdivisions. The Village Board may
approve the use of rural street sections (see Table 1 in Section
38.07(c) of this Ordinance) for minor land divisions and in
subdivisions in the A-2 district. The divider shall finish grade
all shoulders and road ditches, install all necessary culverts at
intersections and, if required, surface ditch inverts to prevent
erosion and sedimentation in accordance with engineering plans
and specifications approved by the Village Board.
(f) Urban Street Sections. Except as stated in
Section 38.08(e), above, all subdivision and large lot
subdivision streets shall be constructed in accordance with the
Village's urban design specifications and standards (see Table 1
in Section 38.07(c) of this Ordinance).
(g) Public Sanitary Sewerage System Facilities.
Except in the A-2 district where the Plan Commission and Village
Board may allow private sanitary disposal systems, public
sanitary sewerage system facilities shall be required for all
subdivisions or large lot subdivisions. Public sanitary sewer
system facilities may be required for minor land divisions within
reasonable proximity to existing public sanitary sewerage
facilities. The divider shall construct all required sanitary
sewerage system facilities in such a manner as to make adequate
sanitary sewerage service available to each lot within the
subdivision, large lot subdivision or minor land division. In
addition:
(1) Sewer laterals shall be installed to the
street lot line.
(2) The size, type, design, location and manner
of installation of all sanitary sewers, sanitary
laterals and related sanitary sewerage system
facilities required or proposed to be constructed
shall be in accordance with the plans and
specifications approved by the Village Board and
the Fifth Edition (March 1, 1988) of "Standard
Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in
Wisconsin", prepared by a committee of municipal
engineers, consultant engineers, suppliers of
construction materials and contractors experienced
in public works construction, as amended from time
to time, hereinafter referenced to as the
"Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water
Construction in Wisconsin". Plans prepared by the
divider or the Village's Consulting Engineer shall
be prepared at a scale of no greater than one (1)
inch equals forty (40) feet horizontal one (1)
inch equals four (4) feet vertical.
(3) All sanitary sewer and sanitary sewer lateral
trenches within dedicated streets shall be
backfilled with excavated or granular material
meeting the requirements of the "Standard
Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in
Wisconsin". All backfill shall be compacted by
mechanical methods.
(4) Sanitary sewers shall provide basement level
service in all new subdivisions, large lot
subdivisions and minor land divisions.
(5) The divider shall bear the cost of installing
all sanitary sewers, sanitary sewer force mains,
sewer laterals, lift stations, and sewer
appurtenances within the land division, except for
the added material cost of installing oversized
sewers and related facilities greater than twelve
(12) inches in diameter which are necessary to
serve tributary areas lying outside of the
proposed land division. The divider shall assume
the cost of installing all boundary sanitary sewer
mains which are determined to be necessary by the
Village. The Village shall reimburse the divider
for the reasonable materials costs of the required
oversizing.
(6) In addition, the divider may be required to
pay to the Village a sanitary sewer trunk line
connection fee based on the added cost of
installing larger sewers or related facilities to
serve the total tributary area, which cost shall
be prorated in proportion to the ratio which the
total drainage area to be served by such larger
sewers or related facilities.
(7) Sanitary sewer trunk line fees collected by
the Village shall be placed in a non-lapsing fund
for sanitary sewerage facilities, which shall be
separate from the General Fund of the Village.
Such special fund shall be used exclusively for
sanitary sewerage facilities projects which
benefit the land division with respect to which
such fees are paid.
(8) The Village may participate in the oversizing
costs of lift stations and sewer force mains
serving the areas outside of the proposed
development.
(9) Installation of all sanitary sewer system
facilities shall be completed within the first 12-
month period following the last required approval
of the final plat of certified survey map, unless
the Village Board expressly waives or modifies
this requirement for good cause shown.
(h) Storm Sewer and Drainage System Facilities. All
streets in subdivisions, large lot subdivisions and all land
divisions for commercial or industrial use shall be provided with
storm sewer systems and concrete curb and gutter for storm water
runoff. The divider shall construct storm water drainage
facilities, adequate to serve the land division and upstream
tributary areas. Such facilities may include, without
limitation, curbs and gutters, catch basins and inlets, storm
sewers, road ditches, open channels, water retention structures
and settling basins, as required. All such facilities shall be
adequate size and grade to hydraulically accommodate runoff from
the ten (10) year recurrence interval storm except as may be
otherwise required by this Ordinance, and shall be so designed as
to prevent and control soil erosion and sedimentation and to
present no hazards to life or property. All storm sewer and
drainage system facilities shall be constructed in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by the Village Board and
the "Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in
Wisconsin". Plans prepared by the divider or the Village's
Consulting Engineer shall be prepared at a scale of no greater
than one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet horizontal and one (1)
inch equals four (4) feet vertical. In addition:
(1) Storm sewer and drainage system facilities
shall be designed to convey runoff from the ten
(10) years recurrence interval storm, as published
by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission in Technical Record Volume 2, Number 4,
except as may be otherwise required by this
Ordinance.
(a) The rational formula shall be used to
compute runoff rates.
(b) Velocities within storm sewers shall not
exceed twelve (12) feet per second.
(c) Storm sewer catch basins, manholes,
storm sewer materials and backfill
requirements shall be in accordance with
Village engineering and design standards.
(d) Storm sewer catch basins shall be
located at all intersections to prevent
surface runoff intervals along residential
streets. Vertical sag curves shall be
provided with multiple catch basins where
overtopping of the roadway would cause damage
to adjacent property.
(e) If adequate downstream storm drainage
facilities are not available,
detention/retention basins shall be provided
to store runoff. Detention/retention basins
shall be sized using USDA Soil Conservation
Service procedures for a design one hundred
(100) year recurrence interval storm based
upon developed conditions. The release rates
shall be the ten (10) year recurrence
interval storm based upon existing
conditions.
(2) Unpaved road ditches shall be shaped and
seeded and/or sodded as grassed waterways. Where
the velocity of flow is in excess of four (4) feet
per second on soils having severe or very severe
erosion hazards and in excess of six (6) feet per
second on soils having moderate, slight, or very
slight erosion hazards, the divider shall install
a paved invert or check dams, flumes, or other
energy dissipating devices.
(3) Shoreland drainage facilities shall, if
required, include water retention structures and
settling basins so as to prevent erosion and
sedimentation where such facilities discharge into
streams or lakes.
(4) All storm sewer trenches within dedicated
streets shall be backfilled with excavated or
compacted granular material meeting the
requirements of the "Standard Specifications for
Sewer and Water Construction in Wisconsin". All
backfill shall be compacted by mechanical means.
(5) The divider shall bear the cost of installing
all storm sewer and drainage system facilities
within the proposed land division, except for the
added material costs of installing oversized storm
sewers or related facilities greater than thirtysix
(36) inches in diameter which are necessary to
serve tributary drainage areas lying outside of
the proposed land division. The Village shall
reimburse the divider for the reasonable material
costs of the required oversizing.
(6) In addition, the divider shall be required to
pay to the Village a storm sewer trunk fee, based
on the added cost of installing larger storm
sewers or related facilities in the total
tributary drainage area, which cost shall be
prorated in proportion to the ratio which the
total area of the proposed land division bears to
the total drainage area to be served by such
larger storm sewers or related facilities.
(7) Storm sewer trunk fees collected by the
Village shall be placed in a nonlapsing special
fund for Village storm water management projects,
which shall be separate from the General Fund of
the Village. Such special fund shall be used
exclusively for storm water management projects
which benefit the land division with respect to
which such fees are paid.
(8) Installation of all storm sewer and drainage
system facilities shall be completed within the
first 12-month period following the last required
approval of the final plat or certified survey
map, unless the Village Board expressly waives or
modifies this requirement for good cause shown.
(i) Water Supply System Facilities. If available,
public water supply and distribution system facilities shall be
required for all subdivisions and large lot subdivisions. Public
water system facilities may be required for minor land divisions
located within reasonable proximity to such facilities. The
divider shall construct the water supply and distribution
facilities, when required, in such a manner as to make adequate
water service available to each lot within the land division.
The divider shall make provision for adequate private water
systems as required by the Village in accordance with the
standards of the Wisconsin Department of Industry, Labor and
Human Relations. In addition:
(1) Water laterals shall be installed to the
street lot line, in the case of connection to
public water supply and distribution systems.
(2) The size, type, design, location and manner
of installation of all public water mains and
related water system facilities required or
proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by the
Village Board and the "Standard Specifications for
Sewer and Water Construction in Wisconsin". Plans
prepared by the divider or the Village's
Consulting Engineer shall be prepared at a scale
of no greater than one (1) inch equals forty (40)
feet horizontal and one (1) inch equals four (4)
feet vertical.
(3) The divider shall bear the cost of installing
all water mains, water laterals, and water system
appurtenances within the proposed land division
except for the added material costs of installing
oversized water mains or related facilities
greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter which
are necessary to serve areas lying outside of the
proposed land division. The divider shall bear
the cost of installing all boundary water mains
which are determined necessary by the Village.
The Village shall reimburse the divider for the
reasonable costs of the required oversizing.
(4) In addition, the divider may be required to
pay to the Village a water trunk fee in an amount
based upon the added cost of installing larger
water mains or related facilities in the total
water service area, which cost shall be prorated
in proportion to the ratio which total area of the
proposed land division bears to the total water
service area to be served by larger water mains or
related facilities.
(5) Water trunk fees collected by the Village
shall be placed in a special nonlapsing fund for
water system projects, which shall be separate
from the General Fund of the Village. Such
special fund shall be used exclusively for water
system projects which benefit the land division
with respect to which such fees are paid.
(6) All water main trenches within dedicated
streets shall be backfilled with excavated or
granular material meeting the requirements of the
"Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water
Construction in Wisconsin". All backfill shall be
compacted by mechanical means.
(7) Installation of all water system facilities
shall be completed within the first twelve (12)
month period following the last required approval
of the final plat or certified survey map, unless
the Village Board expressly waives or modifies
this requirement for good cause shown.
(8) All water distribution facilities shall be
designed so as to allow for the installation of
water meters on each water lateral and every lot
shall be restricted, either by deed restriction or
on the face of the final plat so as to notify all
subsequent transferees that no building permits
shall be issued for the erection, construction or
occupancy of a building or structure unless the
plans therefore include the installation of a
water meter(s).
(j) Other Utilities. The divider shall cause proposed
gas, electrical power, telephone or cable television facilities
to be installed in such a manner as to make adequate service
available to each lot in the land division. All such facilities
shall be located underground in all subdivisions and large lot
subdivisions. Plans showing the proposed location of all
utilities proposed to service the site shall be subject to review
and approval.
(k) Street Lights. The divider of a subdivision or
large lot subdivision shall pay to the Village the cost of
installing fiberglass break-away pole (high-pressure sodium shoebox
fixture) street lights at the intersections of all streets to
be dedicated and at such mid-block intervals as may be required
by the Village Board. Other street light types or designs may be
approved by the Village Board, with recommendation from the Plan
Commission.
(l) Street Signs. The divider shall pay to the
Village the cost of installing street signs of a design approved
by the Village Board, with recommendation from the Plan
Commission, at the intersection of all streets to be dedicated.
(m) Street Trees. In all subdivisions with lots
smaller than one (1) acre, the Village Board shall, and in other
subdivisions may, require the divider to plant at least one (1)
tree of an approved species and of at least one and one-half (1½)
inches in diameter at breast height for each fifty (50) feet of
frontage on all streets to be dedicated. The trees shall be
planted within the curb lawn following the installation of the
curb and gutter. Recommendation of the type and location of tree
plantings shall be made by the Tree Commission. In addition:
(1) In lieu of planting street trees, the divider
may pay a tree fee to the Village Clerk/Treasurer
of Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars for each tree to
be planted. Monies collected for tree planting
shall be kept in a special tree planting fund,
separate from the Village General fund. Such
special fund shall be used exclusively for
planting trees to benefit the land divided with
respect to which such fees were paid.
(2) Tree plantings shall be completed by the
divider or by the Village, as outlined in the Land
Division Agreement, in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by and at such time as
prescribed by the Village Board, with
consideration given to the actual and/or probable
location of sewer laterals.
38.09 CONSTRUCTION
(a) Commencement. No construction or installation of
improvements shall be commenced in a proposed land division until
after the final plat or certified survey map shall have been
finally approved, and certified by the approving agencies, and
the Village shall have given written authorization to the divider
to commence such construction or installation. Payment of
inspection and construction-related fees shall be required as
specified in Section 38.10 of this Ordinance.
(b) Building Permits. No building, zoning or
occupancy permit shall be issued for the erection, construction
or occupancy of a building or structure on any lot created in
violation of this Ordinance until all of the requirements of this
Ordinance have been satisfied. No building or zoning permits
shall be issued with respect to any land division until approved
contracts shall have been awarded for all of the required first
year improvements.
(c) Plans. The following plans, profiles and
specifications are required, and shall be submitted for review
and approval by the Village Board, with the advice and
recommendation of the Building Inspector and Plan Commission,
before authorization of any construction or the installation of
any improvements. The Village President and Clerk/Treasurer
shall place their certification of such approval on each of the
following plans, which shall be kept on file in the Village
Office:
(1) Street plans, profiles and specifications
showing existing and proposed grades, elevations
and cross-sections of required improvements.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities plans, profiles and
specifications showing the locations, grades,
sizes, elevations and materials of all required
sanitary sewer facilities.
(3) Stormwater management facilities plans,
profiles and specifications showing the locations,
grades, sizes, cross-sections, retention/detention
facilities, elevations and materials of all
required stormwater management facilities.
(4) Water supply facilities plans, profiles and
specifications showing the locations, sizes,
elevations and materials of all required water
facilities.
(5) Other facilities plans, profiles and
specifications showing the locations, sizes,
elevations and materials of all gas, electric,
telephone or other communications facilities.
(6) Erosion and sedimentation control plans
showing and describing the structures required to
retard the rate of runoff water, the grading and
excavating practices to prevent erosion and
sedimentation, the time span that soil will be
exposed, and the practices and structures to
protect existing vegetation. Such plans shall
generally follow the guidelines and standards set
forth in the publication, U.S. Soil Conservation
Service Technical Guide, adopted by the Kenosha
County Land Conservation Committee, as amended.
(7) Planting plans showing the location, age,
diameter at breast height, and species of any
proposed grasses, vines, shrubs, and trees.
(8) Additional special plans or information as
required by the Village Board to clarify planning,
engineering or design criteria as presented in the
divider's proposed land division.
(d) Erosion Control.
(1) Construction site erosion control shall be
provided during all phases of grading and
construction to prevent sediment from entering
storm sewers, watercourses or adjacent property.
An erosion control plan shall be submitted to the
Village Board for approval prior to commencing
construction.
(2) The Village Board may require the divider to
provide or install appropriate erosion control
protection and rehabilitation measures, such as
silt fencing, erosion bales, sediment ponds,
sloping, seeding, riprap, revetments, jetties,
clearing, dredging, snagging, drop structures,
brush mats, willow poles, and grade stabilization
structures.
(3) Tree cutting and shrubbery clearing shall not
exceed fifty (50) percent of the lot or tract and
shall be so conducted as to prevent erosion and
sedimentation, preserve and improve scenic
qualities, and preserve natural screening of any
development from stream or lake users. (See
Section 38.09(e) of this Ordinance.)
(4) Paths and trails in wooded and wetland areas
shall not exceed ten (10) feet in width unless
otherwise approved by the Village Board, and shall
be so designed and constructed as to result in the
least removal and disruption of trees and shrubs,
and the minimum impairment of natural beauty.
(5) Earth moving, such as grading, topsoil
removal, mineral extraction, stream course
changing, road cutting, waterway construction or
enlargement, removal of stream or lake bed
materials, excavation, channel clearing, ditching,
drain tile laying, dredging, and lagooning, shall
be so conducted as to prevent erosion and
sedimentation and to minimize the impact of
development on natural fauna, flora, watercourses,
water regimen, and topography. (See Section
38.09(e) of this Ordinance.)
(6) Review of the proposed or actual conduct of
any cutting, clearing or earth moving may be
requested of the Kenosha County Land Conservation
Committee, the DNR District Fish and Game
Managers, and the State District Forester by the
Village Building Inspector, Village Tree
Commission, Village Plan Commission, or Village
Board as they deem appropriate.
(7) The divider shall cause all grading,
excavations, open cuts, side slopes, and other
land surface disturbances to be so mulched,
seeded, sodded, or otherwise so protected that
erosion, siltation, sedimentation, and washing are
prevented.
(8) All erosion control plans shall incorporate
best management practices to reduce soil loss
during construction.
(9) Sod shall be laid in strips at those
intervals necessary to prevent erosion and at
right angles to the direction of drainage.
(10) Temporary Vegetation and mulching shall be
used to protect critical areas, and permanent
vegetation shall be installed as soon as
practical.
(11) Construction at any given time shall be
confined to the smallest practical area and for
the shortest practical period of time.
(12) Sediment basins shall be installed and
maintained at all drainageways to trap, remove,
and prevent sediment and debris from being washed
outside the area being developed.
(e) Existing Flora. The divider shall make every
effort to protect and retain all existing trees, not actually
lying in public roadways, drainageways, building foundation
sites, private driveways, soil absorption waste disposal areas,
paths, and trails. Such trees are to be protected and preserved
during construction in accordance with sound conservation
practices, including the preservation of trees by well islands or
retaining walls whenever abutting grades are altered.
(f) Inspection and Construction Related Services. The
divider, prior to commencing any work within the land division,
shall notify the Village to make arrangements for adequate
inspection. The Village shall, at the divider's expense, provide
all necessary inspection and construction related services for
streets, utilities, and storm sewers and shall inspect and
approve all completed work prior to the release of the sureties.
38.10 FEES.
(a) General. The divider shall submit all required
fees, bonds and letters of credit to the Village Clerk/Treasurer
at the times specified before final approval of a plat or
certified survey map, except fees payable under Section 38.10(h)
hereafter, which shall be payable as specified in that
subsection. In addition, the Land Division Agreement shall be
executed and filed by the divider prior to preliminary approval
of any plat or final approval of any certified survey map.
(b) Neighborhood Sketch Plan Fee. The divider shall
pay to the Village Clerk/Treasurer prior to the preparation or
submission of a neighborhood sketch plan a fee of twenty ($20.00)
Dollars, per acre for each acre included in the divider's
proposed land division to assist in defraying the costs of
reviewing the sketch plan.
(c) Conceptual Plan Review Fee. The divider shall pay
a fee in an amount to be determined by the Zoning Administrator,
taking into account the estimated costs for engineering, legal
and administration which will be incurred by the Village in
reviewing the conceptual plan. This amount shall be determined
and given to the divider in writing as soon as practicable.
These fees are payable to the Village Clerk/Treasurer at the time
of first application for the review of the conceptual plan to
assist in defraying the cost of review.
(d) Preliminary Engineering Cost Estimate Fee.
Following the conceptual review if a conceptual review is
required, a divider interested in obtaining a preliminary
engineering cost estimate for street, sanitary sewer, water,
storm sewer or other required street improvements within a
development site, shall pay a fee of Four Hundred ($400.00)
Dollars, to the Village Clerk/Treasurer.
(e) Certified Survey Map Review Fee. The divider
shall pay a fee of fifty ($50.00) Dollars, for each certified
survey map to the Village Clerk/Treasurer at the time of the
first application for approval of any proposed certified survey
map to assist in defraying the cost of review.
(f) Preliminary Plat Review Fee. The divider shall
pay a fee of Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars, plus One Hundred
Fifty ($150.00) Dollars, per lot or parcel within a proposed
preliminary plat to the Village Clerk/Treasurer at the time of
the first application for approval of such preliminary plat to
assist in defraying the cost of review. A reapplication fee of
Fifty ($50.00) Dollars, shall be paid to the Village
Clerk/Treasurer at the time of submission of any modifications or
additions to any preliminary plat which has previously been
reviewed.
(g) Final Plat Review Approval. The divider shall pay
a fee of One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars, for each lot or parcel
within a proposed final plat to the Village Clerk/Treasurer at
the time of the first application for approval of such plat to
assist in defraying the cost of review. A reapplication fee of
Fifty ($50.00) Dollars, shall be paid to the Village
Clerk/Treasurer at the time of submission of any modifications or
additions to any final plat which has previously been reviewed.
(h) Public Park Site Fee. The divider shall pay a
public park site fee to the Village Clerk/Treasurer in the amount
of Two Thousand Four Hundred ($2,400.00) Dollars for each
buildable single-family residential lot on the plat or map or Two
Thousand Four Hundred ($2,400.00) Dollars for each proposed or
potential dwelling unit in the case of planned unit developments,
multi-unit dwellings or condominiums, payments to be made prior
to the time of issuance of any building permit for such
improvement. Public park site fees collected by the Village
Clerk/Treasurer under the provisions of this ordinance shall be
placed in a non-lapsing special fund for Village parks and shall
be separate from the general fund of the Village, and said
special funds shall be used exclusively for the acquisition and
development of park, recreation and other open space area within
the Village to serve the residents of the proposed land division
or development. As a complete alternative to the public park
site fee to be paid hereunder, the Village Board may, at the
option of the Village, accept land dedicated for playground, park
or other public open space purposes which are consistent with the
Village comprehensive plan where the dedication of such land is
at a rate of a minimum of one (1) acre of land so dedicated for
each twenty-five (25) proposed or potential dwelling units within
the land to be divided, subdivided or developed as a planned unit
development, multi-unit dwelling, condominium development or
single-family residential development. Nothing contained herein
shall prohibit the Village Board from entering into an agreement
with the divider to provide for the payment of public park site
fees and/or the dedication of land for playgrounds, parks or
other public open spaces or an agreement combining both the
payment of public park site fees and the dedication of land, so
long as such agreement is in writing and results in a payment of
park site fees and/or dedication of public land to the Village
which is roughly proportional to the requirements set forth in
this section, which shall be deemed to
be minimum requirements.
(i) Repealed.
(j) Engineering and Inspection Fees. In the event
that the actual cost for engineering inspection work incurred by
the Village through final plat approval exceeds the total fees
paid by the divider under subsections ©), (f) and (g), above,
then the divider shall pay to the Village Clerk/Treasurer upon
demand, a fee equal to the actual cost incurred by the Village
for all engineering or inspection work conducted by, or on behalf
of the Village in connection with its review of any proposed plat
or certified survey map or inspection of any engineering work.
Engineering work shall include, without limitation the
preparation of construction plans and specifications, review of
plans, construction staking, inspection of construction, and such
other engineering or inspection services as the Village may deem
necessary to assure that construction of the required
improvements is in compliance with the approved plans and
specifications. The Village may permit the divider to furnish
all, or some part of the required construction plans and
specifications, and no engineering fees shall be charged for such
plans and specifications, but shall be charged for the review of
such plans.
(k) Administrative Fee. The divider shall pay to the
Village Clerk/Treasurer, upon demand and in no event later than
the final approval of any plat or certified survey map, a fee
equal to the cost of any legal, administrative or fiscal services
incurred by the Village in connection with its review of any plat
or certified survey map. Legal work shall include, without
limitation, the drafting of contracts between the Village and the
land divider. These fees may also include the cost of obtaining
professional opinions including, but not limited to those of
attorneys, accountants, engineers, landscape architects, and land
planners, requested by the Village Board or Plan Commission in
connection with the land division being considered.
(l) Storm Sewer Trunk Fee. To the extent that a
divider is required to pay the storm sewer trunk fee provided for
in Section 38.08(h) of this Ordinance, such fee shall be paid to
the Village Clerk/Treasurer prior to the final approval of any
plat or certified survey map.
(m) Sanitary Sewer Trunk Fee. To the extent that a
divider is required to pay the sanitary sewer trunk fee provided
for in Section 38.08(g) of this Ordinance, such fee shall be paid
to the Village Clerk/Treasurer prior to the final approval of any
plat or certified survey map.
(n) Water Trunk Fee. To the extent that a divider is
required to pay the water trunk fee provided for in Section
38.08(I) of this Ordinance, such fee shall be paid to the Village
Clerk/Treasurer prior to the final approval of any plat or
certified survey map.
(o) Effect on Nonpayment of Fees. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this Ordinance, no final approval of any final
plat or certified survey map shall be granted by the Village
Board until such time as all fees imposed under this Ordinance
have been paid in full, with the exception of constructionrelated
fees.
38.11 DEFINITIONS.
(a) General Definitions. For the purposes of this
Ordinance, the following defined works or phrases shall have the
definitions provided below. Words or phrases that are not
defined shall have their common, ordinary meaning. Additionally,
as used in this Ordinance, the word "shall" is mandatory, and the
word "may" is permissive. Singular words generally include the
plural and vice-versa.
(b) Specific Words and Phrases.
(1) Advisory authority. Any authority or agency,
other than an objecting authority, to which a plat
or certified survey map may be submitted for
review and comment. An advisory agency may give
advice to the Village, but suggestions made by an
advisory authority are not binding on the Village
of Paddock Lake Village Board.
(2) Alley. A special public way affording only
secondary access to abutting properties.
(3) Approving authority. Each governmental body
having authority to approve or reject a plat or
certified survey map. The approving authorities
with respect to subdivision plats are set out in
Section 236.12 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(4) Arterial street. A street or highway used,
or intended to be used primarily for fast or heavy
through traffic. Arterial street shall include
freeways and expressways as well as standard
arterial streets, highways and parkways.
(5) Block. A tract of land or plat bounded by
streets, or a combination of streets, public
parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-ways,
shorelines of navigable waters, and municipal
boundaries, and consisting of a number of platted
lots.
(6) Building setback line. A line parallel to a
lot line and set at a prescribed distance from the
lot line to comply with the terms of the Village
Zoning Ordinance, which delineates the street side
of the buildable area of a lot.
(7) Certified survey map. A map prepared in
accordance with Section 236.34 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and applicable provisions of this
Ordinance for the purpose of dividing land into
not more than four (4) lots and which depicts a
land division resulting in not more than four (4)
lots. Minor land divisions can be legally
accomplished only by means of an approved
certified survey map.
(8) Collector street. A street used, or intended
to be used, to carry traffic from minor streets to
arterial streets, including, without limitation,
the principal entrance streets to residential
developments.
(9) Community. A town, municipality, or a group
of adjacent towns and/or municipalities having
common social, economic and/or physical interests.
(10) Comprehensive plan component. Each
ordinance, plan, study, agreement or other
document duly adopted or approved by the Village
Board or the Village Plan Commission of the
Village of Paddock Lake, which relates to or
affects the regulation of, or the planning for,
land use and development or public services and
facilities within the Village of Paddock Lake or
within its extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction, without regard to whether such
document was originally prepared by the Village or
by some other entity such as the Southeastern
Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission or Kenosha
County.
(11) Cul-de-Sac. A minor street with only one (1)
outlet and having an appropriate turn-around for
the safe and convenient reversal of traffic
movement.
(12) Dedication. Any land identified on a plat or
certified survey map as being under public
ownership for purposes of future public
improvements or facilities.
(13) Divider. Any person, including the owner of
land or the owner's or agent who divides, conveys
or seeks to divide or convey land in such a way
that a land division, subdivision, large lot
subdivision, minor land division or replat
results.
(14) Extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction.
The unincorporated area within one and one-half
(1½) miles of a village or fourth-class city and
within three (3) miles of all other cities.
Wherever such statutory extraterritorial powers of
two (2) municipalities overlap, the jurisdiction
over the overlapping area is divided by a line all
points of which are equidistant from each
municipality so that not more than one (1)
municipality exercises extraterritorial powers
over any particular area.
(15) Face of curb. The vertical portion of the
curb facing the pavement on a non-mountable curb.
On mountable curbs, the curb face is computed to
be a point six (6) inches from the back of the
curb to the front of the curb.
(16) Final plat. A final scale map, prepared in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 236 of
the Wisconsin Statutes and this Ordinance, for the
purpose of dividing land into five (5) or more
lots which depicts a land division (either a
subdivision or a large lot subdivision) resulting
in five (5) or more lots.
(17) Flag lot. A lot which is without street
frontage for much of its width and which has
access to a street only by virtue of a narrow leg
or "flagstaff" where the driveway is usually
located. Flat lots resemble the shape of a flag
and flagstaff. The creation of flag lots is
prohibited.
(18) Floodlands. Those lands, including the
floodways and flood fringe areas which are subject
to inundation by the 100-year recurrence interval
flood or, where such date is not available, by the
maximum flood of record.
(19) Frontage street. A minor street which is
auxiliary to and located beside an arterial
street, and which is used to control access to the
arterial street and to serve the abutting
development.
(20) High water elevation (high water mark of
surface water). The average annual high water
level of a pond, stream, lake, flowage or wetland
referred to an established datum plane or, where
such elevation is not available, the elevation of
the line up to which the presence of the water is
so frequent as to leave a distinct mark by
erosion, change in, or destruction of, vegetation
or other easily recognized topographic, geologic,
or vegetative characteristic.
(21) High groundwater elevation. The highest
elevation to which subsurface water rises. This
may be evidenced by the actual presence of water
during wet periods of the year, or by soil
mottling during drier periods. "Mottling" is a
mixture or variation of soil colors. In soils
with restricted internal drainage, gray, yellow,
red, and brown colors are intermingled giving a
multi-colored effect.
(22) Irrevocable letter of credit. An agreement
guaranteeing payment of land division
improvements, entered into by a bank, savings and
loan association, or other financial institution
authorized to do business in this state and which
has a financial standing acceptable to the
Village.
(23) Kenosha County Planning and Development. The
departmental agency of county government in
Kenosha County having preliminary and final plat
review and approval authority.
(24) Land division. Any division or conveyance of
land which results in the creation of one (1) or
more additional lots or parcels.
(25) Land division agreement. An agreement
between the Village and a divider with respect to
the construction improvements and other matters
relating to a finally approved land division.
(26) Large lot subdivision. Any land division
resulting in five (5) or more lots, less than five
(5) of which are each one and one-half (1½) acres
or less in area. Large lot subdivisions can be
legally accomplished only by means of an approved
preliminary plat and final plat.
(27) Lot. Any parcel of land formed by a land
division.
(28) Lot, corner. A lot abutting two (2) or more
streets at their intersection provided that the
corner of such intersection shall have an angle of
one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees or less,
measured on the lot side.
(29) Lot, double frontage. A lot, other than a
corner lot, with frontage on more than one (1)
street. Double frontage lots shall normally be
deemed to have two (2) front yards, two (2) side
yards and no rear yard. Double frontage lots are
generally not permitted unless the lot abuts an
arterial street. If a double frontage lot abuts
any arterial street, direct access to the arterial
street is restricted by means of a planting buffer
or some other acceptable measure.
(30) Minor land division. Any land division not
defined as a "subdivision" or "large lot
subdivision". Minor land divisions include all
land divisions and conveyances of land resulting
in the creation of no more than four (4) lots.
Minor land divisions can be legally accomplished
only by means of an approved certified survey map.
(31) Minor street. A street used, or intended to
be used, primarily for access to abutting
properties.
(32) Municipality. An incorporated village or
city.
(33) National map accuracy standards. Standards
governing the horizontal and vertical accuracy of
topographic maps and specifying the means for
testing and determining such accuracy, endorsed by
all federal agencies having surveying and mapping
functions and responsibilities. These standards
have been fully reproduced in Appendix D of SEWRPC
Technical Report No. 7, Horizontal and Vertical
Survey Control in Southeastern Wisconsin.
(34) Navigable stream. Any stream capable of
floating any boat, skiff or canoe of the
shallowest draft used for recreational purposes at
any time of the year.
(35) Navigable water. Lake Michigan, Lake
Superior, all natural inland lakes within
Wisconsin, and all streams, ponds, sloughs,
flowages, and other water within the territorial
limits of this state, including the Wisconsin
portion of boundary waters, which are navigable
under the laws of this state. The Wisconsin
Supreme Court has declared as navigable all bodies
of water with a bed differentiated from adjacent
uplands and with levels of flow sufficient to
support navigation by a recreational craft of the
shallowest draft on an annually recurring basis.
[Muench v. Public Service Commission, 261 Wis.2d
492 (1952) and DeGaynor and Co., Inc. v.
Department of Natural Resources, 70 Wis.2d 936
(1975)].
(36) Objecting authority. An agency empowered to
object to a subdivision plat pursuant to Chapter
236 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The Village of
Paddock Lake may not finally approve any
subdivision plat with respect to which a timely
objection by an objecting authority has been
certified until such objection has been satisfied.
(37) Outlot. A parcel of land, other than a
buildable lot or block, which is designated as
such on a plat or certified survey map, and which
can be left as open space, redivided into
buildable lots, or combined with one (1) or more
adjacent outlots or lots for the purpose of
creating buildable lots.
(38) Person. Any individual, corporation,
partnership, association, body politic or
corporate.
(39) Preliminary plat. A map, preliminary scale
map prepared in accordance with the requirements
of Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes and of
this Ordinance, for the purpose of dividing land
into five (5) or more lots, which depicts a land
division (either a subdivision or a large lot
subdivision) resulting in five (5) or more lots.
(40) Public way. Any public road, street,
highway, drainageway, or part thereof.
(41) Reservation. Land identified on a plat or
certified survey map to be set aside for possible
future acquisition for public improvements or
facilities. Land reservations do not imply public
ownership.
(42) Roadway. The paved portion of a street.
(43) Sanitary sewer service area. The area within
and surrounding a city, village or other community
that is planned to be served with public sanitary
sewerage facilities by the year 2010 as determined
by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission, as amended from time to time.
(44) Shorelands. Those lands lying within one
hundred (100) feet from the high water elevation
of navigable lakes, ponds, streams and flowages.
(45) Subdivision. Any land division resulting in
five (5) or more lots at least five (5) of which
are one and one-half (1½) acres or less in area,
or any series of successive land divisions which
result in five (5) or more lots being created from
the same parcel of land within a period of five
(5) years, each of which is one and one-half (1½)
acres or less in area. Subdivisions can be
legally accomplished only by means of an approved
preliminary plat and final plat. (By way of
distinction, see definitions for "large lot
subdivision", "minor land division" and "land
division".)
(46) Surety bond. A bond guaranteeing performance
of a contract or obligation through forfeiture of
the bond if the contract or obligation is
unfulfilled by the divider.
(47) Wetlands. Those areas where water is at,
near, or above the land surface long enough to be
capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic
vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet
conditions.
38.12 ADOPTION AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
Pursuant to Section 66.035 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
this Ordinance shall be effective upon adoption by the Village
Board, and upon posting in three (3) public places in the Village
of Paddock Lake, three (3) public places in the Town of Bristol
and three (3) public places in the Town of Salem and three (3)
public places in the Town of Brighton which are likely to give
notice to persons affected.
Chapter 39
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT OF 1990
39.01 Declaration of Policy
39.02 Definitions
39.03 Grievance Procedure
39.04 Nature of Remedies: Non-Exclusive
Jurisdiction
39.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village
of Paddock Lake pursuant to the Constitution of the United States
and the State of Wisconsin and also its power to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare, that all persons who
are disabled, who have a disability based on impairment, who have
a record of a physical or mental impairment or who are regarded
as having an impairment, all as is defined with more specificity
in the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, are entitled to
fair and equal access to municipal services, activities,
programs, employment, public accommodations and commercial
facilities; and to that end, the Village of Paddock Lake hereby
enacts the following Ordinance which provides a non-exclusive
complaint and grievance procedure for any person who believes
that he or she has been discriminated against under any
applicable provision of the Americans With Disabilities Act of
1990 by any other person by reason or on account of his or her
disability.
39.02 DEFINITIONS.
In this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "ADA" means the Americans With Disabilities Act of
1990 that prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability, as
may be amended from time to time.
(b) "ADA Coordinator" shall mean the Village
Clerk/Treasurer of the Village of Paddock Lake, or such other
person as may be designated as ADA Coordinator from time to time
by a duly enacted resolution of the Village Board of the Village
of Paddock Lake as ADA Coordinator pursuant to the requirements
of the ADA.
(c) "Commission" means the ADA Compliance Commission
duly appointed by the Village Board. The Commission shall
consist of not fewer than five (5) persons, one (1) of whom shall
be a member of the Village Board and the remainder of whom shall
be, to the extent practicable, as follows: a representative of
the disabled community, a representative of the business or
non-profit sector, a person in the education profession and a
person in the health or medical services professions. Residency
in the Village of Paddock Lake shall not be a requisite for
membership on the Commission. The members of the Commission
shall be nominated by the President and confirmed by not less
than a simple majority of the Village Board of Trustees.
(d) "Discriminate" and "Discrimination" means to
segregate, separate, exclude, or treat any person or class of
persons unequally because of a disability or a disability based
upon a physical or mental impairment as defined under the ADA,
where such discrimination is proscribed by the ADA.
(e) "Person" means any individual, partnership, labor
or other association, corporation, legal representative,
receiver, trustee, manager, employee or any other agent of any
such person.
(f) "Public Notice" shall mean such notice as may be
required by the Wisconsin Statutes and/or Village Ordinance for a
particular meeting and such notice as is reasonably likely to
attract the attention of a potentially aggrieved or otherwise
interested person concerning the matters alleged in the
complaint.
(g) "Village Attorney" shall mean the duly-appointed
attorney for the Village of Paddock Lake. In all proceedings
undertaken in the grievance procedure described herein, the
Village Attorney shall represent the Village Board and, to the
extent deemed advisable, all elected or appointed officials or
employees of the Village, including, but not limited to, the ADA
Coordinator and the Commission. In the event that because of the
type of complaint or the nature of the alleged discrimination, it
would appear that there is a potential conflict of interest for
the Village Attorney to represent both the Village Board and an
elected or appointed official or employee of the Village, then
the Village Attorney shall confine his or her representation to
the Village Board. In such circumstances, the Village Board may
appoint independent counsel to render legal services to elected
or appointed officials or employees of the Village for purposes
of representation in connection with the grievance procedure set
forth herein.
(h) "Village Board" shall mean the duly elected Board
of Trustees of the Village of Paddock Lake who convene in open
session pursuant to Section 19.81 et. seq. of the Wisconsin
Statutes, as may be amended from time to time.
39.03 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
(a) Any person who claims to have been injured by a
discriminatory practice or who believes that he or she will be
irrevocably injured by discriminatory practice that is about to
occur or who believes that a discriminatory condition regarding
access is in existence, any of which would be in violation of the
ADA (hereinafter "person aggrieved") may file a complaint, in
writing, with the ADA Coordinator. Upon receipt of such a
complaint, the ADA Coordinator shall conduct an investigation of
the complaint and shall forward a copy of the complaint to the
Village Attorney. If appropriate, a copy of the complaint may be
forwarded to such other Village officials or employees as may be
relevant. A record of the complaint and of the action taken, if
any, will be maintained by the ADA Coordinator. A decision by
the ADA Coordinator will be rendered, in writing, within fifteen
(15) working days of receipt of the complaint.
(b) If the complaint cannot be resolved to the
satisfaction of the person aggrieved by the ADA Coordinator as
set forth in subsection (a) above, and the person aggrieved
notifies the ADA Coordinator, in writing, of such dissatisfaction
within sixty (60) days of the written decision of the ADA
Coordinator, then the complaint will be forwarded to the
Commission for review. Upon receipt of the complaint, the
Commission shall conduct a public hearing within thirty (30)
days, after giving not less than ten (10) days public notice of
such public hearing. The Commission may solicit suggestions or
opinions from disabled persons regarding access to and
participation in public facilities, services, activities and
functions in the community, if germane to the complaint. The
Commission shall establish such procedural rules for hearing
complaints, requests or suggestions as it deems advisable under
the circumstances. The Commission shall render a decision at the
conclusion of the public hearing, which may be adjourned from
time to time, and shall reduce its decision to writing within
five (5) working days of the conclusion of the public hearing or
hearings.
(c) If the complaint cannot be resolved to the
satisfaction of the person aggrieved by the decision of the
Commission, the complaint will be heard by the Village Board at
an open, public hearing. All applicable notices required for a
public hearing contained in the Wisconsin Statutes will be given
prior to such meeting of the Village Board. The Village Board
shall reduce its determination to writing within five (5) working
days of the meeting of the Village Board concerning such
complaint, as may adjourned from time to time. The decision of
the Village Board shall be final.
(d) With regard to any proceedings brought before the
Commission or the Village Board, such proceedings shall be
recorded by audio recording and minutes shall be transcribed for
the permanent records of the Village.
39.04 NATURE OF REMEDIES: NON-EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION.
The criteria for the successful resolution of a
complaint under the grievance procedure detailed herein shall be
resolution to the satisfaction of the person aggrieved. The
right of the person aggrieved to prompt an equitable resolution
of the complaint shall not be impaired by his or her pursuit of
other remedies, such as the filing of a complaint with the United
States Department of Justice or any other appropriate federal or
state agency for resolution of an alleged violation of the ADA.
The grievance procedure contained herein is non-exclusive and the
use of this grievance procedure is not a prerequisite to the
pursuit of any other remedy or remedies.
Chapter 41
FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE
41.01 Statutory Authorization, Finding of Fact,
Statement of Purpose, Title and General
Provisions
41.02 General Standards Applicable to All
Floodplain
41.03 Floodway District (FW)
41.04 Floodfringe District (FF)
41.05 General Floodplain District (GFP)
41.06 Nonconforming Uses
41.07 Administration
41.08 Amendments
41.09 Enforcement and Penalties
41.10 Definitions
41.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDING OF FACT, STATEMENT OF
PURPOSE, TITLE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(a) Statutory Authorization. This ordinance is
adopted pursuant to the authorization in §61.35 and §62.23, for
villages and cities; §59.69, §59.692, and §59.694 for counties;
and the requirements in §87.30, Wis. Stats.
(b) Finding of Fact. Uncontrolled development and use
of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality would impair
the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax
base.
(c) Statement of Purpose. This ordinance is intended
to regulate floodplain development to:
(1) Protect life, health and property;
(2) Minimize expenditures of public funds for
flood control projects;
(3) Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken
at the expense of the taxpayers;
(4) Minimize business interruptions and other
economic disruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities in the
floodplain;
(6) Minimize the occurrence of future flood
blight areas in the floodplain;
(7) Discourage the victimization of unwary land
and homebuyers;
(8) Prevent increases in flood heights that could
increase flood damage and result in conflicts
between property owners; and
(9) Discourage development in a floodplain if
there is any practicable alternative to locate the
activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain.
(d) Title. This ordinance shall be known as the
Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for the Village of Paddock Lake,
Wisconsin.
(e) General Provisions.
(1) Areas to Be Regulated. This ordinance
regulates all areas that would be covered by the
regional flood or base flood as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other maps approved
by DNR. Base flood elevations are derived from the
flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH Zones on the
FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A
and AO zones. Regional Flood Elevations (RFE) may
be derived from other studies. If more than one
(1) map or revision is referenced, the most
restrictive information shall apply.
(2) Official Maps & Revisions. The boundaries of
all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE,
AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) listed below. Any change to
the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to
the boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in
the FIS or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
must be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA
through the Letter of Map Change process (see
§41.08 Amendments) before it is effective. No
changes to RFE's on non-FEMA maps shall be
effective until approved by the DNR. These maps
and revisions are on file in the office of the
Clerk/Treasurer of the Village of Paddock Lake. If
more than one (1) map or revision is referenced,
the most restrictive information shall apply.
(a) Official Maps.
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM),
panel number 55059C0154D, 55059C0134D,
55059C0161D, 55059C0142D, 55059C0153D
and 55059C0162D, dated June 19, 2012;
with corresponding profiles that are
based on the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS), June 19, 2012, Volume No.
55059CV001A and Volume No. 55059CV002A.
(b) OFFICIAL MAPS: Based on other studies.
Any maps referenced in this section must be
approved by the DNR and be more restrictive
than those based on the FIS at the site of
the proposed development.
(1) 100-Year Dam Failure Floodplain
Map, dated (fill in map date), prepared
by (fill in contractor.) Approved by:
The DNR
(2) Letter of Map Revision (case number
and date).
(3) Establishment of Floodplain Zoning Districts.
The regional floodplain areas are divided into
three (3) districts as follows:
(a) The Floodway District (FW), is the
channel of a river or stream and those
portions of the floodplain adjoining the
channel required to carry the regional
floodwaters and are contained within AE Zones
as shown on the FIRM.
(b) The Floodfringe District (FF) is that
portion between the regional flood limits and
the floodway and displayed as AE Zones on the
FIRM.
(c) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is
those areas that may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood and does not have a
BFE or floodway boundary determined,
including A, AH and AO zones on the FIRM.
(4) Locating Floodplain Boundaries.
Discrepancies between boundaries on the official
floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions
shall be resolved using the criteria in subd (a)
or (b) below. If a significant difference exists,
the map shall be amended according to §41.08
Amendments. The zoning administrator can rely on a
boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant
or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map
amendment is required. The zoning administrator
shall be responsible for documenting actual predevelopment
field conditions and the basis upon
which the district boundary was determined and for
initiating any map amendments required under this
section. Disputes between the zoning administrator
and an applicant over the district boundary line
shall be settled according to §41.07(c)(3) and the
criteria in (a) and (b) below. Where the flood
profiles are based on established base flood
elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must approve any map
amendment or revision pursuant to §41.08
Amendments.
(a) If flood profiles exist, the map scale
and the profile elevations shall determine
the district boundary. The regional or base
flood elevations shall govern if there are
any discrepancies.
(b) Where flood profiles do not exist for
projects, the location of the boundary shall
be determined by the map scale.
(5) Removal of Lands from Floodplain. Compliance
with the provisions of this ordinance shall not be
grounds for removing land from the floodplain
unless it is filled at least two (2) feet above
the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is
contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the
map is amended pursuant to §41.08 Amendments.
(6) Compliance. Any development or use within
the areas regulated by this ordinance shall be in
compliance with the terms of this ordinance, and
other applicable local, state, and federal
regulations.
(7) Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated.
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities,
villages, towns, and counties are required to
comply with this ordinance and obtain all
necessary permits. State agencies are required to
comply if §13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance and
repair of state highways and bridges by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt
when §30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
(8) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
(a) This ordinance supersedes all the
provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance
enacted under §59.69, §59.692 or §59.694 for
counties; §62.23 for cities; §61.35 for
villages; or §87.30, Wis. Stats., which
relate to floodplains. A more restrictive
ordinance shall continue in full force and
effect to the extent of the greater
restrictions, but not otherwise.
(b) This ordinance is not intended to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed
restrictions, covenants or easements. If this
ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
(9) Interpretation. In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this ordinance are
the minimum requirements liberally construed in
favor of the governing body and are not a
limitation on or repeal of any other powers
granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision
of this ordinance, required by Chapter NR 116,
Wisconsin Administrative Code, is unclear, the
provision shall be interpreted in light of the
standards in effect on the date of the adoption of
this ordinance or in effect on the date of the
most recent text amendment to this ordinance.
(10) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The
flood protection standards in this ordinance are
based on engineering experience and research.
Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This
ordinance does not imply or guarantee that nonfloodplain
areas or permitted floodplain uses will
be free from flooding and flood damages. This
ordinance does not create liability on the part
of, or a cause of action against, the municipality
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that may result from reliance on this
ordinance.
(11) Severability. Should any portion of this
ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected.
(12) Annexed Areas for Cities and Villages. The
County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on
the date of annexation shall remain in effect and
shall be enforced by the municipality for all
annexed areas until the municipality adopts and
enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements
of Chapter NR 116, Wisconsin Administrative Code
and 44 CFR 59-72, National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the
municipality's official zoning map. County
floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by
reference for the purpose of administering this
section and are on file in the office of the
municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps
of annexation shall show the regional flood
elevation and the floodway location.
41.02 GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN
DISTRICTS.
The community shall review all permit applications to
determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe
from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone
area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be
designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant materials;
be constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that
utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
equipment during conditions of flooding. Subdivisions shall be
reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision
proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include
regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development
that meets the subdivision definition of this ordinance and all
other requirements in §41.07(a)(2). Adequate drainage shall be
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages.
(a) Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analyses.
(1) No floodplain development shall:
(a) Obstruct flow, defined as development
which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters by
itself or with other development, causing any
increase in the regional flood height; or
(b) Cause any increase in the regional flood
height due to floodplain storage area lost.
(2) The zoning administrator shall deny permits
if it is determined the proposed development will
obstruct flow or cause any increase in the
regional flood height, based on the officially
adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the
provisions of §41.08 Amendments are met.
(b) Watercourse Alterations. No land use permit to
alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be
issued until the local official has notified in writing all
adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional
offices, and required the applicant to secure all necessary state
and federal permits. The standards of §41.02(a) must be met and
the flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
As soon as is practicable, but not later than six (6)
months after the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation
and pursuant to §41.08 Amendments, the community shall apply for
a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations
must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the
LOMC process.
(c) Chapter 30, 31, Wis. Stats., Development.
Development which requires a permit from the Department, under
Chapters 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves,
bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if
the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the
floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to §41.08
Amendments.
(d) Public or Private Campgrounds. Public or private
campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall
meet the following provisions:
(1) The campground is approved by the Department
of Health Services;
(2) A land use permit for the campground is
issued by the zoning administrator;
(3) The character of the river system and the
campground elevation are such that a 72-hour
warning of an impending flood can be given to all
campground occupants;
(4) There is an adequate flood warning procedure
for the campground that offers the minimum notice
required under this section to all persons in the
campground. This procedure shall include a written
agreement between the campground owner, the
municipal emergency government coordinator and the
chief law enforcement official which specifies the
flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur,
personnel responsible for monitoring flood
elevations, types of warning systems to be used
and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties,
and the methods and personnel responsible for
conducting the evacuation;
(5) This agreement shall be for no more than one
(1) calendar year, at which time the agreement
shall be reviewed and updated - by the officials
identified in subsection (4) - to remain in
compliance with all applicable regulations,
including those of the state Department of Health
Services and all other applicable regulations;
(6) Only camping units that are fully licensed,
if required, and ready for highway use are
allowed;
(7) The camping units shall not occupy any site
in the campground for more than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days, at which time the camping
unit must be removed from the floodplain for a
minimum of twenty-four (24) hours;
(8) All camping units that remain on site for
more than thirty (30) days shall be issued a
limited authorization by the campground operator,
a written copy of which is kept on file at the
campground. Such authorization shall allow
placement of a camping unit for a period not to
exceed one hundred eighty (180) days and shall
ensure compliance with all the provisions of this
section;
(9) The municipality shall monitor the limited
authorizations issued by the campground operator
to assure compliance with the terms of this
section;
(10) All camping units that remain in place for
more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days must meet the applicable requirements in
either §41.03, §41.04 or §41.05 for the floodplain
district in which the structure is located;
(11) The campground shall have signs clearly
posted at all entrances warning of the flood
hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a
flood warning is issued; and
(12) All service facilities, including but not
limited to refuse collection, electrical service,
gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells
shall be properly anchored and placed at or
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
41.03 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).
(a) Applicability. This section applies to all
floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those
identified pursuant to §41.05(d).
(b) Permitted Uses. The following open space uses are
allowed in the Floodway District and the floodway areas of the
General Floodplain District, if: (1) they are not prohibited by
any other ordinance; (2) they meet the standards in §41.03(c) and
§41.03(d); and (3) all permits or certificates have been issued
according to §41.07(a).
(1) Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor
plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture and
wild crop harvesting.
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses,
such as loading areas, parking areas and airport
landing strips.
(3) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf
courses, tennis courts, archery ranges, picnic
grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities,
hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback
riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of
§41.03(c)(4).
(4) Uses or structures accessory to open space
uses, or classified as historic structures that
comply with §41.03(c) and §41.03(d).
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials
that comply with §41.03(c)(4).
(6) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as
docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage areas,
culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of
transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with
Chapters 30 and 31, Wis. Stats.
(7) Public utilities, streets and bridges that
comply with §41.03(c).
(c) Standards for Developments in the Floodway.
(1) General.
(a) Any development in the floodway shall
comply with §41.02 and have a low flood
damage potential.
(b) Applicants shall provide the following
data to determine the effects of the proposal
according to §41.02(a):
(1) A cross-section elevation view of
the proposal, perpendicular to the
watercourse, showing if the proposed
development will obstruct flow; or
(2) An analysis calculating the effects
of this proposal on regional flood
height.
(c) The zoning administrator shall deny the
permit application if the project will cause
any increase in the flood elevations upstream
or downstream, based on the data submitted
for subsection (b) above.
(2) Structures. Structures accessory to
permanent open space uses or functionally
dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed
by permit if the structures comply with the
following criteria:
(a) Not designed for human habitation, does
not have a high flood damage potential and is
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(b) Shall have a minimum of two (2) openings
on different walls having a total net area
not less than one (1) square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom
of all such openings being no higher than one
(1) foot above grade. The openings shall be
equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
(c) Must be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement;
(d) Mechanical and utility equipment must be
elevated or flood proofed to or above the
flood protection elevation; and
(e) It must not obstruct flow of flood
waters or cause any increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the regional flood.
(3) Public Utilities, Streets and Bridges.
Public utilities, streets and bridges may be
allowed by permit, if:
(a) Adequate floodproofing measures are
provided to the flood protection elevation;
and
(b) Construction meets the development
standards of §41.02(a).
(4) Fills or Deposition of Materials. Fills or
deposition of materials may be allowed by permit,
if:
(a) The requirements of §41.02(a) are met;
(b) No material is deposited in navigable
waters unless a permit is issued by the
Department pursuant to Chapter 30, Wis.
Stats., and a permit pursuant to §404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344 has been
issued, if applicable, and all other
requirements have been met;
(c) The fill or other materials will be
protected against erosion by riprap,
vegetative cover, sheet piling or
bulkheading; and
(d) The fill is not classified as a solid or
hazardous material.
(d) Prohibited Uses. All uses not listed as permitted
uses in §41.03(b) are prohibited, including the following uses:
(1) Habitable structures, structures with high
flood damage potential, or those not associated
with permanent open-space uses;
(2) Storing materials that are buoyant,
flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water
quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other
aquatic life;
(3) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to
uses permitted in the adjoining districts;
(4) Any private or public sewage systems, except
portable latrines that are removed prior to
flooding and systems associated with recreational
areas and Department approved campgrounds that
meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances
and Chapter SPS 383, Wisconsin Administrative
Code;
(5) Any public or private wells which are used to
obtain potable water, except those for
recreational areas that meet the requirements of
local ordinances and Chapters NR 811 and NR 812,
Wisconsin Administrative Code;
(6) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(7) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities,
except those permitted under §NR 110.15(3)(b),
Wisconsin Administrative Code; and
(8) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines,
except those to service existing or proposed
development located outside the floodway which
complies with the regulations for the floodplain
area occupied.
41.04 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF).
(a) Applicability. This section applies to all
floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and those
identified pursuant to §41.05(d).
(b) Permitted Uses. Any structure, land use, or
development is allowed in the Floodfringe District if the
standards in §41.04(c) are met, the use is not prohibited by this
or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or
certificates specified in §41.07(a) have been issued.
(c) Standards for Development in the Floodfringe.
§41.02(a) shall apply in addition to the following requirements
according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the
floodfringe must meet the requirements of §41.06 Nonconforming
Uses;
(1) Residential Uses. Any structure, including a
manufactured home, which is to be newly
constructed or moved into the floodfringe, shall
meet or exceed the following standards. Any
existing structure in the floodfringe must meet
the requirements of §41.06 Nonconforming Uses;
(a) The elevation of the lowest floor shall
be at or above the flood protection elevation
on fill unless the requirements of
§41.04(c)(1)(b) can be met. The fill shall be
one (1) foot or more above the regional flood
elevation extending at least fifteen (15)
feet beyond the limits of the structure.
(b) The basement or crawlway floor may be
placed at the regional flood elevation if it
is dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is
allowed below the regional flood elevation;
(c) Contiguous dryland access shall be
provided from a structure to land outside of
the floodplain, except as provided in
subsection (d).
(d) In developments where existing street or
sewer line elevations make compliance with
subsection (c) impractical, the municipality
may permit new development and substantial
improvements where roads are below the
regional flood elevation, if:
(1) The municipality has written
assurance from police, fire and
emergency services that rescue and
relief will be provided to the
structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during
a regional flood event; or
(2) The municipality has a DNR-approved
emergency evacuation plan.
(2) Accessory Structures or Uses. Accessory
structures shall be constructed on fill with the
lowest floor at or above the regional flood
elevation.
(3) Commercial Uses. Any commercial structure
which is erected, altered or moved into the
floodfringe shall meet the requirements of
§41.04(c)(1). Subject to the requirements of
§41.04(c)(5), storage yards, surface parking lots
and other such uses may be placed at lower
elevations if an adequate warning system exists to
protect life and property.
(4) Manufacturing and Industrial Uses. Any
manufacturing or industrial structure which is
erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe
shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation or meet the
floodproofing standards in §41.07(e). Subject to
the requirements of §41.04(c)(5), storage yards,
surface parking lots and other such uses may be
placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning
system exists to protect life and property.
(5) Storage of Materials. Materials that are
buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to
property, water quality or human, animal, plant,
fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above
the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in
compliance with §41.07(e) Adequate measures shall
be taken to ensure that such materials will not
enter the water body during flooding.
(6) Public Utilities, Streets and Bridges. All
utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed
to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans; and
(a) When failure of public utilities,
streets and bridges would endanger public
health or safety, or where such facilities
are deemed essential, construction or repair
of such facilities shall only be permitted if
they are designed to comply with §41.07(e).
(b) Minor roads or non-essential utilities
may be constructed at lower elevations if
they are designed to withstand flood forces
to the regional flood elevation.
(7) Sewage Systems. All sewage disposal systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood water into the system,
pursuant to §41.07(e)(3), to the flood protection
elevation and meet the provisions of all local
ordinances and Chapter SPS 383, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(8) Wells. All wells shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the system, pursuant to §41.07(e)(3), to the
flood protection elevation and shall meet the
provisions of Chapters NR 811 and NR 812,
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(9) Solid Waste Disposal Sites. Disposal of
solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in
floodfringe areas.
(10) Deposition of Materials. Any deposited
material must meet all the provisions of this
ordinance.
(11) Manufactured Homes.
(a) Owners or operators of all manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall provide
adequate surface drainage to minimize flood
damage, and prepare, secure approval and file
an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular
access and escape routes, with local
emergency management authorities.
(b) In existing manufactured home parks, all
new homes, replacement homes on existing
pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
(1) have the lowest floor elevated to
the flood protection elevation; and
(2) be anchored so they do not float,
collapse or move laterally during a
flood.
(c) Outside of existing manufactured home
parks, including new manufactured home parks
and all single units outside of existing
parks, all new, replacement and substantially
improved manufactured homes shall meet the
residential development standards for the
floodfringe in §41.04(c)(1).
(12) Mobile Recreational Vehicles. All mobile
recreational vehicles that are on site for 180
consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed
and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation
and anchoring requirements in §41.04(c)(11)(b) and
(c). A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quickdisconnect
utilities and security devices and has
no permanently attached additions.
41.05 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP).
(a) Applicability. The provisions for this district
shall apply to all floodplains mapped as A, AO or AH zones.
(b) Permitted Uses. Pursuant to §41.05(d), it shall
be determined whether the proposed use is located within the
floodway or floodfringe. Those uses permitted in the Floodway
(§41.03(b)) and Floodfringe (§41.04(b)) Districts are allowed
within the General Floodplain District, according to the
standards of §41.05(c), provided that all permits or certificates
required under §41.07(a) have been issued.
(c) Standards for Development in the General
Floodplain District. Section 41.03 applies to floodway areas,
§41.04 applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this ordinance
applies to either district.
(1) In AO/AH Zones the structure’s lowest floor
must meet one (1) of the conditions listed below
whichever is higher:
(a) at or above the flood protection
elevation; or
(b) two (2) feet above the highest adjacent
grade around the structure; or
(c) the depth as shown on the FIRM
(2) In AO/AH zones, provide plans showing
adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters
around structures.
(d) Determining Floodway and Floodfringe Limits. Upon
receiving an application for development within the general
floodplain district, the zoning administrator shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit two (2)
copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which
shows the proposed development with respect to the
general floodplain district limits, stream
channel, and existing floodplain developments,
along with a legal description of the property,
fill limits and elevations, building floor
elevations and flood proofing measures; and the
flood zone as shown on the FIRM.
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the
following information deemed necessary by the
Department to evaluate the effects of the proposal
upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood
elevation and to determine floodway boundaries.
(a) A Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study as
specified in §41.07(a)(2)(c).
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations
or contours of the ground; pertinent
structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and layout of all proposed and
existing structures on the site; location and
elevations of streets, water supply, and
sanitary facilities; soil types and other
pertinent information;
(c) Specifications for building construction
and materials, floodproofing, filling,
dredging, channel improvement, storage, water
supply and sanitary facilities.
41.06 NONCONFORMING USES.
(a) General.
(1) Applicability. If these standards conform
with §59.69(10), Wis. Stats., for counties or
§62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., for cities and
villages, they shall apply to all modifications or
additions to any nonconforming use or structure
and to the use of any structure or premises which
was lawful before the passage of this ordinance or
any amendment thereto.
(2) The existing lawful use of a structure or its
accessory use which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance may continue subject
to the following conditions:
(a) No modifications or additions to a
nonconforming use or structure shall be
permitted unless they comply with this
ordinance. The words "modification" and
"addition" include, but are not limited to,
any alteration, addition, modification,
structural repair, rebuilding or replacement
of any such existing use, structure or
accessory structure or use. Maintenance is
not considered a modification; this includes
painting, decorating, paneling and other
nonstructural components and the maintenance,
repair or replacement of existing private
sewage or water supply systems or connections
to public utilities. Any costs associated
with the repair of a damaged structure are
not considered maintenance.
The construction of a deck that does not
exceed two hundred (200) square feet and that
is adjacent to the exterior wall of a
principal structure is not an extension,
modification or addition. The roof of the
structure may extend over a portion of the
deck in order to provide safe ingress and
egress to the principal structure.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a
nonconforming structure is discontinued for
twelve (12) consecutive months, it is no
longer permitted and any future use of the
property, and any structure or building
thereon, shall conform to the applicable
requirements of this ordinance;
(c) The municipality shall keep a record
which lists all nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures, their present
equalized assessed value, the cost of all
modifications or additions which have been
permitted, and the percentage of the
structure's total current value those
modifications represent;
(d) No modification or addition to any
nonconforming structure or any structure with
a nonconforming use, which over the life of
the structure would equal or exceed fifty
(50%) percent of its present equalized
assessed value, shall be allowed unless the
entire structure is permanently changed to a
conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements
of this ordinance. Contiguous dry land access
must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with
§41.04(c)(1). The costs of elevating the
lowest floor of a nonconforming building or a
building with a nonconforming use to the
flood protection elevation are excluded from
the fifty (50%) percent provisions of this
paragraph;
(e) No maintenance to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use, the cost of which would
equal or exceed fifty (50%) percent of its
present equalized assessed value, shall be
allowed unless the entire structure is
permanently changed to a conforming structure
with a conforming use in compliance with the
applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided
for residential and commercial uses in
compliance with §41.04(c)(1).
(f) If on a per event basis the total value
of the work being done under (d) and (e)
equals or exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the
present equalized assessed value the work
shall not be permitted unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a
conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements
of this ordinance. Contiguous dry land access
must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with
§41.04(c)(1).
(g) Except as provided in subsection (h), if
any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is
substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced,
reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and
the structure meet the current ordinance
requirements. A structure is considered
substantially damaged if the total cost to
restore the structure to its pre-damaged
condition equals or exceeds fifty (50%)
percent of the structure’s present equalized
assessed value.
(h) For nonconforming buildings that are
substantially damaged or destroyed by a
nonflood disaster, the repair or
reconstruction of any such nonconforming
building shall be permitted in order to
restore it to the size and use in effect
prior to the damage event, provided that the
minimum federal code requirements below are
met and all required permits have been
granted prior to the start of construction.
(1) Residential Structures.
(a) Shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation
using fill, pilings, columns, posts
or perimeter walls. Perimeter
walls must meet the requirements of
§41.07(e)(2).
(b) Shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of
buoyancy and shall be constructed
with methods and materials
resistant to flood damage.
(c) Shall be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service
facilities that are designed and/or
elevated so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating
within the components during
conditions of flooding.
(d) In A Zones, obtain, review and
utilize any flood data available
from a federal, state or other
source.
(e) In AO Zones with no elevations
specified, shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, meet the
standards in §41.05(c)(1).
(f) In AO Zones, shall have
adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from
the structure.
(2) Nonresidential Structures.
(a) Shall meet the requirements of
§41.06(a)(2)(h)(1)(a) - (b) and (e)
- (g).
(b) Shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated
to or above the regional flood
elevation; or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet the
standards in §41.07(e)(1) or (2).
(c) In AO Zones with no elevations
specified, shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, meet the
standards in §41.05(c)(1).
(3) A nonconforming historic structure
may be altered if the alteration will
not preclude the structures continued
designation as a historic structure, the
alteration will comply with
§41.03(c)(1), flood resistant materials
are used, and construction practices and
floodproofing methods that comply with
§41.07(e) are used. Repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures
shall be exempt from the development
standards of §41.06(a)(2)(h)(1) if it is
determined that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a
historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(b) Floodway District.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed
to any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use in the Floodway District,
unless such modification or addition:
(a) Has been granted a permit or variance
which meets all ordinance requirements;
(b) Meets the requirements of §41.06(a);
(c) Shall not increase the obstruction to
flood flows or regional flood height;
(d) Any addition to the existing structure
shall be floodproofed, pursuant to §41.07(e),
by means other than the use of fill, to the
flood protection elevation; and
(e) If any part of the foundation below the
flood protection elevation is enclosed, the
following standards shall apply:
(1) The enclosed area shall be designed
by a registered architect or engineer to
allow for the efficient entry and exit
of flood waters without human
intervention. A minimum of two (2)
openings must be provided with a minimum
net area of at least one (1) square inch
for every one (1) square foot of the
enclosed area. The lowest part of the
opening can be no more than twelve (12)
inches above the adjacent grade;
(2) The parts of the foundation located
below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed of flood-resistant
materials;
(3) Mechanical and utility equipment
must be elevated or floodproofed to or
above the flood protection elevation;
and
(4) The use must be limited to parking,
building access or limited storage.
(2) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or
addition to an existing on-site sewage disposal
system, except where an addition has been ordered
by a government agency to correct a hazard to
public health, shall be allowed in the Floodway
District. Any replacement, repair or maintenance
of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a
floodway area shall meet the applicable
requirements of all municipal ordinances,
§41.07(e)(3) and Chapter SPS 383, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(3) No new well or modification to an existing
well used to obtain potable water shall be allowed
in the Floodway District. Any replacement, repair
or maintenance of an existing well in the Floodway
District shall meet the applicable requirements of
all municipal ordinances, §41.07(e)(3) and
Chapters NR 811 and NR 812, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(c) Floodfringe District.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed
to any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use unless such modification
or addition has been granted a permit or variance
by the municipality, and meets the requirements of
§41.04(c) except where §41.06(c)(2) is applicable.
(2) Where compliance with the provisions of
subsection (1) would result in unnecessary
hardship and only where the structure will not be
used for human habitation or be associated with a
high flood damage potential, the Board of
Adjustment/Appeals, using the procedures
established in §41.07(c), may grant a variance
from those provisions of subsection (1) for
modifications or additions using the criteria
listed below. Modifications or additions which are
protected to elevations lower than the flood
protection elevation may be permitted if:
(a) No floor is allowed below the regional
flood elevation for residential or commercial
structures;
(b) Human lives are not endangered;
(c) Public facilities, such as water or
sewer, shall not be installed;
(d) Flood depths shall not exceed two (2)
feet;
(e) Flood velocities shall not exceed two
(2) feet per second; and
(f) The structure shall not be used for
storage of materials as described in
§41.04(c)(5).
(3) All new private sewage disposal systems, or
addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of
a private sewage disposal system shall meet all
the applicable provisions of all local ordinances,
§41.07(e)(3) and Chapter SPS 383, Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(4) All new wells, or addition to, replacement,
repair or maintenance of a well shall meet the
applicable provisions of this ordinance,
§41.07(e)(3) and Chapters NR 811 and NR 812,
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
41.07 ADMINISTRATION.
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a
board of adjustment/appeals has already been appointed to
administer a zoning ordinance adopted under §59.69, §59.692 or
§62.23(7), Wis. Stats., these officials shall also administer
this ordinance.
(a) Zoning Administrator.
(1) Duties and Powers. The zoning administrator
is authorized to administer this ordinance and
shall have the following duties and powers:
(a) Advise applicants of the ordinance
provisions, assist in preparing permit
applications and appeals, and assure that the
regional flood elevation for the proposed
development is shown on all permit
applications.
(b) Issue permits and inspect properties for
compliance with provisions of this ordinance
and issue certificates of compliance where
appropriate.
(c) Inspect and assess all damaged
floodplain structures to determine if
substantial damage to the structures has
occurred.
(d) Keep records of all official actions
such as:
(1) All permits issued, inspections
made, and work approved.
(2) Documentation of certified lowest
floor and regional flood elevations.
(3) Floodproofing certificates.
(4) Water surface profiles, floodplain
zoning maps and ordinances,
nonconforming uses and structures
including changes, appeals, variances
and amendments.
(5) All substantial damage assessment
reports for floodplain structures.
(6) List of nonconforming structures
and uses.
(e) Submit copies of the following items to
the Department Regional office:
(1) Within ten (10) days of the
decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text
interpretations, and map or text
amendments.
(2) Copies of case-by-case analyses and
other required information including an
annual summary of floodplain zoning
actions taken.
(3) Copies of substantial damage
assessments performed and all related
correspondence concerning the
assessments.
(f) Investigate, prepare reports, and report
violations of this ordinance to the municipal
zoning agency and attorney for prosecution.
Copies of the reports shall also be sent to
the Department Regional office.
(g) Submit copies of amendments and biennial
reports to the FEMA Regional office.
(2) Land Use Permit. A land use permit shall be
obtained before any new development; repair,
modification or addition to an existing structure;
or change in the use of a building or structure,
including sewer and water facilities, may be
initiated. Application to the zoning administrator
shall include:
(a) General Information.
(1) Name and address of the applicant,
property owner and contractor.
(2) Legal description, proposed use,
and whether it is new construction or a
modification;
(b) Site Development Plan. A site plan
drawn to scale shall be submitted with the
permit application form and shall contain:
(1) Location, dimensions, area and
elevation of the lot.
(2) Location of the ordinary highwater
mark of any abutting navigable
waterways.
(3) Location of any structures with
distances measured from the lot lines
and street center lines.
(4) Location of any existing or
proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems.
(5) Location and elevation of existing
or future access roads.
(6) Location of floodplain and floodway
limits as determined from the official
floodplain zoning maps.
(7) The elevation of the lowest floor
of proposed buildings and any fill using
the vertical datum from the adopted
study – either National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD).
(8) Data sufficient to determine the
regional flood elevation in NGVD or NAVD
at the location of the development and
to determine whether or not the
requirements of §41.03 or §41.04 are
met, and
(9) Data to determine if the proposed
development will cause an obstruction to
flow or an increase in regional flood
height or discharge according to
§41.02(a). This may include any of the
information noted in §41.03(c)(1).
(c) Hydraulic and Hydrologic Studies to
Analyze Development. All hydraulic and
hydrologic studies shall be completed under
the direct supervision of a professional
engineer registered in the State. The study
contractor shall be responsible for the
technical adequacy of the study. All studies
shall be reviewed and approved by the
Department.
(1) Zone A floodplains.
(a) Hydrology.
(i) The appropriate method
shall be based on the
standards in Chapter NR
116.07(3), Wisconsin
Administrative Code,
Hydrologic Analysis:
Determination of Regional
Flood Discharge.
(b) Hydraulic modeling. The
regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in Chapter
NR 116.07(4), Wisconsin
Administrative Code, Hydraulic
Analysis: Determination of Regional
Flood Elevation and the following:
(i) Determination of the
required limits of the
hydraulic model shall be based
on detailed study information
for downstream structures
(dam, bridge, culvert) to
determine adequate starting
WSEL for the study.
(ii) Channel sections must be
surveyed.
(iii) Minimum four (4) foot
contour data in the overbanks
shall be used for the
development of cross section
overbank and floodplain
mapping.
(iv) A maximum distance of
five hundred (500) feet
between cross sections is
allowed in developed areas
with additional intermediate
cross sections required at
transitions in channel bottom
slope including a survey of
the channel at each location.
(v) The most current version
of HEC-RAS shall be used.
(vi) A survey of bridge and
culvert openings and the top
of road is required at each
structure.
(vii) Additional cross
sections are required at the
downstream and upstream limits
of the proposed development
and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length
of the reach if greater than
five hundred (500) feet.
(viii) Standard accepted
engineering practices shall be
used when assigning parameters
for the base model such as
flow, Manning’s N values,
expansion and contraction
coefficients or effective flow
limits. The base model shall
be calibrated to past flooding
data such as high water marks
to determine the
reasonableness of the model
results. If no historical data
is available, adequate
justification shall be
provided for any parameters
outside standard accepted
engineering practices.
(ix) The model must extend
past the upstream limit of the
difference in the existing and
proposed flood profiles in
order to provide a tie-in to
existing studies. The height
difference between the
proposed flood profile and the
existing study profiles shall
be no more than zero (0.00)
feet.
(c) Mapping. A work map of the
reach studied shall be provided,
showing all cross section
locations, floodway/floodplain
limits based on best available
topographic data, geographic limits
of the proposed development and
whether the proposed development is
located in the floodway.
(i) If the proposed
development is located outside
of the floodway, then it is
determined to have no impact
on the regional flood
elevation.
(ii) If any part of the
proposed development is in the
floodway, it must be added to
the base model to show the
difference between existing
and proposed conditions. The
study must ensure that all
coefficients remain the same
as in the existing model,
unless adequate justification
based on standard accepted
engineering practices is
provided.
(2) Zone AE Floodplains.
(a) Hydrology. If the proposed
hydrology will change the existing
study, the appropriate method to be
used shall be based on Chapter NR
116.07(3), Wisconsin Administrative
Code, Hydrologic Analysis:
Determination of Regional Flood
Discharge.
(b) Hydraulic model. The regional
flood elevation shall be based on
the standards in Chapter NR
116.07(4), Wisconsin Administrative
Code, Hydraulic Analysis:
Determination of Regional Flood
Elevation and the following:
(i) Duplicate Effective
Model. The effective model
shall be reproduced to ensure
correct transference of the
model data and to allow
integration of the revised
data to provide a continuous
FIS model upstream and
downstream of the revised
reach. If data from the
effective model is available,
models shall be generated that
duplicate the FIS profiles and
the elevations shown in the
Floodway Data Table in the FIS
report to within one-tenth
(0.1) foot.
(ii) Corrected Effective
Model. The Corrected
Effective Model shall not
include any man-made physical
changes since the effective
model date, but shall import
the model into the most
current version of HEC-RAS for
Department review.
(iii) Existing (Pre-Project
Conditions) Model. The
Existing Model shall be
required to support
conclusions about the actual
impacts of the project
associated with the Revised
(Post-Project) Model or to
establish more up-to-date
models on which to base the
Revised (Post-Project) Model.
(iv) Revised (Post-Project
Conditions) Model. The
Revised (Post-Project
Conditions) Model shall
incorporate the Existing Model
and any proposed changes to
the topography caused by the
proposed development. This
model shall reflect proposed
conditions.
(v) All changes to the
Duplicate Effective Model and
subsequent models must be
supported by certified
topographic information,
bridge plans, construction
plans and survey notes.
(vi) Changes to the hydraulic
models shall be limited to the
stream reach for which the
revision is being requested.
Cross sections upstream and
downstream of the revised
reach shall be identical to
those in the effective model
and result in water surface
elevations and top widths
computed by the revised models
matching those in the
effective models upstream and
downstream of the revised
reach as required. The
Effective Model shall not be
truncated.
(c) Mapping. Maps and associated
engineering data shall be submitted
to the Department for review which
meet the following conditions:
(i) Consistency between the
revised hydraulic models, the
revised floodplain and
floodway delineations, the
revised flood profiles,
topographic work map,
annotated FIRMs and/or Flood
Boundary Floodway Maps
(FBFMs), construction plans,
bridge plans.
(ii) Certified topographic map
of suitable scale, contour
interval, and a planimetric
map showing the applicable
items. If a digital version of
the map is available, it may
be submitted in order that the
FIRM may be more easily
revised.
(iii) Annotated FIRM panel
showing the revised one (1%)
percent and two-tenths (0.2%)
percent annual chance
floodplains and floodway
boundaries.
(iv) If an annotated FIRM
and/or FBFM and digital
mapping data (GIS or CADD) are
used then all supporting
documentation or metadata must
be included with the data
submission along with the
Universal Transverse Mercator
(UTM) projection and State
Plane Coordinate System in
accordance with FEMA mapping
specifications.
(v) The revised floodplain
boundaries shall tie into the
effective floodplain
boundaries.
(vi) All cross sections from
the effective model shall be
labeled in accordance with the
effective map and a cross
section lookup table shall be
included to relate to the
model input numbering scheme.
(vii) Both the current and
proposed floodways shall be
shown on the map.
(viii) The stream centerline,
or profile baseline used to
measure stream distances in
the model shall be visible on
the map.
(d) Expiration. All permits issued under
the authority of this ordinance shall expire
no more than one hundred eighty (180) days
after issuance. The permit may be extended
for a maximum of one hundred eighty (180)
days for good and sufficient cause.
(3) Certificate of Compliance. No land shall be
occupied or used, and no building which is
hereafter constructed, altered, added to,
modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be
occupied until a certificate of compliance is
issued by the zoning administrator, except where
no permit is required, subject to the following
provisions:
(a) The certificate of compliance shall show
that the building or premises or part
thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the
provisions of this ordinance;
(b) Application for such certificate shall
be concurrent with the application for a
permit;
(c) If all ordinance provisions are met, the
certificate of compliance shall be issued
within ten (10) days after written
notification that the permitted work is
completed;
(d) The applicant shall submit a
certification signed by a registered
professional engineer, architect or land
surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and
floodproofing elevations are in compliance
with the permit issued. Floodproofing
measures also require certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect
that the requirements of §41.07(e) are met.
(4) Other Permits. Prior to obtaining a
floodplain development permit the applicant must
secure all necessary permits from federal, state,
and local agencies, including but not limited to
those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
under §404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344.
(b) Zoning Agency.
(1) The Plan Commission shall:
(a) Oversee the functions of the office of
the zoning administrator; and
(b) Review and advise the governing body on
all proposed amendments to this ordinance,
maps and text.
(2) The Plan Commission shall not:
(a) Grant variances to the terms of the
ordinance in place of action by the Board of
Adjustment/Appeals; or
(b) Amend the text or zoning maps in place
of official action by the governing body.
(c) Board of Adjustment/Appeals. The Board of
Adjustment/Appeals, created under §59.694, Wis. Stats., for
counties or §62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., for cities or villages, is
hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for the purposes
of this ordinance. The Board shall exercise the powers conferred
by Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of
business. The zoning administrator shall not be the secretary of
the Board.
(1) Powers and Duties. The Board of
Adjustment/Appeals shall:
(a) Appeals - Hear and decide appeals where
it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made
by an administrative official in the
enforcement or administration of this
ordinance;
(b) Boundary Disputes - Hear and decide
disputes concerning the district boundaries
shown on the official floodplain zoning map;
and
(c) Variances - Hear and decide, upon
appeal, variances from the ordinance
standards.
(2) Appeals to the Board.
(a) Appeals to the board may be taken by any
person aggrieved, or by any officer or
department of the municipality affected by
any decision of the zoning administrator or
other administrative officer. Such appeal
shall be taken within thirty (30) days unless
otherwise provided by the rules of the board,
by filing with the official whose decision is
in question, and with the board, a notice of
appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal.
The official whose decision is in question
shall transmit to the board all records
regarding the matter appealed.
(b) Notice and Hearing for Appeals Including
Variances.
(1) Notice - The board shall:
(a) Fix a reasonable time for the
hearing;
(b) Publish adequate notice
pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time, place
and subject of the hearing; and
(c) Assure that notice shall be
mailed to the parties in interest
and the Department Regional office
at least ten (10) days in advance
of the hearing.
(2) Hearing - Any party may appear in
person or by agent. The board shall:
(a) Resolve boundary disputes
according to §41.07(c)(3);
(b) Decide variance applications
according to §41.07(c)(4); and
(c) Decide appeals of permit
denials according to §41.07(d).
(c) Decision. The final decision regarding
the appeal or variance application shall:
(1) Be made within a reasonable time;
(2) Be sent to the Department Regional
office within ten (10) days of the
decision;
(3) Be a written determination signed
by the chairman or secretary of the
Board;
(4) State the specific facts which are
the basis for the Board's decision;
(5) Either affirm, reverse, vary or
modify the order, requirement, decision
or determination appealed, in whole or
in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of
jurisdiction or grant or deny the
variance application; and
(6) Include the reasons for granting an
appeal, describing the hardship
demonstrated by the applicant in the
case of a variance, clearly stated in
the recorded minutes of the Board
proceedings.
(3) Boundary Disputes. The following procedure
shall be used by the Board in hearing disputes
concerning floodplain district boundaries:
(a) If a floodplain district boundary is
established by approximate or detailed
floodplain studies, the flood elevations or
profiles shall prevail in locating the
boundary. If none exist, other evidence may
be examined;
(b) The person contesting the boundary
location shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present arguments and
technical evidence to the Board; and
(c) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped,
the Board should inform the zoning committee
or the person contesting the boundary
location to petition the governing body for a
map amendment according to §41.08 Amendments.
(4) Variance.
(a) The Board may, upon appeal, grant a
variance from the standards of this ordinance
if an applicant convincingly demonstrates
that:
(1) Literal enforcement of the
ordinance will cause unnecessary
hardship;
(2) The hardship is due to adoption of
the floodplain ordinance and unique
property conditions, not common to
adjacent lots or premises. In such case
the ordinance or map must be amended;
(3) The variance is not contrary to the
public interest; and
(4) The variance is consistent with the
purpose of this ordinance in §41.01(c).
(b) In addition to the criteria in
subsection (a), to qualify for a variance
under FEMA regulations, the following
criteria must be met:
(1) The variance shall not cause any
increase in the regional flood
elevation;
(2) Variances can only be granted for
lots that are less than one-half (½)
acre and are contiguous to existing
structures constructed below the RFE;
and
(3) Variances shall only be granted
upon a showing of good and sufficient
cause, shall be the minimum relief
necessary, shall not cause increased
risks to public safety or nuisances,
shall not increase costs for rescue and
relief efforts and shall not be contrary
to the purpose of the ordinance.
(c) A variance shall not:
(1) Grant, extend or increase any use
prohibited in the zoning district;
(2) Be granted for a hardship based
solely on an economic gain or loss;
(3) Be granted for a hardship which is
self-created.
(4) Damage the rights or property
values of other persons in the area;
(5) Allow actions without the
amendments to this ordinance or map(s)
required in §41.08 Amendments; and
(6) Allow any alteration of an historic
structure, including its use, which
would preclude its continued designation
as an historic structure.
(d) When a floodplain variance is granted
the Board shall notify the applicant in
writing that it may increase risks to life
and property and flood insurance premiums
could increase up to Twenty-five ($25.00)
Dollars per One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars of
coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the
variance record.
(d) To Review Appeals of Permit Denials.
(1) The Zoning Agency (§41.07(b)) or Board shall
review all data related to the appeal. This may
include:
(a) Permit application data listed in
§41.07(a)(2);
(b) Floodway/floodfringe determination data
in §41.05(d);
(c) Data listed in §41.03(c)(1)(b) where the
applicant has not submitted this information
to the zoning administrator; and
(d) Other data submitted with the
application, or submitted to the Board with
the appeal.
(2) For appeals of all denied permits the Board
shall:
(a) Follow the procedures of §41.07(c);
(b) Consider zoning agency recommendations;
and
(c) Either uphold the denial or grant the
appeal.
(3) For appeals concerning increases in regional
flood elevation the Board shall:
(a) Uphold the denial where the Board agrees
with the data showing an increase in flood
elevation. Increases may only be allowed
after amending the flood profile and map and
all appropriate legal arrangements are made
with all adversely affected property owners
as per the requirements of §41.08 Amendments;
and
(b) Grant the appeal where the Board agrees
that the data properly demonstrates that the
project does not cause an increase provided
no other reasons for denial exist.
(e) Floodproofing Standards for Noncomforming
Structures or Uses.
(1) No permit or variance shall be issued for a
non-residential structure designed to be
watertight below the regional flood elevation
until the applicant submits a plan certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing measures will protect the
structure or development to the flood protection
elevation and submits a FEMA Floodproofing
Certificate.
(2) For a structure designed to allow the entry
of floodwaters, no permit or variance shall be
issued until the applicant submits a plan either:
(a) Certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect; or
(b) meets or exceeds the following
standards:
(1) a minimum of two (2) openings
having a total net area of not less
thank one (1) square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be
no higher than one (1) foot above grade;
and
(3) openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
(3) Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as
appropriate, to:
(a) Withstand flood pressures, depths,
velocities, uplift and impact forces and
other regional flood factors;
(b) Protect structures to the flood
protection elevation;
(c) Anchor structures to foundations to
resist flotation and lateral movement; and
(d) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of
flood waters.
(e) Minimize or eliminate discharges into
flood waters.
(f) Public Information.
(1) Place marks on structures to show the depth
of inundation during the regional flood.
(2) All maps, engineering data and regulations
shall be available and widely distributed.
(3) Real estate transfers should show what
floodplain district any real property is in.
41.08 AMENDMENTS.
Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if
amendments are made to this ordinance, the official floodplain
zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in
accordance with §41.08(a).
In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or
increases shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are
made to this ordinance, the official floodplain zoning maps,
floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with
§41.08(a). Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by
FEMA and the DNR.
In A Zones increases equal to or greater than one (1.0)
foot may only be permitted if the applicant receives a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are
made to this ordinance, the official floodplain maps, floodway
lines, and water surface profiles, in accordance with §41.08(a).
(a) General. The governing body shall change or
supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries and this
ordinance in the manner outlined in §41.08(b) below. Actions
which require an amendment to the ordinance and/ or submittal of
a Letter of Map Change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to,
the following:
(1) Any fill or floodway encroachment that
obstructs flow causing any increase in the
regional flood height;
(2) Any change to the floodplain boundaries
and/or watercourse alterations on the FIRM;
(3) Any changes to any other officially adopted
floodplain maps listed in §41.01(e)(2)(b);
(4) Any floodplain fill which raises the
elevation of the filled area to a height at or
above the flood protection elevation and is
contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain;
(5) Correction of discrepancies between the water
surface profiles and floodplain maps;
(6) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance
text required by §NR 116.05, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, or otherwise required by law,
or for changes by the municipality; and
(7) All channel relocations and changes to the
maps to alter floodway lines or to remove an area
from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based
on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires
prior approval by FEMA.
(b) Procedures. Ordinance amendments may be made upon
petition of any party according to the provisions of §62.23, Wis.
Stats., for cities and villages, or §59.69, Wis. Stats., for
counties. The petitions shall include all data required by
§41.05(d) and §41.07(a)(2). The Land Use Permit shall not be
issued until a Letter of Map Revision is issued by FEMA for the
proposed changes.
(1) The proposed amendment shall be referred to
the zoning agency for a public hearing and
recommendation to the governing body. The
amendment and notice of public hearing shall be
submitted to the Department Regional office for
review prior to the hearing. The amendment
procedure shall comply with the provisions of
§62.23, Wis. Stats., for cities and villages or
§59.69, Wis. Stats., for counties.
(2) No amendments shall become effective until
reviewed and approved by the Department.
(3) All persons petitioning for a map amendment
that obstructs flow causing any increase in the
regional flood height, shall obtain flooding
easements or other appropriate legal arrangements
from all adversely affected property owners and
notify local units of government before the
amendment can be approved by the governing body.
41.09 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance by
any person shall be unlawful and shall be referred to the
municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such
violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the
municipality a penalty of not less than Ten ($10.00) Dollars and
not more than Fifty ($50.00) Dollars, together with a taxable
cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall
constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this ordinance
is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the
maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the municipality,
the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to §87.30, Wis. Stats.
41.10 DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this
ordinance shall have their common law meaning and shall be
applied in accordance with their common usage. Words used in the
present tense include the future, the singular number includes
the plural and the plural number includes the singular. The word
"may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not
discretionary.
(a) A ZONES – Those areas shown on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map which would be inundated by the regional
flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A
Zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending
on the availability of data for a given area.
(b) AH ZONE – See “AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING”.
(c) AO ZONE – See “AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING”.
(d) ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE – A facility,
structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to
the principal use of a property, structure or building.
(e) ALTERATION – An enhancement, upgrading or
substantial change or modifications other than an addition or
repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a
structure.
(f) AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING – A designated AO, AH,
AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) with a 1 percent or greater annual chance of flooding
to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable, and where velocity flood may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
(g) BASE FLOOD – Means the flood having a one (1%)
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as
published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM.
(h) BASEMENT – Any enclosed area of a building having
its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
(i) BUILDING – See STRUCTURE.
(j) BULKHEAD LINE – A geographic line along a reach of
navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance
and approved by the Department pursuant to §30.11, Wis. Stats.,
and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and
the original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling
is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this ordinance.
(k) CAMPGROUND – Any parcel of land which is designed,
maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites
for nonpermanent overnight use by four (4) or more camping units,
or which is advertised or represented as a camping area.
(l) CAMPING UNIT – Any portable device, no more than
400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including
but not limited to a camping trailer, motor home, bus, van,
pickup truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if required, and
ready for highway use.
(m) CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE – A certification that
the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation
of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with
all of the provisions of this ordinance.
(n) CHANNEL – A natural or artificial watercourse with
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of
water.
(o) CRAWLWAYS OR "CRAWL SPACE" – An enclosed area
below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than
five (5) feet in height, used for access to plumbing and
electrical utilities.
(p) DECK – An unenclosed exterior structure that has
no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor which allows the
infiltration of precipitation.
(q) DEPARTMENT – The Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
(r) DEVELOPMENT – Any artificial change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the
construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures;
the construction of additions or alterations to buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged
structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure,
regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement
of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site
preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or
extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation,
repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or
water supply facilities.
(s) DRYLAND ACCESS – A vehicular access route which is
above the regional flood elevation and which connects land
located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as
a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide
enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
(t) ENCROACHMENT – Any fill, structure, equipment, use
or development in the floodway.
(u) FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) – The
federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance
Program.
(v) FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) – A map of a
community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the floodplain and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(w) FLOOD or FLOODING – A general and temporary
condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas caused by one (1) of the following conditions:
(1) The overflow or rise of inland waters;
(2) The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source;
(3) The inundation caused by waves or currents of
water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along
the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior; or
(4) The sudden increase caused by an unusually
high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche,
or by some similarly unusual event.
(x) FLOOD FREQUENCY – The probability of a flood
occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The
frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as
occurring, on the average once in a specified number of years or
as a percent (%) chance of occurring in any given year.
(y) FLOODFRINGE – That portion of the floodplain
outside of the floodway which is covered by flood waters during
the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than
flowing water.
(z) FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP – A map designating
approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are
designated as unnumbered A-Zones and do not contain floodway
lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for
both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood Insurance
Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(aa) FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY – A technical engineering
examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood
hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected
by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate
zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines.
The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered
A-Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps, that accompany the Flood
Insurance Study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the
insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(bb) FLOODPLAIN – Land which has been or may be covered
by flood water during the regional flood. It includes the
floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other designated
floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
(cc) FLOODPLAIN ISLAND – A natural geologic land
formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but not
covered, by floodwater during the regional flood.
(dd) FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT – Policy and procedures to
insure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and
engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and
enforcement of floodplain regulations.
(ee) FLOOD PROFILE – A graph or a longitudinal profile
line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a
flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a
stream or river.
(ff) FLOODPROOFING – Any combination of structural
provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures,
water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject
to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood
damage.
(gg) FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION – An elevation of two
(2) feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation
designated for the regional flood. (Also see: FREEBOARD.)
(hh) FLOOD STORAGE – Those floodplain areas where
storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during
analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge.
(ii) FLOODWAY – The channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required
to carry the regional flood discharge.
(jj) FREEBOARD – A safety factor expressed in terms of
a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level.
Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights
greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris
accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and
floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood
storage areas due to development and aggregation of the river or
stream bed.
(kk) HABITABLE STRUCTURE – Any structure or portion
thereof used or designed for human habitation.
(ll) HEARING NOTICE – Publication or posting meeting
the requirements of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. For appeals, a Class 1
notice, published once at least one (1) week (seven (7) days)
before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and
amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each week
consecutively, the last at least a week (seven (7) days) before
the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional
notice, exceeding these minimums.
(mm) HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL – Damage that could
result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health
or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and
its contents.
(nn) HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE – The highest natural
elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
(oo) HISTORIC STRUCTURE – Any structure that is either:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register
of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the
National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of
historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of
historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified
either by an approved state program, as determined
by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the
Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(pp) INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT – A calculated
upward rise in the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00
foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed
conditions which is directly attributable to development in the
floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical
variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction
coefficients and discharge.
(qq) LAND USE – Any nonstructural use made of
unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see DEVELOPMENT.)
(rr) LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE – Elevation of the lowest
ground surface that touches any of the exterior walls of a
building.
(ss) LOWEST FLOOR – The lowest floor of the lowest
enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation
of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR
60.3.
(tt) MAINTENANCE – The act or process of restoring to
original soundness, including redecorating, refinishing, non
structural repairs, or the replacement of existing fixtures,
systems or equipment with equivalent fixtures, systems or
structures.
(uu) MANUFACTURED HOME – A structure transportable in
one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis
and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" includes a mobile home but does not include a "mobile
recreational vehicle."
(vv) MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – A
parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two (2) or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
(ww) MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION,
EXISTING – A parcel of land, divided into two (2) or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed
before the effective date of this ordinance. At a minimum, this
would include the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads.
(xx) MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO
EXISTING – The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation
of utilities, construction of streets and either final site
grading, or the pouring if concrete pads.
(yy) MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE – A vehicle which is
built on a single chassis, four hundred (400) square feet or less
when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to
be selfpropelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed,
light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration
is required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are
towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable
of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not
fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles."
(zz) MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE – A hydraulic
engineering model that corrects any errors that occur in the
Duplicate Effective Model, adds any additional cross sections to
the Duplicate Effective Model, or incorporates more detailed
topographic information than that used in the current effective
model.
(aaa) MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE – A copy of the
hydraulic analysis used in the effective FIS and referred to as
the effective model.
(bbb) MODEL, EFFECTIVE – The hydraulic engineering
model that was used to produce the current effective Flood
Insurance Study.
(ccc) MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT) – A modification of
the Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected Effective Model to
reflect any man made modifications that have occurred within the
floodplain since the date of the effective model but prior to the
construction of the project for which the revision is being
requested. If no modification has occurred since the date of the
effective model, then this model would be identical to the
Corrected Effective Model or Duplicate Effective Model.
(ddd) MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) – A modification of
the Existing or Pre-Project Conditions Model, Duplicate Effective
Model or Corrected Effective Model to reflect revised or postproject
conditions.
(eee) MUNICIPALITY" or "MUNICIPAL – The county, city or
village governmental units enacting, administering and enforcing
this zoning ordinance.
(fff) NAVD” or “NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM –
Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
(ggg) NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM –
Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
(hhh) NEW CONSTRUCTION – For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start
of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the
purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or
after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31,
1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
(iii) NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE – An existing lawful
structure or building which is not in conformity with the
dimensional or structural requirements of this ordinance for the
area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an
existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a
conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the
flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
(jjj) NONCONFORMING USE – An existing lawful use or
accessory use of a structure or building which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance for the area of
the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence in the
floodway.)
(kkk) OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW – Any development which
blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this development
alone or together with any future development will cause an
increase in regional flood height.
(lll) OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP – That map,
adopted and made part of this ordinance, as described in
§41.01(e)(2), which has been approved by the Department and FEMA.
(mmm) OPEN SPACE USE – Those uses having a relatively
low flood damage potential and not involving structures.
(nnn) ORDINARY HIGHWATER MARK – The point on the bank
or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is
so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion,
destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance
of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
(ooo) PERSON – An individual, or group of individuals,
corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state
agency.
(ppp) PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM – A sewage treatment and
disposal system serving one (1) structure with a septic tank and
soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the
structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by
the Department of Commerce, including a substitute for the septic
tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving
more than one (1) structure or a system located on a different
parcel than the structure.
(qqq) PUBLIC UTILITIES – Those utilities using
underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric,
telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems
such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
(rrr) REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING – Means base flood
waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be
removed from the floodplain and that any subsurface waters
related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed
buildings.
(sss) REGIONAL FLOOD – A flood determined to be
representative of large floods known to have occurred in
Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one (1%) percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if
depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
(ttt) START OF CONSTRUCTION – The date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an
alteration, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
(uuu) STRUCTURE – Any manmade object with form, shape
and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to,
placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed,
including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas
or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
(vvv) SUBDIVISION – Has the meaning given in
§236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
(www) SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE – Damage of any origin
sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed
fifty (50%) percent of the equalized assessed value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
(xxx) SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT – Any repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
(50%) percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure
before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has
sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered
substantial improvement regardless of the work preformed. The
term does not, however, include either any project for the
improvement of a building required to correct existing health,
sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or any alteration of a historic structure provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure.
(yyy) UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP – Where special conditions
affecting a particular property, which were not self-created,
have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas,
setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or
unreasonable in light of the purposes of the ordinance.
(zzz) VARIANCE – An authorization by the board of
adjustment or appeals for the construction or maintenance of a
building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with
dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain
zoning ordinance.
(aaaa) VIOLATION – The failure of a structure or other
development to be fully compliant with the floodplain zoning
ordinance. A structure or other development without required
permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing
certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation
is provided.
(bbbb) WATERSHED – The entire region contributing
runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water.
(cccc) WATER SURFACE PROFILE – A graphical
representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a
watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at
a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional
flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
(dddd) WELL – means an excavation opening in the ground
made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to
obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use.
Chapter 42
FORESTRY MANAGEMENT
42.01 Intent and Purpose
42.02 Definitions
42.03 Authority of Village Administrator
42.04 Public Area Plantings
42.05 General Rules and Regulations Regarding Trees
and Shrubs
42.06 Damage to Trees and Shrubs
42.07 Removal of Trees and Stumps
42.08 Trees Infected with Destructive Diseases or
Insects that Constitute a Potential Threat or
Hazard to the Urban Forest; Nuisance Declared
42.09 Violations
42.01 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village
of Paddock Lake to regulate, finance and control the planting,
removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs within
all public areas of the Village in order to:
(a) Eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions
which may result in injury to persons using the streets,
sidewalks or other public areas;
(b) To promote and enhance the beauty and general
welfare of the Village;
(c) To prohibit the undesirable and unsafe plan
ting or removal of trees and shrubs located in public areas; and
(d) To guard all trees and shrubs, both public and
private, within the Village against the spread of disease,
insects or pests.
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all trees and
shrubs growing or hereafter planted within public areas; and also
to all trees and shrubs growing or to be planted in or upon any
private premises which may threaten the life, health, safety or
welfare of the public or of any public areas.
42.02 DEFINITIONS.
(a) "Boulevard" shall be the median strip between the
edge of pavements or curbs of streets or roads having a
separation of vehicular traveled ways.
(b) "Village" means the Village of Paddock Lake,
Wisconsin.
(c) "Clear Sight Triangle" shall be a triangle formed
by the property lines of two intersecting rights of way and a
third line connecting specified points on those property lines so
as to provide a full view zone at corners of streets, alleys and
highways.
(d) "Dutch Elm Disease" includes all standing elm
trees or parts thereof, logs, branches, stumps or other elm
materials infected with the fungus CERATOCYSTIS ULMI or which
harbors any of the Elm Bark, Beetle, SCOLYTUS MULTISTRIATUS -
(European) or HYLURGOPINOS RUFIDES (American).
(e) "Emerald Ash Borer Infestation” includes all
standing ash trees or parts thereof, logs, branches, stumps or
other ash materials infected with the insect commonly known as
the Emerald Ash Borer.
(f) "Forestry Program" shall be a comprehensive plan
including maintenance, new planting and budget with projections
for long range implementation.
(g) “Invasive Pests” shall include those pests
identified in subsection (d), (e) and (i) herein, as well as any
other or future health hazard to trees not yet identified.
(h) "Maintenance and Protection" shall include all
operations of trimming, pruning, spraying, injecting,
fertilizing, treating, bracing, doing surgery work, cutting above
or below ground, except such operations as are conducted by the
Public Works Department of the Village or its contractors.
(i) "Oak Wilt Disease" is a disease caused by the
fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum that attacks the water conducting
system of oak trees causing the trees to wilt and die.
(j) "Person" shall include an individual, firm,
association or corporation.
(k) "Public Area" shall include all public ways, parks
and other lands owned or leased by the Village.
(l) "Public Nuisance" shall mean any tree or shrub or
part thereof which, by reason of its condition, interferes with
the use of public areas; is infected with a plant disease;
infested with injurious insects or pests; in jurious to public
improvements; or which may endanger life, health, safety or
welfare of persons or property, public or private.
(m) "Public Way" shall include all streets, roads,
boulevards, alleys and sidewalks.
(n) "Terrace" shall be the area between the edge of
the pavement or curb, or proposed curb, and the sidewalk or
proposed sidewalk; also, all unpaved areas in cul-de-sacs.
(o) "Trees and/or Shrubs" shall include all woody
vegetation presently standing or hereafter planted.
42.03 AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
(a) Over Public Trees and Shrubs. The Village
Administrator or his/her designee shall have the power to
maintain and protect, renew and remove public trees or cause such
work to be done as may be necessary to insure public safety and
preserve the beauty and the protection of property from injury or
damage.
(b) Over Private Trees and Shrubs. Whenever the
Village Administrator or his/her designee shall find on
examination that any tree or shrub, or part thereof, growing or
located upon private property is a public nuisance as defined in
this ordinance, he or she shall notify the owner, as his or her
name appears on the assessment roll of the Village, in writing,
that the nuisance must be properly treated or removed or
otherwise abated as directed in the notice within the time
specified, which shall not be less than thirty (30) days nor more
than ninety (90) days, unless the Village Administrator
determines that immediate action is necessary for public safety.
If the owner does not comply with the notice within the specified
time, the Village Administrator shall cause the nuisance to be
abated forthwith. He or she shall then notify the owner in
writing of the expense of abatement, the time and place when he
or she may be heard before the Village Board if desirous of
contesting the abatement charge, and that the charge will be
entered on the tax roll against the parcel of real estate on
which the three or shrub was located if the same is not
contested. In the event the charge is contested, the Board shall
finally determine the amount thereof which shall be paid within
ten (10) days following such determination or, if not so paid,
shall be entered in the tax roll against said property.
42.04 PUBLIC AREA PLANTINGS.
(a) Subdivision or Plat of Record. Public plantings
shall be under the control of the Village Administrator in
consultation with the Tree Commission pursuant to Section 3.15 of
the Village Ordinances. A determination shall be made as to the
best suited species at a particular planting site in regard to
growth habits, shape, form, health, disease and pest resistance,
conflicts with wires, lights, pavements, traffic, pedestrians,
sewers, water mains, space availability and environmental
pollution. The locations for plantings shall be determined by the
Village Administrator. Except as hereinafter provided, the cost
of planting, removal, maintenance and protection of all trees and
shrubs in public areas shall be borne by the Village. The cost
of terrace, boulevard and traffic circle plantings shall either
be wholly the responsibility of the Village or may be shared by
the Village and a permit holder (subdivider, builder contractor,
etc.) as determined by the policy of the Village Board then in
effect or any Developer Agreement in effect.
(b) New Subdivisions. Plats or Certified Survey Maps
that create new public right-of-way shall include with their
development drawings a tree planting plan approved by the Village
Plan Commission and Village Board. The plan shall provide for
trees to be installed in terraces, boulevards, and traffic
circles and the plan shall be subject to all provisions of this
ordinance. The cost of preparing and implementing this plan shall
be borne by the subdivider. The subdivider shall be responsible
for replacing trees that die within two (2) years of planting.
The owner of a lot shall be responsible for all tree relocation
or replacement costs due to their actions or construction.
(c) Planting, Maintenance and Removal of Public Trees
and Shrubs.
(1) Permit Required. No person, except on the
order or with the permission of the Village
Administrator, shall plant, remove, treat, brace,
trim, prune, cut above or below the ground,
disturb or alter any tree or shrub in any public
area of the Village or cause such act to be done
by others, without first obtaining a written
permit from the Village Administrator as
hereinafter provided, except that no permit shall
be required to cultivate, fertilize, mulch or
water public trees or shrubs.
(2) Permit Conditions. Whenever the Village
Administrator shall determine that any proposed
planting or work is in accord with the provisions
of this ordinance, a permit shall be issued on a
standard form and shall specify the work to be
done and shall specify the species, variety, size
and location of any trees or shrubs to be planted.
All work to be done must be in accord with this
ordinance and the permit shall expire six (6)
months after the date of issuance.
(3) Permits to Public Utilities. A public
utility, except municipal utilities, shall secure
an annual permit from the Village Administrator
which shall provide that the utility will notify
the Administrator at least twenty-four (24) hours
before any tree or shrub is to be cut, trimmed or
removed within any public area, and the Village
Administrator shall determine whether such
cutting, trimming or removal is in the public
interest and whether it is permissible under this
ordinance before such work is done. In the event
of an emergency which threatens the health, life
or welfare of persons or property, a public
utility may proceed to trim, cut or remove all or
a portion of trees prior to the permit and
notification required herein.
42.05 GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS REGARDING TREES AND
SHRUBS.
(a) Planting. The species, varieties and sizes of all
trees and shrubs to be planted in public areas and the manner of
planting shall be submitted to and approved by the Village
Administrator before commencement of such work.
(b) Dimensional Limits on Planting.
(1) No trees or shrubs shall be planted within
forty (40) feet of any street corner or within any
"clear sight triangle" as herein above defined.
There shall be a minimum of thirty five (35) feet
between trees in public ways, unless otherwise
authorized by the Village Administrator, based on
site and plant species. An approved species list
of trees shall be kept on file with the Tree
Commission subject to periodic revision. Trees
planted within public ways shall be at least one
and one-half (1½) inches in diameter measured six
(6) inches above the ground. Each tree shall have
a minimum height of eight (8) feet. No tree shall
be planted less than two (2) feet from any
established or proposed curb line or less than two
(2) feet from the inner line of any sidewalk or
proposed sidewalk.
(2) The Village Administrator shall prepare and
maintain lists of tree species desirable for
planting according to their normal mature height:
(a) Large trees - over forty (40) feet; and
(b) Medium trees - twenty five (25) to forty
(40) feet; and
(c) Small trees - fifteen (15) to twenty
five (25) feet.
(3) Planting size.
(a) All large or medium trees, when planted,
shall be at least eight (8) feet high and
have a minimum trunk diameter of one and
one-half (1½) inches.
(b) All small trees, when planted, shall be
at least five (5) feet high and have five (5)
or more branches and shall be one and onehalf
(1½) inches in diameter measured at six
(6) inches above grade.
(4) Location.
(a) There shall be a distance of thirty five
(35) feet to fifty (50) feet between the
terrace area trees depending upon the size of
tree and other factors. Terrace/median trees
shall be planted equal distance between the
side walk or proposed sidewalk and back of
the curb or proposed back of curb. In terrace
areas less than four (4) feet wide, planting
will not be permitted. No trees or shrubs
shall be planted within forty (40) feet of
any street corner or within any clear sight
triangle. There shall be a minimum of thirty
five (35) feet between trees in terraces,
unless otherwise authorized by the Village
Administrator, based on site and plant
species.
(b) Small sized trees shall be planted at
least five (5) feet from driveways and large
or medium sized trees shall be planted at
least fifteen (15) feet from driveways. Trees
shall also be planted at least ten (10) feet
from curb box/water shutoffs and sanitary
sewer laterals. Trees shall not be planted
within twenty-five (25) feet of any public
light pole.
(c) Evergreen trees or shrubs shall not be
planted in a terrace area.
(5) Certain Species Restricted. No person shall
plant within the Village any female tree of the
species Populas deltoidea, commonly called the
"Cottonwood", or any tree commonly called the seed
bearing Box Elder or Acer negundo, which may now
or hereafter become infested with Box Elder bugs,
and such trees are hereby declared a nuisance.
(6) Unlawfully Planted Trees. Trees, plants or
shrubs planted within any terrace/median or
planting easement without the authorization and
approved of the Village Administrator may be
removed. The Village Administrator shall notify
the abutting owner in writing, listing the
unlawfully planted trees, plants or shrubs,
ordering their removal, and establishing a
reasonable time within which such removal shall be
accomplished. In the event that removal is not
accomplished within the time specified, the
Village may remove such trees, plants or shrubs
and assess the costs thereof to the owner.
(c) Trimming. Trees and shrubs standing on either
public or private property and overhanging any paved public right
of way shall be kept trimmed so that the lowest branches provide
a clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet above the street. The
Village Administrator may waive this requirement for newly
planted trees if he or she determines that any such tree does not
interfere with public travel, obstruct street lighting or
endanger public safety. Clearance from sidewalk to tree branches
shall be not less than eight (8) feet. Shrubs planted on private
property adjacent to sidewalks shall be pruned so as to not
encroach upon the walk right of way. Trees shall be trimmed so as
to allow the proper diffusion of light from any public lamp.
(d) Obstruction of View at Intersection is Prohibited.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, no person
shall maintain, plant or permit to remain on any premises owned
or controlled by him or her and situated at the intersection of
two (2) or more streets in the Village any tree, hedge or shrub
or other growth which may obstruct the view of any motorist or
pedestrian approaching such an intersection. Within this clear
sight triangle, all growth shall be limited to a height of thirty
(30) inches above the street grade. Any planting which exceeds
this height is hereby declared a public nuisance. Any shrub, tree
or other plant which obstructs the view of an intersection or the
view of a traffic sign or interferes with public use of public
areas and sidewalks shall be deemed dangerous to public travel
and the Village Administrator may order, by written notice, the
owner or occupant of any private place or premises on which there
stands a tree or shrub which unreasonably interferes with or
encroaches upon the street or sidewalk, to take such steps as are
necessary to remove such interference. If such owner or occupant
fails, within ten (10) days of receipt of notice to take such
necessary steps, the Village Administrator and/or Village Board
shall order Village employees to remove the interference. The
cost of removing the interference shall be levied and collected
as a special tax upon the property upon which or in front of
which such tree or shrub stands. Any person who is an owner or
occupant or firm or corporation failing to obey the written
notice of the Village Administrator as specified above shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture as provided
in §42.09 of this Code.
42.06 DAMAGE TO TREES AND SHRUBS.
(a) No person shall, in any public area or private
area without the permission of the owner, break, injure,
mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub, permit any animal
under his or her control to do so, permit any fire to injure any
portion of any tree or shrub, permit any leak to exist in any gas
line within the root zone of any tree or shrub, permit any toxic
chemical to seep, drain, or be emptied on or about any tree or
shrub, or permit electric wires to come into contact with any
tree or shrub. During construction operations, each contractor or
builder shall erect suitable protective barriers around public
trees and shrubs which could be injured during construction, and
shall obtain the Village Administrator’s approval of the adequacy
of such barriers before construction is commenced. No person
shall fasten any sign, rope, wire or other material to or around
or through any public tree or shrub without first obtaining
permission from the Village Administrator. No person shall remove
any guard, stake or other device or material intended for the
protection of a public tree or shrub, or close or obstruct any
open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to
permit access of air, water, and fertilizer. No person shall
attach any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree, or
fasten any guy wire, cable, rope, nails, screws or other device
to any tree; except that the Village may tie temporary no parking
signs to trees when necessary in conjunction with street
improvement work or parades.
(b) Protection During Excavations. All trees on any
terrace/median or other public owned property near any excavation
or construction of any building structure or street work shall be
sufficiently guarded and protected by those responsible for such
work as to prevent any injury to said trees. No person shall
excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches, or install pavement
within a radius of ten (10) feet from any public tree without a
permit from the Village Administrator. During construction
operations, each contractor or builder shall erect suitable
protective barriers around public trees and shrubs which could be
injured during construction, and shall obtain the Village
Administrator’s approval of the adequacy of such barriers before
construction is commenced.
42.07 REMOVAL OF TREES AND STUMPS.
(a) Dangerous, Obstructive and Infected Trees. Any
tree or part thereof, whether alive or dead, which the Village
Administrator or his/her designee shall find to be infected,
hazardous or a nuisance so as to endanger the general public or
other trees, plants or shrubs growing within the Village, or to
be injurious to sewers, sidewalks or other public improvements
whether growing upon public or private premises, shall be
removed, trimmed or treated by the owner of the property upon or
adjacent to which such tree of part thereof is located. The
Village Administrator shall give written notice to said owner to
remedy the situation which shall be served personally or posted
upon the affected tree. Such notice shall specifically state the
period of time within which the action must be taken, which shall
be not less than twenty-four (24) hours nor more than thirty (30)
days as determined by the Village Administrator on the basis of
the seriousness of the condition of the tree or danger to the
public. If the owner shall fail to remove, treat or trim said
tree within the time specified, the Village Administrator shall
cause the tree to be removed, treated or trimmed and shall report
the full cost thereof to the Village Clerk/Treasurer, who shall
thereupon enter such cost as a special charge against the
property.
(b) Removal Standards. In cutting down trees located
in public and terrace areas, the tree must be removed with the
root stump grubbed out, or ground out to a depth of at least nine
(9) inches below grade measured in a straight line with the
normal grade of sidewalk to top of nine (9) inches below grade
measured as a straight line, normal grade of sidewalk to top of
curb. All wood and debris must be removed from the street prior
to the end of each working day and all holes shall be filled to
normal grade level with topsoil as soon as practicable.
(c) Private Removal. No person, firm, organization or
corporation shall plant, injure, trim, remove or destroy any tree
or shrub located in or upon any public place, until a permit
shall have been issued by the Village Administrator. Such permit
shall be issued only when the removal, trimming or cutting of the
tree or shrub is necessary as determined by the Village
Administrator, because of disease, damage, hazardous condition,
and/or location, or it location is such that substantial
detriment is done to the property upon which the tree or shrub
stands, or property abutting the same. Such permit shall
expressly state the premises upon which the tree stands and the
location of the tree thereon.
42.08 TREES INFECTED WITH DESTRUCTIVE DISEASES OR INSECTS
THAT CONSTITUTE A POTENTIAL THREAT OR HAZARD TO THE URBAN FOREST;
NUISANCE DECLARED.
(a) Public Nuisance Declared.
(1) The Village Board of Trustees, having
determined that the health of the elm trees within
the Village is threatened by fatal diseases known
as Dutch Elm disease Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman)
hereby declares the following to be a public
nuisance:
(a) Any living or standing elm tree or part
thereof infected with the Dutch Elm disease
fungus or which harbors any of the elm bark
beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Marsh.) or
Hylargophinus rufipes (Eichh.).
(b) Any dead elm tree or part thereof,
including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or
other elm material from which the bark has
not been removed and burned or treated with
an effective elm bark beetle destroying
insecticide.
(2) The Village Board of Trustees having
determined that the health of oak trees within the
Village is threatened by a fatal disease known as
oak wilt disease (Ceratocystis fagacearum) hereby
declares the following to be a public nuisance:
(a) Any living or standing oak tree or part
thereof infected with the oak wilt disease
fungus.
(b) Any dead oak tree or part thereof,
including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or
other oak material from which the bark has
not been removed.
(3) The Village Board of Trustees, having
determined that the health of ash and other trees
within the Village are threatened by destructive
insects including but not limited to the Emerald
Ash Borer (Agrilus planipennis) or the Asian
long-horned beetle (Anoplophora glabripennis)
hereby declares the following to be a public
nuisance:
(a) Any living or standing tree or part
thereof infested with these or other
destructive insects.
(b) Any dead tree or part thereof, including
logs, branches, stumps, or other material
infested with these or other destructive
insects.
(c) Any infested firewood or wooden packing
or shipping materials infested with these or
other destructive insects.
(b) Nuisances Prohibited. No person, firm, or
corporation shall permit any public nuisances as defined in
subsection (a) of this section to remain on any premises owned or
controlled by him or her within the Village.
(c) Inspection. The Village Administrator or his/her
designee shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises and
places within the Village to determine whether any public
nuisance as defined herein exists thereon and shall also inspect
or cause to be inspected any trees or materials reported or
suspected to be infected with the diseases or insects listed in
subsection (a) of this section.
(d) Abatement of Nuisances.
(1) If the Village Administrator upon inspection
or examination in person or by some qualified
person acting for him or her, shall determine that
any public nuisance as herein defined exists in or
upon any public street, alley, park or other
public place, including the terrace strip between
the curb and lot line with in the Village, and
that the danger to other trees within the Village
is imminent, she or he shall:
(a) Immediately cause it to be removed and
the wood to be debarked, covered or chipped,
or
(b) Otherwise abate the nuisance in such a
manner as to destroy or prevent as fully as
possible the spread of these or other
injurious diseases and insects.
(2) If the Village Administrator shall determine
within reasonable certainty that any public
nuisance as herein defined herein exists in or
upon private premises and that the danger to other
trees within the Village is imminent, she or he
shall immediately report the existence of such
nuisance to the Tree Commissioners and the Village
Board and the Board shall, if it determines that
such nuisance exists, cause notice to be served
that the Board proposes the removal and
destruction of such trees or materials as
nuisances under this ordinance specifying the
location and number of such trees or materials,
and that a hearing will be held before the Board
for the purpose of ordering the removal and
destruction of such trees or materials. Such
notice shall be served at least two (2) weeks
prior to the date of the hearing before the Board
and shall be served on the owner of the lot or
parcel of land on which such trees or materials
stand or his or her agent, or if neither is known
and there is a tenant occupying said property then
to such tenant, of the time and place at which
said contemplated place of work and removal will
be considered by the Board. After such hearing the
Village Administrator, subject to the direction of
the Board, shall abandon the work or proceed with
it as he or she believes the best interests of the
public require. In lieu of such removal by the
Village Administrator, the Village Administrator
may serve or cause to be served upon the owner of
the property notice to abate such nuisance within
thirty (30) days of the service of said notice. If
such owner or occupant does not abate such
nuisance within the time limited, the Village
Administrator may cause the same to be abated. No
damages shall be awarded to the owner for the
destruction of any trees or any part or materials
thereof pursuant to this section.
(e) Assessment of Costs of Abatement.
(1) The entire costs of abating any public
nuisance as defined in subsection (a) of this
ordinance may be chargeable to and assessed
against the parcel or lot upon which such tree or
material stands. The cost of abating any such
nuisance which is located in or upon any park or
public grounds, boulevards or public way shall be
borne by the Village.
(2) The Village Administrator or his or her
designee shall keep strict account of the costs of
work done under this ordinance for which
assessments are to be made, stating and certifying
the description of land, lots, parts of lots, or
parcels of land and the amount chargeable to each.
The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall include in her
or his report to the Village Board the aggregate
amounts chargeable to each lot parcel as recorded
by her and him and such amounts shall be levied
and assessed against such parcels or lots in the
same manner as other special taxes. Before such
assessments are entered on the tax roll the
Village Board shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed assessments and shall give advance notice
thereof not less than fourteen (14) days before
the time set for such hearing by publication in
the official newspaper or posting in at least four
(4) conspicuous places.
(f) Transporting of Wood Prohibited. No person, firm
or corporation shall transport within the Village any bark
bearing wood material infested with such diseases or insects
without first securing the written permission of the Village
Administrator.
(g) Removal or Pruning of Oak Trees Prohibited. No
person, firm or corporation shall remove, trim or prune any oak
tree or portion thereof between April 1 and October 1 without
first securing the written permission of the Village
Administrator.
(h) Interference with Village Administrator
Prohibited. No person, firm or corporation shall prevent, delay
or interfere with the Village Administrator or any of his or her
agents or employees while they are engaged in the performance of
duties imposed by this ordinance.
42.09 VIOLATIONS.
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance
shall be subject to a penalty as prescribed by §1.07 of this
Code, and shall have the costs of abatement or correction
assessed as an additional penalty. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to
the forfeiture the Village may require restitution for the fair
market value of the trees or shrubs which were damaged or
destroyed as a result of violation(s) of this ordinance.
Chapter 43
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
43.01 Reserved
43.02 Amendment to Comprehensive Plan–Adreani Property
43.03 Amendment to Comprehensive Plan-The Paddocks, LLC
43.01 RESERVED
43.02 AMENDMENT TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN–ADREANI PROPERTY.
(a) Pursuant to §62.23, §61.35 and §60.22(3) of the
Wisconsin Statutes, the Village of Paddock Lake is authorized to
prepare and adopt a comprehensive plan as defined in
§66.1001(1)(a) and §66.1001(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) The Village Board, by enactment of an ordinance,
formally adopted the document titled Comprehensive Land Use Plan
as the Village Comprehensive Plan on April 20, 2005.
(c) The Planning Commission of the Village of Paddock
Lake, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, by a majority vote of the entire
Commission at meeting held on December 9, 2013, recommended to
the Village Board the adoption of an amendment to change the land
use designation of a parcel of land known as 40-4-120-024-1001
and 40-4-120-013-1000 and as described and mapped on the attached
Exhibit “A” from “Planned Neighborhood” to “Planned Mix Use” on
the future land use map.
(d) The Village published or posted a Class 1 public
notice and held a public hearing regarding the plan amendment.
(e) The Village Board of Trustees hereby adopts the
proposed plan amendment.
(f) The Village Clerk is directed to send a copy of
this ordinance and the plan amendment to the parties listed in
§66.1001(4)(b) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(g) This ordinance shall take effect upon passage by a
majority vote of the full membership of the Village Board and
publication or posting as required by law.
43.03 AMENDMENT TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN–THE PADDOCKS, LLC
PROPERTY.
(a) Pursuant to §62.23, §61.35 and §60.22(3) of the
Wisconsin Statutes, the Village of Paddock Lake is authorized to
prepare and adopt a comprehensive plan as defined in
§66.1001(1)(a) and §66.1001(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) The Village Board, by enactment of an ordinance,
formally adopted the document titled Comprehensive Land Use Plan
as the Village Comprehensive Plan on April 20, 2005.
(c) The Planning Commission of the Village of Paddock
Lake, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, by a majority vote of the entire
Commission at meeting held on December 9, 2013, recommended to
the Village Board the adoption of an amendment to change the land
use designation of a parcel of land known as 40-4-120-103-0600
and as described and mapped on the attached Exhibit “A” from
“Planned Neighborhood” to “Agriculture/Rural” on the future land
use map.
(d) The Village published or posted a Class 1 public
notice and held a public hearing regarding the plan amendment.
(e) The Village Board of Trustees hereby adopts the
proposed plan amendment.
(f) The Village Clerk is directed to send a copy of
this ordinance and the plan amendment to the parties listed in
§66.1001(4)(b) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(g) This ordinance shall take effect upon passage by a
majority vote of the full membership of the Village Board and
publication or posting as required by law.
Chapter 44
GOLF CARTS
44.01 Purpose
44.02 Definitions
44.03 Licensing and Registration
44.04 Operating Regulations
44.05 Penalty
44.01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this ordinance shall be to establish
regulations within the Village of Paddock Lake to ensure the
safety and welfare of persons and property relative to the
operation of golf carts on the public streets within the Village
of Paddock Lake.
44.02 DEFINITION.
(a) “Golf Cart” means a three (3) or four (4) wheel
motorized vehicle manufactured for operation on golf courses for
sporting or recreational purposes and which is not capable of
exceeding speeds of twenty (20) miles per hour.
(b) “All-terrain Vehicle (ATV)” means a commercially
designed and manufactured motor driven device which has a net
weight of nine hundred (900) pounds or less, equipped with a seat
designed to be straddled by the operator and which is designed to
travel on three (3) or more low pressure or non-pneumatic tires.
Further, ATV are devices requiring registration by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) as ATV’s are included in
this definition. A golf cart is not considered an ATV.
(c) “Low Speed Vehicle (LSV)” means a low speed
vehicle which must meet the national highway traffic safety
administration (NHTSA), Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards
and must have a certification labeled safety test that the
vehicle meets those standards. A golf cart is not considered a
LSV. LSV’s are licensed and registered pursuant to §340.01(27h),
Wis. Stats., and conforms to Federal Safety Standards 49CFR.
(d) “Seat Belt” means a type 1 or type 2 belt lap
restraint with an assembly conforming to §571.209 of the Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards No. 209.
(e) “Mini Truck” means a motor truck, as defined in
§340.01(34), Wis. Stats., as having a top speed of not more than
sixty (60) miles per hour and that is all of the following:
powered by an internal combustion engine with a displacement of
not less than four hundred forty (440) cc’s, not more than sixty
(60") inches wide, with an unloaded weight less than one thousand
six hundred (1,600) pounds.
(f) “Utility-Terrain Vehicle (UTV)” means a
commercially designed and manufactured motor driven device that
is not a golf cart, low speed vehicle, dune buggy, mini truck or
tracked vehicle, that is designed to be used primarily off
highway, and originally manufactured and equipped with all of the
following: a weight, without fluids, of less than two thousand
(2,000) pounds, four (4) or more low pressure tires, steering
wheel, tail lights, brake lights, width of not more than sixtyfive
(65") inches, seat belt and a roll bar.
(g) “Village Roads” for purposes of this Chapter means
paved roads constructed and maintained by the Village with a
posted speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less.
44.03 LICENSING AND REGISTRATION.
No person shall operate a golf cart on the Village
roads in the Village of Paddock Lake except as hereinafter
provided.
(a) No golf carts shall be operated on village roads,
unless a permit issued by the Village Clerk or his/her appointee
has been issued to the owner of said golf cart. The permit
received from the Village of Paddock Lake must be displayed on
the golf cart in a prominent location at all times of operation
so as to be clearly visible. The permit shall be valid for each
calendar year from April 1 to November 1 and shall be renewed st st
annually. The annual fee for said permit shall be Fifty ($50.00)
Dollars to cover the annual inspection and administrative costs.
(b) No permit shall be issued if the golf cart owner
or applicant is indebted to the Village for overdue utility
bills, special assessments, real property taxes or past due fines
pursuant to §4.08 of the Village Code of Ordinances.
(c) Any person who operates a golf cart on Village
roads within the Village of Paddock Lake who fails to properly
display or receive a Village permit/sticker will be subject to
the penalties contained in §44.14 of these ordinances.
(d) Golf cart owners must complete a registration form
approved by the Village Board, a facsimile of which is appended
to these ordinances as Exhibit “A”, which may be changed from
time to time, together with a waiver of liability form and
provide a copy of the proof of liability insurance prior to the
cart being inspected as described in subsection (e), below. The
completed forms and proof of insurance will be maintained by the
Village Clerk/Treasurer.
(e) Prior to the issuance or renewal of a Village golf
cart permit, the golf cart shall be inspected by the Kenosha
County Sheriff’s Department to ensure that the golf cart for
which a permit is being applied for complies with the
requirements set forth by the Village of Paddock Lake and the
State of Wisconsin.
(f) As part of the permit process, the owner of the
golf cart shall provide proof of liability insurance in the
amount of One Hundred Thousand ($100,000.00) Dollars per
incident. The proof of insurance must be with the golf cart
whenever said golf cart is in operation on Village roads. Proof
of renewed liability insurance must be provided annually and at
time of permit renewal.
(g) All golf carts operating on Village roads shall be
equipped with the following:
(1) Brakes that are in good working condition.
(2) DOT approved slow moving vehicle (SMV) sign
located on rear of golf cart.
(3) Front and rear reflectors.
(4) Audible warning device.
(h) Golf carts may be operated during the following
times of day and times of year:
(1) Golf carts may be driven on Village roads
only from sunrise to sunset unless the cart is
equipped with two (2) operating headlights and two
(2) operating tail lights which are visible from a
distance of five hundred (500') feet.
(2) Golf carts are prohibited from operating on
Village roads from November 1 through April 1 . st st
44.04 OPERATING REGULATIONS.
The following regulations apply to the operation of a
golf cart within the Village of Paddock Lake:
(a) All applicable Wisconsin State Laws regarding
motor vehicles shall be adhered to including the possession and
use of alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs.
(b) The operator and or occupants of golf carts shall
comply with all traffic rules and regulations adopted by the
State of Wisconsin and the Village of Paddock Lake.
(c) Golf carts shall adhere to all traffic flow
patterns and will operate on the right side of the roadway and
may only be operated on Village roads where the posted speed
limit is twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less.
(d) Operations of golf carts will adhere to all rules
of the road applicable to motorized vehicles as set forth by the
Wisconsin Department of Motor Vehicles and the Village of Paddock
Lake. A golf cart may be operated by persons who are:
(1) At least sixteen (16) years of age and
possess a valid driver’s license.
(2) Underage operators are defined as follows: a
person under the age of sixteen (16) years old may
not legally operate a golf cart on Village roads.
(e) All riders in the golf cart must remain seated at
all times the golf cart is in motion.
(f) The number of occupants in a golf cart shall be
limited to the number of adult persons for whom individual
seating is installed and provided on the cart.
(g) No golf cart shall operate on the Village roads
known as 236 Avenue and 248 Avenue. No golf cart shall be th th
operated on County or State Highways including, but not limited
to, CTH K (60 Street) and State Highway 50 (75 Street). The th th
exception would be as follows: golf carts are permitted to cross
236 Avenue, 248 Avenue at perpendicular angles. th th
(h) No golf cart shall be operated upon public
sidewalks, pedestrian walkways, bike paths or multi-use paths.
Nor shall golf carts be operated upon that portion of the street
located between the curb lane and the sidewalk, except for the
purpose of crossing the same as to a public street upon which
operation is authorized.
(i) No golf cart shall be operated within or on
Village park land.
(j) No person shall operate a golf cart in a careless,
reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or
property of another or cause injury or damage.
(k) No item shall be towed by a golf cart.
(l) Golf carts shall not operate on private property
without permission and written consent of the property owners.
(m) Golf carts shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians, bicyclist and other motor vehicles.
44.05 PENALTY.
(a) Any act constituting a violation of this ordinance
or a failure to comply with any of its requirements shall subject
the offender, upon conviction to a fine of not less than Twentyfive
($25.00) Dollars nor more than Five Hundred ($500.00)
Dollars.

Chapter 12
ZONING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
12.01 Preliminary Considerations
12.02 Interpretation
12.03 Permits
12.04 General Land Use Regulations
12.05 Zoning Districts
12.06 Conditional Uses
12.07 Modification and Exceptions
12.08 Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
12.09 Board of Zoning Appeals
12.10 Changes and Amendments
12.11 Definitions
12.12 Paddock Lake Design Review Process
12.13 Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control
12.14 Enforcement of State Building Code
12.15 Building Site Start Times
12.16 RESERVED
12.17 RESERVED
12.18 Post-Construction Stormwater Management
12.19 Illicit Discharges and Connections
12.01 PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS.
(1) Authority. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to
the authority granted by the Wisconsin Statutes but not limited
to Sections 61.34, 61.35 and 623.23(7) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Any mandatory amendments or repeals or recreations to state
statutes pertaining to the subject matter of this Ordinance
incorporated in this Ordinance as of the effective date of the
amendment, repeal, or recreation. The Board of Trustees of
Village of Paddock Lake, Kenosha County, Wisconsin, do ordain as
follows:
(2) Purpose.
(a) It is the purpose of this Ordinance to repeal
the present zoning ordinance of the Village of
Paddock Lake, to reinstate a comprehensive
rezoning ordinance, and encourage the use of land,
waters and structures within the Village in a
planned and orderly manner so as to promote the
public health, safety, morals, prosperity,
aesthetics, comfort, convenience and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village.
(b) It is the finding of the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Paddock Lake that the regulation of
land uses within the Village serves to promote the
general welfare of its citizens, the quality of
the environment, and the conservation of its
resources.
(3) Intent.
(a) By enactment of this Ordinance, it is the
general intent and objective of the Board of
Trustees pursuant to the authority granted in
Section 12.01(1) of this Ordinance to accomplish
the following within those areas falling within
the jurisdiction of this Ordinance:
(1) Regulate the use of all lands,
buildings, structures and waters in the
incorporated areas of the Village so as
to determine, establish, regulate and
restrict the following:
(a) The areas within which agriculture,
forestry, industry, trades,
business and recreation may be
conducted;
(b) The areas in which residential uses
may be regulated or prohibited;
(c) The areas in and along or in or
along natural water courses,
channels, lakes and streams in
which trades or industries, filling
or dumping, erection of structures
and location of buildings may be
prohibited or restricted.
(2) Designate certain areas, uses or
purposes which may be subjected to
special regulation.
(3) Determine, establish, regulate and
restrict the location, setback,
sideguard, height, bulk, number of
stories and size of buildings and other
structures.
(4) Determine, establish, regulate and
restrict the location of buildings and
structures designed for specific uses
and designation of uses for which
buildings and structures may not be used
or altered.
(5) Determine, establish, regulate and
restrict trailer camps or tourist camps
and motels or both and mobile home
parks.
(6) Regulate population density and
distribution.
(7) Determine, establish, regulate and
restrict the percentage of any parcel
which may be occupied, size of yards and
other open spaces.
(8) Provide healthy surroundings for family
life.
(9) Provide areas for peace and quiet, open
space and privacy.
(10) Determine, establish, regulate and
restrict the location of roads and
schools.
(11) Insure adequate highway, utility,
health, educational, recreational and
other public facilities.
(12) Lessen congestion in and promote the
safety and efficiency of the streets and
highways: Regulate parking, loading and
access for safety and efficiency
purposes.
(13) Secure safety from fire, explosions,
flooding and other dangers.
(14) Provide adequate light, air, sanitation
and drainage.
(15) Establish performance standards so as to
guard against air and water pollution,
unnecessary contamination, noises,
vibrations and odors, and heat, fire,
flooding, radiation and other hazards
and nuisances.
(16) Promote the efficiency and economical
use of public funds.
(17) Protect property values and the property
tax base.
(18) Recognize the needs of agriculture,
forestry, industry, business and
recreation and future growth.
(19) Further the appropriate use of land and
encourage uses of land and other natural
resources which are in accordance with
their character and adaptability.
(20) Prevent and control soil erosion,
sedimentation and water pollution of the
surface and subsurface waters.
(21) Further the maintenance of safe and
healthful water conditions.
(22) Prevent flood damage to persons and
property and minimize expenditures for
flood relief and flood control projects.
(23) Preserve shore growth and cover and
promote the natural beauty of the
shoreland areas.
(24) Protect fish and animal life including
the spawning, resting, nesting, nursing
and feeding areas.
(25) Implement those municipal, watershed,
and regional comprehensive plans or
components of such plans applicable to
and adopted by the Village of Paddock
Lake.
(26) Obtain the wise use, conservation,
development and protection of the
Village's water, soil, wildlife and
other natural resources and attain a
balance between land uses and the
ability of the natural resource base to
support and to sustain such uses.
(27) Preserve natural growth and cover;
promote, stabilize and protect the
natural beauty and amenities of
landscape and manmade developments
within the Village and encourage the
aesthetic development of the Village.
(28) Preserve neighborhoods and eliminate
blight.
(b) To accomplish the above objectives, it is the
further intent of the Village Board of Trustees in
enacting this Ordinance to hereby:
(1) Create, as a part of this Ordinance, all
of the necessary districts and maps
deemed necessary for achieving all of
the objectives of this Ordinance.
(2) Delineate as clearly as possible those
circumstances which when present will
qualify as exceptions to this Ordinance
as well as to those circumstances in
which changes and amendments may be made
to this Ordinance or variances granted.
(3) Delineate, without limitation due to
enumeration, those aspects of zoning
which are to be prohibited, such as use
variances.
(4) Follow all due process requirements and
procedures so as to safeguard the rights
of individual land owners.
(5) Provide for the strict enforcement of
this Ordinance.
(6) Establish a proper system for reviewing
and appealing the actions of the
Planning and Zoning Board of the Village
of Paddock Lake.
12.02 INTERPRETATION.
(1) Jurisdiction. The provisions of this Ordinance
shall apply to all structures, land, water and air within the
incorporated area of the Village of Paddock Lake, Kenosha County,
Wisconsin. The jurisdiction of this Ordinance shall also extend
to those lands and waters lying within the unincorporated areas
within one and one-half to three (1 1/2 - 3) miles of the
corporate limits that are approved by the majority of the members
of the appropriate joint extraterritorial zoning committee
pursuant to Section 62.23(7a) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) Repeal Conflicting Ordinances and Greater
Restrictions. All prior zoning ordinances of the Village of
Paddock Lake are hereby repealed and superceded by this
Ordinance. In the case of conflicts between this Ordinance and
any of the provisions of any other ordinances which are
subsequently adopted, those provisions providing for greater
restrictions shall prevail.
(3) Projects in Progress. The provisions of this
Ordinance shall not apply to any construction project for which a
valid zoning permit has been issued prior to the enactment of
this Ordinance, with the provision, however, that construction
has substantially commenced as defined in this Ordinance, within
six months after the issuance of the permit and with the further
provision, however, that substantial construction is completed,
as defined in this Ordinance, within fifteen months after the
issuance of the permit.
(4) Abrogation. It is not intended by this Ordinance
to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing
easements, covenance, deed restrictions, agreements, rules or
permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. Nor is it
the intent of this Ordinance to abrogate, impair or interfere
with the legal rights of the individuals as they may be
guaranteed by the state and federal constitutions, statutes and
administrative rules.
(5) Liberal Construction. In the interpretation and
application of this Ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the Village and shall not be
construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power granted
by the Wisconsin Statutes, as may be amended from time to time.
(6) Severability and Non-Liability.
(a) If any section, clause, provision or portion
of this Ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected
thereby.
(b) If any application of this Ordinance to a
particular structure, land or water is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not be
applicable to any other structure, land or water
not specifically included in said judgment.
(c) The Village does not guarantee, warrant or
represent that only those areas designated as
having soils unsuited for specific uses are the
only unsuitable soils, and thereby asserts that
there is no liability on the part of the Village
Board of Trustees, its agents or employees for any
structural damage, sanitation problems or other
damages that may occur as a result of reliance
upon and conformance with this Ordinance.
(7) Zoning Map. A certified copy of the zoning map
shall be adopted and approved with the text as a part of this
ordinance and shall bear upon its face the attestation of the
President of the Board of Trustees and the Village
Clerk/Treasurer and shall be available to the public for
inspection in the Village office.
(8) Interpretation of District Boundaries.
(a) The official zoning map is herewith made a
part of this Ordinance. No change in a zoning
boundary shall be made except after petition,
review and approval pursuant to the requirements
of this Ordinance. Boundaries of the zoning
district shall be construed to follow corporate
limits; lot or property lines; center lines of
streets, highways, alleys, easements, navigable
bodies of water and railroad rights-of-way, or
such lines extended. Lines which appear to be
parallel to any of the aforementioned boundaries
of specific distance shall be construed to be
parallel as noted.
(b) In the event that any lands are annexed
within the corporate limits of the Village, the
regulations imposed by this Ordinance shall be in
effect upon the effective date of the adoption of
an annexation Ordinance for such lands which are
annexed.
(9) Incorporation of Floodplain Zoning Provisions. All
provisions of the Village Floodplain Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 41
contained herein, are hereby adopted as if fully set forth. Any
zoning or building activities within the Village must be in
conformance with such regulations in addition to such other
requirements as may be stated in this chapter.
12.03 PERMITS.
(1) Applications Required.
(a) No buildings, structures, or any parts
thereof, or any development except as hereinafter
provided in this ordinance, shall be built,
enlarged, altered, repaired, demolished, placed or
moved within the areas subject to the provisions
of this ordinance until a zoning permit and
building permit, when required under the Village
of Paddock Lake Building Code, have been applied
for in writing and issued by the Building
Inspector. For the purposes of this section, to
alter or repair a building or structure shall be
construed to mean a change in the dimensions,
square footage, cubic footage or structural
supports of a building or structure or to change
the structure in such a way that the future use of
the premises is inconsistent with the district
wherein the parcel is located. All permits issued
by the Building Inspector shall be issued only
upon the condition that the Building Inspector or
his designee may inspect the premises for
compliance during reasonable daylight hours.
(b) No new business or industry established in an
existing structure shall be permitted to commence
its operation until such time as a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Building
Inspector certifying that the proposed use or
operation is in compliance with the terms of this
ordinance.
(c) Applications for permits required by this
ordinance shall be made in writing to the Building
Inspector on forms furnished by the Building
Inspector or authorized by this ordinance and
shall include all information and data required by
such forms including, but not limited to, the
following:
(1) Names and addresses of the applicant,
owner of the site, architect,
professional engineer or contractor.
(2) Description of the subject site by lot,
block and recorded subdivision or by
metes and bounds; address of the subject
site; type of structure; existing and
proposed operation or use of the
structure or site; the proposed number
of employees; and the zoning district
within which the subject site is
situated.
(3) Plat of survey prepared by a registered
land surveyor showing the location,
boundaries, dimensions, elevations,
uses, and size of the following:
(aa) Subject site.
(bb) Existing and proposed structures.
(cc) Existing and proposed easements,
streets and other public ways.
(dd) Off street parking, loading areas,
driveways, existing highway access
restrictions, existing and proposed
streets.
(ee) Side and rear yard.
(ff) Location, elevation and use of any
abutting lands and their structures
within forty (40) feet of the
subject site, when required by the
Building Inspector.
(gg) Proposed water supply plan if
municipal water service is not
available. This plan shall be
approved by the Village Engineer or
Building Inspector.
(hh) Additional information as may be
required by the Village Plan
Commission, Village Engineer,
Building Inspector, or other State,
County or Village authorities.
(ii) Location of the ordinary high-water
mark of any abutting navigable
waterways, together with the
boundaries of all wetlands and
location of floodplain and floodway
limits, if any.
(4) Every application for a zoning permit, a
building permit or an occupancy permit
required by this ordinance must, in the
case of non-residential facilities and
properties as that term is defined in
§5.10(j) of the ordinances, be
accompanied by a recycling plan, as that
term is defined in §5.10(u) of these
ordinances. The Building Inspector,
should he or she deem it necessary, may
also require such proof of performance
of the recycling plan as is deemed
necessary including, but not limited to,
written verification from a provider of
recycling services that the subject site
is to be serviced under such recycling
plan.
(d) Applications for zoning permits required by
this ordinance shall fully comply with §66.036 of
the Wisconsin Statutes, these ordinances, the
Kenosha County Sanitary Code and Private Sewage
System Ordinance, and all amendments of the
foregoing.
(e) No application shall be accepted by the
Building Inspector if the parcel for which a
permit is being applied for is not in compliance
with any provision of this ordinance.
(2) Applications Not Required. Except for the
wetlands overlay district, a zoning permit shall not be required
for:
(a) Except as may be required by Chapter 6 of
these ordinances, public utilities such as gas and
oil pipelines, electric and telephone transmission
and distribution lines, poles and other
accessories which shall be permitted in all
districts however, that when a utility proposes a
major transmission line or pipeline, it must give
notice to the Plan Commission of such intention
and of the time and place of hearing before the
Pubic Service Commission and provided further that
at the request of the Plan Commission, the utility
meet with it to discuss the routing of said
transmission line or pipeline and before actual
construction, file a map description of the route
of such transmission line with the Plan
Commission.
(b) Repairs and other alterations which do not
change the cubic footage of a building or
structure and do not constitute a change in use
and meet all street, sides, rear and shoreyard
setback requirements. For purposes of this
section, to alter or repair a building or
structure shall be construed to mean a change in
the dimensions, square footage, cubic footage or
structural supports of a building or structure or
to change the structure in such a way that the
future use of the premises is inconsistent with
the district wherein the parcel is located.
(3) Duty of the Building Inspector. It shall be the
duty of the Building Inspector of the Village of Paddock Lake,
with the aid of such Kenosha County Sheriff’s Deputies as may be
assigned to the Village, to investigate all complaints, give
notice to violations and to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance. The Building Inspector and his duly-appointed
deputies may enter at any reasonable time onto any public or
private lands or waters to make zoning or building inspections.
(4) Time Limits.
(a) All permits, except conditional use permits,
shall be granted or denied by the Building
Inspector within thirty (30) days after
application. All conditional use permits shall be
granted or denied within sixty (60) days after
application, unless the time is extended by mutual
agreement by the applicant and the Building
Inspector. The applicant shall post any permit
granted in a conspicuous place at the site. The
zoning permit shall expire within six (6) months,
unless substantial construction, as defined
herein, has been commenced, or within eighteen
(18) months after the issuance of the permit if
the structure for which a permit is issued is not
substantially completed, as defined herein, and
the applicant in such case shall reapply for a
zoning permit before recommencing work on the
structure. Any permit issued in conflict with the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be null and
void.
(b) For purposes of this section, "substantial
construction" will have been "commenced" if the
value of such work that has been commenced is
equivalent to twenty-five percent (25%) of the
projected cost of the project as noted on the
application for the permit.
(c) For purposes of this section, "substantially
completed" shall be deemed to mean that
construction equivalent to seventy-five percent
(75%) of the projected cost of the project as
noted in the application for the permit has, in
fact, been completed.
(5) Other Permits. It is the responsibility of a
permit applicant to secure all other necessary permits required
by any federal, state or local agency.
(6) Permit Fees. All owners or persons, firms or
corporations performing work which by this Ordinance requires the
issuance of a permit shall pay a fee for such permit to the
Village Clerk/Treasurer or Village Building Inspector to help
defray the cost of administration, investigation, advertising and
processing of permits and variances. The permit for which such a
fee is required are the Zoning Permit, Building Permit,
Certificate of Occupancy, Conditional Use Permit and the Park Fee
Permit, in the case of a lot(s) which previously was not improved
by a commercial building or residential dwelling(s). The
following fees shall be collected as provided herein:
(a) Type of permit. Fee
All Zoning Permits $10.00
Certificate of Occupancy $10.00
Conditional Use Permit $125.00
Request for rezoning (alteration
of map or text amendment) $150.00
Zoning Variance $200.00
Park Fee (per §38.10) $1,000.00
Per unit
Building Permit - see Village of Paddock Lake
Building Code
(b) The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall issue a
receipt upon receiving all such fees.
(c) The above schedule of fees may be amended
from time to time by the Village Board of
Trustees.
(7) Triple Fees. A triple fee shall be charged by the
Building Inspector if construction, as defined in this Ordinance,
is started before a permit is applied for and issued. Such triple
fee shall not release the applicant from full compliance with
this Ordinance nor from prosecution for violation of this
Ordinance.
(8) Height Restrictions. No land shall be used or
structure erected where the land is held unsuitable for such use
or structure by the Village Plan Commission by reason of
flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil
or rock formation, unfavorable topography, low perculation rate
or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility, or any other feature
likely to be harmful to the health, safety, prosperity,
aesthetics, and general welfare of this community. The Village
Plan Commission, in applying the provisions of this section,
shall, in writing, recite the particular facts upon which it
bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for certain
uses. The applicant shall have an opportunity to present evidence
contesting such unsuitability if he or she so desires.
Thereafter, the Village Plan Commission may affirm, modify or
withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
12.04 GENERAL LAND USE REGULATIONS
(1) Introduction. The proper regulation of the use of
certain structures, lands and waters, only through the use of the
zoning districts contained within this Ordinance is neither
feasible nor adequate. Therefore, the following regulations,
which shall be applied in addition to the district regulations,
are necessary to accomplish the intent of this Ordinance. All
structure, land, water, or air shall hereafter be used or
developed and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
located, erected, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged, converted, demolished, or structurally altered without
full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and all
other applicable village, county and state regulations.
(2) Uses Allowed. Only the following uses, structures
and their essential services shall be allowed in any district:
(a) Principle uses and structures specified for a
district and permitted as a matter of right.
(b) Accessory uses and structures are permitted
as a matter of right in any district. Uses
accessory to residential district development
shall not involve the conduct of any business,
trade or industry except as may be provided
herein. An accessory structure cannot be occupied
as a separate dwelling unit.
(c) Conditional uses, as defined herein and their
accessory uses may be permitted only in specified
districts after review and approval by the Village
Plan Commission in accordance with procedures and
standards established in this Ordinance.
(d) Temporary uses and structures, as may be
provided for under this Ordinance.
(e) Unclassified or unspecified uses may be
permitted by the Board of Appeals after the
Village Plan Commission has made a review and
recommendation provided that such uses are similar
in character to the principal uses permitted in
that district.
(f) Temporary uses, such as real estate sales,
field offices or shelters for materials and
equipment being used in the construction of a
permanent structure, may be permitted by the Board
of Appeals.
(3) Home Occupations and Professional Home Offices.
(a) Requirements. Customary home occupations and
professional home offices may be established in a
dwelling only in those districts which provide for
such home occupations and professions. In such
districts, the following requirements shall apply,
in addition to all other applicable requirements
of this Ordinance for the districts in which such
uses are located:
(1) The home occupation or profession shall
be clearly incidental to the residential
use of the dwelling and parcel and shall
not change the essential residential
character of the dwelling and parcel.
(2) Use of the dwelling and parcel for this
purpose shall be limited to only
twenty-five percent (25%) of one floor
of either the principal building or an
accessory building.
(3) No accessory buildings or outside
storage shall be used in connection with
the home occupation except as provided
in Section (2) above.
(4) No chemical, mechanical or electrical
equipment that is not normally a part of
domestic or household equipment shall be
used primarily for commercial purposes,
with the exception of medical or dental
equipment used for professional
purposes.
(5) Machinery that causes noises or other
interference in radio or television
reception shall be prohibited.
(6) No internal or external alterations
inconsistent with the residential use of
the building shall be permitted.
(7) Residents of the dwelling only may be
engaged in the home occupation. In the
case of professional offices, no more
than one non-resident may be employed on
the premises.
(8) No display of products shall be visible
from the street and only articles made
on the premises may be sold on the
premises.
(9) Instruction and music, dancing and
similar subjects shall be limited to two
students at one time.
(10) No more than three vehicles used
primarily as passenger vehicles shall be
permitted in connection with the conduct
of the customary home occupation.
(11) Signs shall be subject to regulations
contained in this Ordinance.
(4) Customary Home Occupations.
(a) The following are hereby declared to be
customary home occupations as intended by this
section:
(1) Architects;
(2) Artists, sculptor;
(3) Author;
(4) Doctor, dentist;
(5) Dressmaker, seamstress;
(6) Insurance salesman;
(7) Lawyers;
(8) Minister;
(9) Music and dance teacher;
(10) Real estate sales.
(b) It is recognized that it is neither possible
nor practical to list all of the home occupations
that are compatible with those listed above and
therefore, it is intended that the aforementioned
list of home occupations be illustrative only. Any
individual aggrieved by a failure to list a
particular home occupation in this subsection
shall have the right to file a petition with the
Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to this Ordinance
for a determination as to the similarity of the
intended home occupation with the home occupations
listed above.
(5) Site Regulations.
(a) Structures Per Lot; Public Access. All
structures shall be located on a lot; and, except
as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, in the
Rs-1, Rs-2, Rs-3, Rd-1 and B-1 districts, only one
principal structure shall be located, erected or
moved on to a lot. The number, size and type of
accessory structure shall be governed as specified
in each district and section of this Ordinance.
All lots shall abut upon a public street or other
officially approved means of access and no zoning
permit shall be issued for a lot which abuts a
public street dedicated to only a portion of its
proposed width and located on that side thereof
from which the required dedication has not been
secured.
(b) Sanitary Width Requirements. In any district
where public sewerage service is not available,
the width and area of all lots shall be sufficient
to permit use of an on-site sewage disposal system
designed in accordance with Section H65 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code. Such on-site sewage
disposal systems shall be designated in accordance
with all state and local laws, regulations and
ordinances. On-site sewage disposal absorption
systems shall be located on the same parcel of
land as the building or buildings which are
serviced by it. In any district where a public
water service or public sewage service is not
available, the lot width and area shall be
determined in accordance with Section H65 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code, but for one-family
dwellings shall be no less than one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet and no less than forty
thousand (40,000) square feet respectively.
(c) Lots Abutting Cul-de-sacs. All lots abutting
cul-de-sacs and curbs may reduce the frontage on a
public street or other officially approved means
of access as outlined in each district only.
(d) Lots Abutting More Restrictive Districts.
Lots abutting more restrictive district boundaries
shall provide side and rear yards not less than
those required in the more restrictive abutting
district. The street yards on the less restrictive
district shall be modified for a distance of not
more than sixty (60) feet from the district
boundary line, so as to equal the average of the
street yards required in both districts.
(e) Multiple District Lots. Any lot or parcel
containing more than one zoning district shall be
considered to be entirely within the least
restrictive district as defined in this Ordinance
provided, however, that in no case shall a
district boundary be relocated a distance greater
than sixty (60) feet.
(f) Storage and Discharge Prohibited. No waste
material such as garbage, rubbage, gasoline, fuel
oil, flammables, soils, tars, chemicals, greases,
industrial or agricultural waste, or any other
materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness,
toxicity, or temperature so as to contaminate,
pollute, or harm the water shall be located,
stored, or discharged in a way that would be
likely to run off, seep, or wash into surface or
ground waters. Nor shall any such material be
allowed to accumulate on any lot of record so as
to be unsightly, dangerous or so as to constitute
a nuisance. No gasoline storage tanks shall be
permitted in any residential district.
(g) Reduction or Joint Use. No lot, yard, parking
area, building area, sanitary sewage disposal
area, or other space shall be reduced in area or
dimensions so as not to meet the provisions of
this Ordinance. No part of any lot, yard, parking
area, sanitary sewage disposal area, or other
space required for a structure or use shall be
used to meet the requirements for any other
structure or use.
(h) Use of Knox Box. Any building containing
more than two residential living units, commercial
building, industrial building, institutional or
public service building built after May 1, 2001,
or any other building designated by the Village
Building Inspector to be subject to the terms of
this ordinance in issuing permits for construction
of the same, shall be required to install a Knox
box, or similar device, to enable fire department
and rescue squad personnel to achieve access to
the structure and its individual components in the
event of emergency.
(i) Cargo Containers. Cargo containers,
motorized storage containers or trailers shall not
be allowed to be used as accessory structures
within any single-family residential, multifamily,
institutional, park and recreation,
commercial, business, community business or
agricultural zoning district within the Village of
Paddock Lake.
(1) Definition. “Cargo container” shall
mean standardized reusable vessels that were
originally or previously designed for or used
in connection with the packing, shipping,
transportation or freight industry and shall
include tractor trailers or other motorized
storage containers, whether self-propelled or
requiring separate propulsion.
(2) Temporary Use. Cargo container shall be
allowed in any district for the purpose of
moving and transfer of personal property for
a period of no more than fourteen (14) days.
Any cargo container utilized for this purpose
must be removed from the corporate limits of
the Village within that period of time. In
the event of a documented hardship including,
but not limited to, structure fire, wind
damage, flooding, or the like, a Village
resident may obtain an extension of time
within which such cargo container may be
located within an otherwise prohibited zoning
district but only upon written application
for such extension and approval by the
Building Inspector with such conditions as
the Building Inspector deems appropriate
under the circumstances.
(3) Cargo Containers in Industrial Zoning
District. Cargo containers may be permitted
in the industrial zoning district as a
conditional use, provided the following
criteria are met and only following written
application to the Building Inspector:
(a) No more than one cargo container
shall be allowed for each ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of lot area.
(b) No more than ten (10) cargo
containers shall be allowed on any one
conforming lot or combination of
contiguous lots.
(c) No container shall exceed thirty
(30') feet in length or ten (10') feet
in width.
(d) All cargo containers shall be
located behind adequate screening,
including fences and landscaping.
(e) All cargo containers contained on a
single lot or on adjoining parcels owned
or controlled by the same person shall
be painted a uniform neutral earth tone
color. All containers located adjacent
to a building shall be painted to match
the color of the building.
(f) All cargo containers must have
working doors and locks and must be
firmly secured from unwanted intrusion.
(g) Cargo containers shall be placed on
a hard level surface such as welldrained
gravel, concrete, asphalt or
such other surfaces as may be approved
by the Village Building Inspector.
(h) Cargo containers shall not be
stacked.
(i) Such other conditions as may be
deemed appropriate under the
circumstances by the Village Building
Inspector.
(4) Cargo Containers in Commercial/Business
Zoning Districts. Cargo containers may be
permitted in the commercial and business
zoning districts as a conditional use,
following review and imposition of such
conditions as may be found necessary or
desirable by the Plan Commission.
(j) Temporary Toilet Facilities. All structures
under construction or premises in the Village
intended for human habitation, occupancy or being
occupied by employees, workers, or owner(s) for
extended periods of time and that are not serviced
by permanent sanitary sewer facilities shall be
provided with a portable toilet facility or other
approved devices capable of holding or treating
human waste. The construction permittee and the
owner(s) of the property shall be jointly
responsible for providing routine maintenance/
service by a licensed septic hauler to remove
waste from the temporary toilet facilities and for
the ultimate legally approved disposal of such
waste. As an alternative, the construction
permittee and/or owner may be able to provide an
alternative plan to be reviewed and approved by
the Village Building Inspector. For purposes of
this section, temporary toilet facilities shall
include any legally approved temporary toilet
facility under applicable provisions of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code including, but not
limited to port-o-lets, port-o-potties, or any
other contrivance or device, the purpose of which
is to secure and contain human waste until it can
be removed legally by a licensed sanitary hauler.
(6) Performance Standards.
(a) Intent. It is the intent of the Village Board
of Trustees that the following performance
standards designed to limit, restrict and prohibit
the effects of those uses outside of their
premises or district be imposed upon all parcels
falling within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance
so as to protect the quality of the environment,
the safety and health of the citizens of the
Village of Paddock Lake, and to alleviate, and
where possible, eliminate nuisances. It is the
further intent of the Board of Trustees that all
structures, lands, air and water shall hereafter,
in addition to their use, site, shoreland and
sanitary regulations, comply with the following
performance standards, and all applicable
standards set forth by the Wisconsin Department of
Industry, Labor and Human Relations, Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources, and the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(b) Procedure. The following procedure shall be
applicable:
(1) Prior to Construction and Operation.
Any application for a permit under this
Ordinance or any use subject to the
regulations and standards set forth
herein, shall be accompanied by a sworn
statement by the owner or agent of the
subject property that the property and
use will be operated in accordance with
the performance standards hereinafter
set forth.
(2) Continued Compliance. Continued
compliance with the regulations and
standards heretofore set forth in this
section is required and the enforcement
of such continued compliance with these
regulations and standards shall be the
duty of the Building Inspector.
(3) Determination of Violation. The
Building Inspector shall investigate any
reported violation of the hereinafter
noted regulations and standards and, if
there is reasonable grounds for the
same, shall proceed in accordance with
subparagraph (4) below.
(4) Termination of Violation. All
violations, as ascertained in accordance
with paragraph (3) above shall be
terminated within thirty (30) days after
notice of such violation and in the
event that said violation is not
terminated, it shall be deemed to be a
separate violation for each date of its
existence and subject to fines as set
forth in this Ordinance, except that
certain uses established before the
effective date of this Ordinance and
non-conforming as to the regulations and
standards hereinafter set forth shall be
given not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days in which to conform therewith
after the determination of the existence
of such violation and in the event said
violation is not terminated, it shall be
deemed a separate violation for each day
it existed since the effective date of
this Ordinance.
(c) Regulation of Nuisance Elements.
(1) No land or building in any district
shall be operated in such a manner so as
to create any dangerous, injurious,
noxious or otherwise objectionable fire,
explosive or other hazards; noise or
vibration, smoke, dust, dirt or other
form of air pollution; water pollution;
electrical, radio active or other
disturbances; glare; or other substance,
condition or element (referred to herein
as "dangerous or objectionable
elements") in such amount as to
adversely affect the surrounding area or
premises; provided that any use
permitted by these Ordinances may be
undertaken and maintained if it conforms
to the regulations of this subsection
eliminating dangerous and objectionable
elements at the specified point or
points of the determination of their
existence.
(2) The determination of the existence of
any dangerous and objectionable elements
shall be made at:
(a) The point or points where such
elements shall be most apparent for
fire and explosion hazards, for
radioactivity and electrical
disturbances, for smoke and other
forms of air pollution.
(b) The property lines of the use
creating such elements for noise,
vibration, glare and odors.
(d) Performance Standards to be Enforced.
(1) Air Pollution. No activity shall emit
any fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, smoke,
mists or gases in such quantities so as
to cause soiling or danger to the health
of persons, animals, vegetation or other
forms of property. No activity shall
emit any liquid or solid particles and
concentrations exceeding 0.3 grains per
cubic foot of the conveying gas nor any
color visible smoke equal to or darker
than No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart
described in Section NR 154 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code and
amendments thereto.
(2) Electrical Radioactive or Other
Disturbances. No activity shall emit
electrical, radioactive or other
disturbances outside its premises that
are dangerous or adversely affect the
use of the neighboring premises. All
applicable federal and state regulations
shall be complied with.
(3) Fire and Explosive Hazards. All
activities involving the manufacturing,
utilization, processing or storage of
flammable and explosive materials shall
be provided with adequate safety devices
against the hazard of fire and explosion
with adequate fire fighting and fire
suppression equipment and devices that
are standard in the industry. All
materials that range from active to
intense burning shall be manufactured,
utilized, processed and stored only in
completely enclosed buildings which have
incombustible exterior walls and an
automatic fire extinguishing system.
This shall include fireworks which are
held or stored for wholesale or retail
sale. The above ground storage capacity
of the materials that produce flammable
or explosive vapors shall not exceed the
following:
Closed Cup Flash Point Gallons
Over 187EF 400,000
105EF - 187EF 200,000
Below 105EF 100,000
(4) Glare and Heat. No activity shall emit
glare or heat that is visible or
measurable at the boundaries at the lot
on which the principle use is located.
All operations producing intense glare
or heat shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building. Exposed
sources of light shall be shielded so as
not to be visible outside their
premises.
(5) Noise. No activity in an industrial
district (other than transportation
facilities or temporary construction
work) that exceeds the following sound
level measured by a sound level meter
and associated octave band filter
conforming to standards prescribed by
the American Standards Association,
Inc., New York, New York, (American
Standard Sound Level Meters for
measurement of noise and other sounds,
224.3-1944, American Standards
Association, Inc., New York, New York,
and American Standards Specifications
for Octave-Band filter set for the
analysis of noise and other sounds,
224.10-1953, or latest approved revision
thereof, American Standards Association,
Inc., New York, New York, shall be
used.):
Octave Band
Frequency
Cycles per second
Sound Level
Decibels
0 - 75 79
75 - 150 74
150 - 300 66
300 - 600 59
600 - 1,200 53
1,200 - 2,400 47
2,400 - 4,800 41
above 4,800 39
No other activity in any other district
shall produce a sound level outside its
premises that exceeds the following
displacement measured with a threecomponent
measuring system:
Displacement (inches)
Frequency
cycles per
second
Outside
the Premises
Outside
the District
0 - 10 .0020 .0004
10 - 20 .0010 .0002
20 - 30 .0006 .0001
30 - 40 .0004 .0001
40 - 50 .0003 .0001
50 and over .0002 .0001
(6) Odors. Odors, except in the A-A
District, no activity shall emit any
odorous matter of such nature or
quantity as to be offensive, obnoxious
or unhealthful outside their premises.
The guide for determining odor
measurement and control shall be Chapter
NR 154 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code and amendments thereto.
(7) Liquid or Solid Gases. No activity
shall locate, store, discharge or permit
the discharge of any treated, untreated
or inadequately treated, liquid gaseous
or solid materials of such nature,
quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity or
temperature that would be likely to run
off, seep, perculate or wash into
surface or subsurface waters so as to
contaminate, pollute or harm such waters
or cause nuisances, such as
objectionable deposits, floating or
submerged debris, oil or scum, color,
odor, taste or unsightliness or to be
harmful to human, animal, plant or
aquatic life, or which can cause the
emission of dangerous or offensive
elements or can overload the existing
municipal utilities. In addition, no
activity shall discharge any liquid,
gaseous or solid materials so as to
exceed or contribute towards exceeding
the minimum standards and those other
standards and application of those
standards set forth in Chapter NR 102 of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code and
amendments thereto.
(e) Traffic, Parking and Access.
(1) Traffic Disability (Vision Triangle).
(a) No obstructions, such as
structures, fences, parking or
vegetation shall be permitted in
any business, manufacturing or
institutional district between the
heights of two (2) feet and ten
(10) feet above the plane through
the center line of the road within
the triangular space formed by any
two existing or proposed
intersecting street or alley rightof-
way lines and a line joining
points on such lines located a
minimum of fifteen (15) feet from
their intersection.
(b) In the case of any federal, state
or county highway or village road
intersection with any other
federal, state or county highway or
village road, the corner cutoff
distance is establishing the
triangular vision clearance space
shall be increased to fifty (50)
feet.
(2) Loading Requirements.
(a) In all districts adequate loading
area shall be provided so that all
vehicles loading, maneuvering, or
unloading are completely off the
public right-of-ways and so that
all vehicles need not back onto any
public right-of-ways.
(b) On every lot on which a business,
trade, or industrial use is
hereafter established, space with
access to a public street or alley
shall be provided as indicated
below for the loading and unloading
of vehicles off the public
right-of-way.
(1) Businesses: One (1) space of
at least 10 by 25 feet for
each 3,000 square feet of
floor area or part thereof.
(2) Wholesale and industrial: One
(1) space of at least 10 by 50
feet for each 10,000 square
feet of floor area or part
thereof.
(3) Bus and truck terminals:
Sufficient space to
accommodate the maximum number
of buses or trucks to be
stored or to be loaded or
unloaded at the terminal at
any one time.
(3) Parking Requirements. In all districts
and in connection with every use, there
shall be provided at the time any use or
building is erected, enlarged, extended,
or increased off-street parking stalls
for all vehicles in accordance with the
following:
Number of off-street parking stalls
(a) Residential uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings: two
stalls for each dwelling.
(2) Mobile homes: two stalls for
each mobile home.
(3) Two-family dwellings: four
stalls per building.
(4) Multiple family dwellings: two
stalls for one and two bedroom
units; 7.5 stalls for three or
more bedroom units; plus one
stall for every eight units
for guest parking.
(5) Housing for the elderly: one
stall for each dwelling unit
plus one stall for every eight
units for guest parking.
(b) Commercial uses.
(1) Automobile repair garages and
service garages: one space for
each regular employee plus one
space for each 250 square feet
of floor area used for repair
work.
(2) Financial institutions and
professional offices: one
stall for each 300 square feet
of primary floor area plus one
stall for every two employees.
(3) Funeral homes: twenty stalls
for each potential viewing
room.
(4) Gasoline filling stations: two
spaces for each grease rack or
similar facility plus one
space for each attendant on
duty at any given time.
(5) Hotels, motels: one stall for
each guest room plus one stall
for each three employees.
(6) Motor vehicle sales (new and
used): one space for each 500
square feet of floor area plus
300 square feet of outdoor
display area for each motor
vehicle to be displayed. (This
requirement does not include
service garages - see above).
(7) Restaurants, bars, clubs,
lodges, and places of
entertainment: one stall for
each 100 square feet of floor
area plus one stall for every
two employees.
(8) Shopping centers, discount
family stores and full service
food stores: one stall for
each 150 square feet of floor
area plus one stall for every
two employees.
(9) Freestanding retail and
service stores, convenient
food stores: one stall for
each 200 square feet of
primary floor area plus one
stall for every two employees.
(c) Manufacturing uses.
(1) Manufacturing and processing
plants and warehouses: one
stall for each two employees
during any 12 hour period.
(d) Institutional uses.
(1) Churches, auditoriums, community
centers, vocational and
night schools and other places
of public assembly: one stall
for every five seats.
(2) Secondary and elementary
schools: one stall for every
employee plus 1 stall for
every 10 students between the
ages of 16 and 18 and 1 stall
for every 5 students over 18
years of age.
(3) Governmental offices: one
stall for every 300 square
feet of floor area.
(4) Medical and dental clinics:
five stalls for every doctor
plus one stall for every
employee.
(5) Orphanages, convents,
rectories, monasteries: one
stall for every 2,000 square
feet of floor area.
(6) Sanatoriums, hospitals,
institutions, rest and nursing
homes: one stall for every
three beds plus one stall for
every three employees.
(e) Recreational uses (commercial or
non-commercial).
(1) Bowling alleys: six parking
spaces for each lane plus
additional spaces as may be
required herein for affiliated
uses such as restaurants and
other accessory uses.
(2) Health salons, skating rinks,
etc.: one parking space for
every three persons, based on
the maximum number of persons
that can be accommodated at
the same time in accordance
with such design capacity and
fire department regulations,
and one parking space for
every two employees.
(3) Park, recreation areas and
community centers: one parking
space for every two employees,
plus spaces in adequate
number, as determined by the
Building Inspector, to serve
the visiting public.
(f) Uses not listed. In the case of
structures or uses not mentioned,
the provisions for a use which is
similar shall apply.
(g) Combinations. Combinations of any
of the above uses shall provide the
total of the number of stalls
required for each individual use.
(h) Adequate access. Adequate access to
a public street shall be provided
for each parking space, and
driveway shall be at least ten (10)
feet wide for one and two-family
dwellings and at least twenty-four
(24) feet wide for all other uses.
(i) Size. The size of each parking
space shall not be less than one
hundred eighty (180) square feet
exclusive of the space required for
ingress and egress.
(j) Location. The location of each
parking space shall be on the same
lot as the principal use unless
parking space is provided on
another parcel, in which case, all
parking lots shall have the same
zoning district as the principal
use and, if not contained on the
same parcel as the principal use,
shall not be over four hundred
(400) feet from the principal use.
No parking stall or driveway except
in residential districts shall be
closer than three (3) feet to a
residential district lot line or a
street line opposite a residential
district.
(k) Surfacing. All off-street parking
areas shall be grated and surfaced
so as to be dust free and properly
drained. Any parking area for more
than five (5) vehicles shall have
the aisles and spaces clearly
marked.
(1) Screening. Any off-street parking
area, other than that provided for
a residence which abuts or faces a
residential zoning district and
where the vehicles will travel or
be parked within fifty (50) feet of
the resident's district line, shall
provide a planning screen,
landscaped earth berm, landscaped
fence or wall at least three (3)
feet in height at time of planting
along the side abutting or fronting
on a resident's district. Plans for
such screen shall be submitted to
the Building Inspector for approval
before installation.
(m) Lighting. Exterior lighting
provided in any parking area shall
be shielded or directed in such a
manner so as to prevent light from
shining directly onto abutting
properties.
(n) Curbs or barriers. Curbs or
barriers shall be installed so as
to prevent the parked vehicles from
extending any closer than five (5)
feet from any side and rear lot
line except where the parking space
abuts a residential district it
shall be no less than ten (10)
feet.
(o) Semi-trailers. Semi-trucks,
trailers and cabs, specialized
construction equipment and vehicles
such as, but not limited to,
backhoes, tow trucks, bulldozers,
dumptrucks and mobile homes shall
not be permitted to be parked in
residential zoning districts. This
subsection shall not prohibit
parking of motor homes and travel
trailers on private property in
residential zoning districts.
(4) Driveways and Hi way Access. All
driveways installed, altered, changed,
replaced, or extended after the
effective date of this Ordinance shall
meet the following requirements:
(a) Openings for vehicular ingress and
egress shall not exceed twenty-four
(24) feet at the street line and
thirty (30) feet at the roadway.
(b) Islands between driveway openings
shall be provided with a minimum of
ten (10) feet between all driveways
and six (6) feet at all lot lines.
(c) Vehicle entrances and exits to
drive-in theaters, banks,
restaurants, motels, funeral homes,
vehicle sales and service, car
washes, service stations, garages,
or public parking lots shall be not
less than two hundred (100) feet
from any pedestrian entrance or
exit to a school, college,
university, church, hospital, park
playground, library or other place
of public assembly.
(d) No direct public or private access
shall be permitted to the existing
or proposed right-of-ways of
freeways, interstate highways, and
interchanges and their entrances or
exit ramps nor within five hundred
(500) feet of the most remote end
of the taper of the entrances or
exit ramp.
(e) No direct public or private access
shall be permitted to any existing
or proposed federal, state trunk,
or county trunk highway within one
hundred (100) feet of its
intersection with another highway.
(f) Access barriers, such as curbing,
fencing, ditching, landscaping, or
other topographic barriers, shall
be erected to prevent unauthorized
vehicle ingress or egress to the
above specified streets or
highways.
(g) Temporary access to the rights-ofway
in subsections (d), (e); and
(f) above, may be granted by the
Board of Appeals after review and
recommendation by the highway
agencies having jurisdiction. Such
access permit shall be temporary,
revocable and subject to any
conditions required and shall be
issued for a period not to exceed
twelve (12) months.
(f) Fences.
(1) Permit required. No fence, except those
fences provided for in subsection (2)
below, shall hereinafter be located,
directed, moved, reconstructed, extended
or enlarged, converted or structurally
altered without a zoning permit and
building permit, when required under the
Village of Paddock Lake Building Code,
and without being in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance, the state
statutes and the Wisconsin
Administrative Code. The fence shall
also meet all the structural
requirements of local and state codes.
(2) Fences permitted without a zoning
permit. The following fences are
permitted as specified without a zoning
permit subject to the following
restrictions and providing that said
fence does not in any way interfere with
traffic visibility.
(a) A snow fence shall be permitted in
all districts when comprised of
pickets bound together and not
exceeding four (4) feet in height
and are removed between May 1 and
November 1 of each year. No
privately owned snow fences shall
extend beyond the highway rightof-
way line.
(b) Fences to be installed around
swimming pools shall be governed by
the provisions of Section
12.04(6)(g)(7).
(c) Agricultural fences in the A-A
district shall be permitted
provided that they do not extend
beyond the highway or road
right-of-way.
(d) Decorative fences not exceeding two
(2) feet in height shall be
permitted in all districts.
(3) Fences or walls for which a zoning
permit is required.
(a) Residential fences or walls are
permitted on the property lines in
residential districts, but shall
not be greater than six (6) feet in
height in the side yard and rear
yard or greater than four (4) feet
in the height in the street yard.
Residential fences or walls may be
six (6) feet in height in rear
street yard of a double frontage
lot or in the side street yard of a
corner lot not closer than fifteen
(15) feet. Residential fences or
walls shall not be closer than two
(2) feet to any public right-of-way
and no fence or wall greater than
two (2) feet in height shall be
placed within the vision triangle.
No fence or wall which incorporates
barb wire shall be permitted in the
residential districts.
(b) Security fences or walls are
permitted in all districts other
than residential districts.
Security fences or walls may be
placed on side and rear property
lines, but shall not be located
closer than two (2) feet to a
public right-of-way line. Security
fences or walls shall not exceed
ten (10) feet in height. No fence
or walls greater than two (2) feet
in height shall be placed within
the vision triangle.
(c) Any fence or hedgerow in a
commercial or industrial district
shall comply to the provisions of
paragraph (b) above. Fences in
commercial and industrial districts
may be solid, chainlink or open
woven wire. The use of electrically
charged fences is prohibited and
the use of barb wire is prohibited
except as upon approval by the
Village Board.
(4) No person shall install, plant or
maintain a fence or hedge on any lot
which creates an unsafe condition for
pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Any
fence or hedge in violation of this
section shall be deemed a public
nuisance and shall be subject to the
abatement of public nuisances as set
forth in Chapter 18 of this Code.
(5) Any fence within the Village of Paddock
Lake which has become so deteriorated,
dilapidated or broken as to be unsightly
and a detriment to the neighborhood or
area, or shall no longer fulfill its
purpose as a fence because of its
condition, shall be removed by the owner
within ten (10) days after notice by the
Building Inspector. In the event that
the owner fails to comply with the
Inspector's order, the Inspector shall
declare the fence a public nuisance and
proceed under Chapter 18 of this Code to
abate the nuisance.
(g) Swimming Pools.
(1) Compliance. It shall be unlawful to
construct, install, enlarge, or alter
any swimming pool as defined in this
Ordinance within the Village of Paddock
Lake, except in compliance with all of
the provisions of this section.
(2) Districts. Swimming pools may be
installed in all districts except the C,
S-0, B-1, B-2, M-1 and M-2 districts.
(3) Permit required. It shall be unlawful to
proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any
private residential swimming pool and
accessories thereto within the Village
unless a zoning permit and building
permit, when required under the Village
of Paddock Lake Building Code, have been
first obtained from the Building
Inspector.
(4) Application. All drawings and plans for
the construction, installation, enlargement
or alteration of any such swimming
pool and the accessories thereto shall
first be presented to the Building
Inspector for examination and approval
as to the proper location and
construction. All such plans and
drawings shall be drawn to scale and
shall indicate thereon all distances and
dimensions so as to accurately and
explicitly show all lot lines, and all
information pertaining to the pool,
walk, deck, fence construction, water
supply system, drainage and water
disposal systems, and all accessories
pertaining to the swimming pool. Such
plans shall also indicate the vertical
elevations of the pool. All private
residential swimming pools and
accessories thereto, water supply and
drainage system shall be constructed in
conformity with the approved plans.
(5) Location. No portion of a swimming pool
outside a building, including a
surrounding deck and fence, shall be
located at a distance of less than eight
(8) feet from any side or rear property
line or building line. Such pool shall
also comply with any and all state and
local regulations with respect to the
distances from an onsite sewage disposal
absorption system. On corner lots, all
streetyards, setbacks or property lines
shall be complied with. Pumps, filters
and pool water disinfection equipment
installations and all other accessories
shall be located at a distance of not
less than eight (8) feet from any side
property line. Such pools may be
installed only upon the rear yard of a
premises. All state requirements with
respect to the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, Section H 62.20, as hereinafter
amended or recreated relating to
setbacks from an onsite sewage disposal
system shall be complied with.
(6) Area. Such pool may be constructed
provided however it does not occupy more
than forty (40) percent of the usable
area of the rearyard excluding all
garages or other accessory structures
located in such area.
(7) Safety features. No swimming pool shall
be installed or maintained unless:
(a) There shall be erected and
maintained a good quality fence not
less than four (4) feet in height
completely surrounding the pool or
surrounding the yard in which the
pool is located. In lieu of a
fence, the Building Inspector may,
on a case-by-case basis, approve
other measures designed to prevent
unauthorized access to the pool.
(b) Every gate or other opening to the
fence enclosing such pool, except
an opening to the dwelling or other
main building of the premises,
shall be kept securely closed and
locked at all times when the owner
or occupant of the premises is not
present at such pool. All such
gates shall be supplied with self--
closing and self-latching devices
placed at the top of the gate.
(8) Lighting. No lighting may be installed
in connection with the pool which shall
throw any rays beyond such property
lines.
(9) Water drainage. No water drain from a
pool shall be discharged over or near
any septic tank, septic field or well.
(10) Inspection. The Building Inspector shall
inspect all swimming pools to determine
whether or not the provisions of this
ordinance are being complied with.
(h) Signs.
(1) Permit Required.
(a) No sign shall hereafter be located,
erected, moved, reconstructed,
extended, enlarged, converted or
structurally altered without a
zoning permit pursuant to Section
12.04(6)(h)(8) or a building
permit, when required under the
Village of Paddock Lake Building
Code, except those signs permitted
under Section 12.04(6)(h)(4),
without being in conformity with
the provisions of this Chapter,
Section 84.30 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, and Chapter H19 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code as
hereinafter amended or recreated.
The sign shall also meet all of the
structural requirements of the
Village and state building codes.
(b) Before any sign for which a permit
is required by this Ordinance is
erected, there should be submitted
to the Building Inspector the
written consent of the owner of the
land upon which the sign is to be
located that permission has been so
granted, a scale drawing of the
proposed sign indicating its
location on the premises and its
relationship to other structures
and property lines, and a
computation of the display area as
defined in this Ordinance.
(c) Back to back signs shall constitute
but one sign within the meaning of
this Ordinance.
(2) Signs Prohibited. Hazards or nuisances:
no sign which creates a hazard or
dangerous distraction to vehicle traffic
or a nuisance to adjoining property
shall be permitted in any district.
Signs shall not resemble, imitate or
approximate the shape, size, form or
color of railroad or traffic signs,
signals or devices, nor obstruct or
interfere with the effectiveness of said
devices. Flashing signs and inflatable
signs are hereby prohibited. No signs or
any part thereof or sign anchors,
braces, or guiderods shall be attached,
fastened, or anchored to any fire
escape, fire ladder, or standpipe, and
no sign or any part of any sign or any
anchor, brace or guiderod shall be
erected, relocated, or maintained so as
to hinder or prevent ingress and egress
from public or private driveways,
parking lots or fire escapes or through
a door, doorway or window or so as to
hinder or prevent pedestrian traffic on
a sidewalk or so as to hinder or prevent
the raising or placing of ladders
against the building by the fire
department as necessity therefore may
require. No sign shall be placed so as
to obstruct or interfere with traffic
visibility nor be lighted in such a way
so as to cause glare or impair driver
visibility upon public right-of-ways. No
rotating or swinging signs or devices
except for time or temperature devices,
whether illuminated or not, shall be
permitted. The use of banners, pendants,
flags, balloons, streamers or other
similar media for advertising shall be
strictly prohibited except for special
events lasting not more than fourteen
(14) days and only upon the prior
approval of the Building Inspector.
(3) General Requirements.
(a) All signs, whether attached to or
detached from a building or structure,
shall be located only on those sides of
a building or structure which face on a
public street or alley, right-of-way or
public parking lot.
(b) No sign should extend above the
high point or peak of the roof, wall or
parapet of the building or structure to
which it is attached, except a
projecting sign as defined herein, which
may extend up to, but not more than five
(5) feet above such high point or peak
of the roof, wall or parapet of the
building or structure to which it is
attached.
(c) Vision setback lines at public
sidewalk right-of-ways or at the
intersections of public streets and
public or private driveways shall not be
less than ten (10) feet unless otherwise
specifically stated in this Ordinance.
(d) The total gross surface area of all
business signs on a single lot shall be
determined in the following manner: for
each building side facing a public
street or alley right-of-way or public
parking lot, the maximum allowable area
in square feet of restricted signs shall
be the sum of 1.5 times the lineal
footage of structure facing on such
public right-of-way plus the setback
distance as defined in this Ordinance.
However, there shall be a minimum
allowed side area of twenty-five (25)
square feet per building side facing a
public street or alley right-of-way or
public parking lot for each business on
the first floor level and a maximum of
two hundred (200) square feet per
building side facing a public street or
alley right-of-way or public parking
lot, for each business on the first
floor level. The gross surface area of
all unrestricted signs is cumulative.
However, the gross surface sign area
allowed for one building side shall not
be cumulative to another side.
(e) On lots of one (1) acre or less
where the building or structure area is
less than twenty (20) per cent of the
lot area or on a lot of any acreage
where no building or structure exists
but a commercial service exists, the
allowed gross surface area per lot shall
be determined by the Village Building
Inspector. But in no case shall such
sign area exceed two hundred (200)
square feet in area for each lot line
abutting a public street or alley
right-of-way or public parking lot.
(f) Signs for businesses located above
the first floor level shall be
prohibited except as follows:
(1) Business or professional name
plates located inside of windows or
which are painted upon windows
above the first floor level of any
building or structure side facing a
public street or alley right-of-way
or public parking lot and which
occupy 50 percent or less of the
window area.
(2) One (1) group directory sign
may be affixed at each public
entrance which faces a public
street or alley right-of-way or
public or private parking lot
without obtaining a sign permit,
but subject to the area regulations
for group directory signs as
provided herein and if illuminated,
subject to any electrical code
requirements contained in the
Village building code or the state
building code.
(g) Location of all signs shall be set
back ten (10) feet from the front lot
line or sideyard lot line if on corner
lots. In B-1, B-2, M-1, M-2 and I-1
districts a detached or projecting sign
with its lowest point not less than ten
(10) feet above the ground level may be
located within the ten (10) foot setback
but not projecting into the public
highway right-of-ways.
(h) No person, firm or corporation
shall post or otherwise fasten any paper
or other material, paint, stencil or
write any number, sign, name, or any
disfiguring mark on any sidewalk, curb,
gutter, street, any post, pole, or tree,
nor shall any of said objects be defaced
in any manner, unless sanctioned by the
provisions of this Ordinance or other
provisions of the Village Ordinances or
by the Village Building Inspector in
carrying out the provisions of this
Ordinance or any public work or
construction.
(i) Subdivision entrance signs may be
permitted at the discretion of the
Village Building Inspector and subject
to the requirements of this Ordinance.
Specific design, sign appearance,
location, size and continuing
maintenance responsibility shall be
submitted to the Village Building
Inspector for approval.
(j) No flashing, alternating, rotating
or swinging signs or devices except time
or temperature devices, whether
illuminated or not, shall be permitted.
(k) The use of banners, pendants,
flags, balloons, streamers, or other
similar media for advertising shall be
strictly prohibited except for special
events lasting not more than fourteen
(14) days and only upon approval of the
Building Inspector.
(1) Each lot, whether occupied by one
or more business establishments, shall
be limited to one (1) detached sign and
one (1) portable sign except that there
shall be no limit to the number of
detached operational signs. In the event
one (1) business establishment occupies
more than one (1) lot, that business
establishment shall be limited to one
(1) detached sign and one (1) portable
sign.
(1) Any individual display surface
of a detached sign shall not exceed
one hundred (100) square feet and
the total vertical height including
structural supports shall not
exceed fifty (50) feet.
(2) Any individual display surface
of a portable sign shall not exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet. Every
portable sign shall be stoutly
secured and anchored in a secure
and substantial manner.
(m) Externally illuminated signs,
including flood lighting shall
illuminate only the immediate area of
the sign, concentrating light upon the
sign without radiating light upon
adjacent public or private property as
to interfere with the comfort and repose
of those residing in the neighborhood
dwellings or constituting a traffic
hazard or detriment to traffic safety.
(n) Internally illuminated signs shall
illuminate only the immediate area of
the sign, concentrating light within the
sign without radiating light upon
adjacent public or private property so
as to interfere with the comfort and
repose of those residing in the
neighboring dwellings.
(o) Flat signs shall be located on the
premises being served and the display
surface shall not exceed one hundred
(100) square feet for each such sign.
The number of flat signs used on a lot
shall not be limited, provided however,
the total allowed gross surface sign
area for restricted signs is not
exceeded.
(p) Painted skeleton cutout letter
signs shall be located on the building
or structure being served and shall be
only permitted on cornice, lentel or
panel of the building or structure. The
number of painted skeleton cutout letter
signs shall not be limited, provided,
however, the total allowed gross surface
sign area for restricted signs is not
exceeded.
(q) Projecting signs shall be located
on the premises being served and shall
be limited to one (1) such sign for each
business for each public street or alley
right-of-way or public parking lot upon
which it faces. No projecting sign shall
be at its lowest point less than ten
(10) feet above any public street,
walkway, driveway, parking lot or any
public right-of-way.
(r) Skeleton cutout letter signs shall
be located on the premises being served
and shall be limited to one (1) such
sign for each business for each public
street or alley right-of-way or public
parking lot which it .faces. There shall
be no maximum dimensions for skeleton
cutout letter signs.
(s) Business signs shall be located on
the premises being served and shall be
limited to permitted combinations of
detached, flat, painted, projecting or
skeleton cutout letter signs as may be
allowed under the total allowed gross
surface area of all business signs.
(4) Signs permitted in all districts without
a zoning permit. The following types of signs
shall be permitted in all districts without a
zoning permit, subject to requirements for
location, size and number as specified herein
and subject to all Village and state building
code requirements and electrical code
requirements if illuminated:
(a) Awning or canopy signs. These shall
be located on the premises being served
and shall only display the owner's name
or business name. One (1) awning or
canopy sign shall not occupy more than
30 per cent of the area vertical face of
such awning or canopy.
(b) Bulletin signs for public,
charitable or religious institutions
which shall be located on the premises
of the institution being served and
shall be limited to one (1) such sign
for each institution except on corner
lots where two (2) signs, one facing
each street shall be permitted. One
bulletin sign shall not exceed twenty
(20) square feet in area.
(c) Contractor signs for ongoing
construction, which shall be on the site
of construction and shall be limited to
one (1) nine (9') square foot sign in
the R-1, R-2, R-3, RD-1, RM-1, A-2
zoning district and one (1) thirty-two
(32') square foot sign in the B-1, B-2,
M-1, M-2, I-1, AA and W zoning
districts. All contractors signs shall
be removed within thirty (30) days of
completion of project.
(d) Election campaign signs shall not
be located on any property owned by the
Village of Paddock Lake nor shall any
election campaign sign be located on any
Village road right-of-way. On any
property where election campaign signs
are permitted to be located, permission
to erect such signs shall be obtained
from the owner of such property.
Pursuant to Section 12.04 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, no election campaign
signs shall be erected before the first
day for circulation of nomination papers
by candidates, or the first day on which
candidates would circulate nomination
papers were papers to be required and
shall be removed within seven (7) days
following completion of the election. If
the signs are not removed within the
seven day period, the Village shall
cause such signs to be removed without
the necessity of giving notice. One (1)
election campaign sign shall not exceed
twenty (20) square feet in area.
(e) Governmental signs such as traffic
control, parking restrictions,
information and notices shall be located
as needed by any public official.
(f) Memorial signs shall be located on
the premises being served and there
shall be no limitations as to the area
or number of such signs.
(g) Operational signs shall be located
on the premises being served and shall
be unlimited as to the number of such
signs. No individual operational sign
shall exceed ten (10) square feet in
area and shall comply with the minimum
height and setback requirements.
(h) Professional name plate signs shall
be located on the premises being served
and shall be limited to one (1 ) such
sign per business. One (1) professional
name plate sign shall not exceed four
(4) square feet in area. Real estate
signs shall not be located on property
owned by the Village of Paddock Lake nor
shall any real estate sign be located on
any Village road right-of-way. Real
estate signs on property where real
estate signs are permitted to be located
shall be limited to one (1) sign for
each property except on corner lots
where two (2) signs, one facing each
street, shall be permitted, and on lots
abutting a lake where two (2) signs, one
facing the street and one facing the
lake, shall be permitted. Real estate
signs in all business and industrial
districts shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet in area and in
residential districts shall not exceed
eight (8) square feet in area. A11 real
estate signs shall comply with minimum
height and set back requirements as
provided in this Ordinance.
(i) Residential name plate signs shall
be located only in residential districts
and shall be limited to one (1) such
sign for each lot except on corner lots
where two (2) such signs, one facing
each street, shall be permitted. One (1)
residential name plate sign shall not
exceed two (2) square feet in area.
(j) Signs in windows above first floor
levels shall be subject to the
requirements of this Ordinance.
(5) Temporary Signs. Temporary signs, as
defined in this Ordinance, may be permitted
at the discretion of the Village Building
Inspector. Where such sign is to be located
on the premises involved, the temporary sign
may be permitted for up to a period of three
(3) months and extensions may be permitted
for a period not to exceed six (6) months in
total. Specific design, sign appearance,
location, and size shall be submitted to the
Village Building Inspector for approval but
in any such event shall not be located in any
vision triangle as defined in this Ordinance
and shall not incorporate any flashing or
traveling lights. Such signs shall be at
least fifteen (15) feet from highway
right-of-way lines and shall not be
illuminated in such a way so as to obstruct
highway visibility. Such signs shall not be
more than forty (40) square feet in area.
(6) Construction and Maintenance of Signs.
(a) Wind pressures and deadload
requirements. All signs and other
advertising structures shall be designed
and constructed to withstand wind
pressure of not less than forty (40)
pounds per square foot of area and shall
be constructed to receive deadloads as
required in Village or state building
codes or other ordinances.
(b) Protection of the Public. The
temporary occupancy of a sidewalk or
street or other public property during
construction, removal, repair,
alteration or maintenance of a sign is
permitted provided that the space
occupied is roped off, fenced off or
otherwise isolated.
(c) Maintenance. The owner of any sign
shall keep such sign in good maintenance
and repair which includes restoring,
repainting, or replacement of a worn or
damaged legally existing sign to its
original condition; and shall maintain
the premises on which the sign is
erected in a clear, sanitary and
inoffensive condition, free and clear of
all obnoxious substances, rubbish, weeds
and grass.
(d) Supporting Members or Braces. The
supporting members or braces of all
signs shall be constructed of galvanized
iron, properly treated steel, copper,
brass or other non-corrosive,
incombustible material. All projecting
signs, if placed at right or other angle
to the wall or roof of any building,
shall be attached by such non-corrosive
metal bolts, anchors, cable or other
metal attachments as shall insure
permanent and safe construction and
shall be maintained free from rust or
other defects. Every means or device
used for attaching any sign shall extend
through the walls or roof to the
building. Should the Building Inspector
determine that the safe and permanent
support of such sign so requires and
shall be securely anchored by wall
plates or nuts to the inside of the
walls or to bearing on the underside of
two (2) or more roof or ceiling joists
in accordance with instructions given by
the Building Inspector. Small flat signs
containing less than ten (10) square
feet of area may be attached to a
building by the use of lag bolts or
other means to the satisfaction of the
Building Inspector.
(e) Sign Repair. Signs affixed which
shall fail to comply with the orders of
the Building Inspector relative to the
painting, repair, alteration,
maintenance or removal of said sign
pursuant to a written notice thereof and
within thirty (30) days thereafter shall
be painted, repaired, altered,
maintained or removed under the
authority of the Building Inspector and
any cost incurred shall be paid by the
owner of the premises on which the sign
is located.
(f) Electrical Requirements. All
electrical installations shall be done
according to national, state and local
codes to insure safety and function.
(7) Existing signs. Signs lawfully existing
on the effective date of this Ordinance which
do not conform to the provisions of this
Ordinance, shall, when removed from their
fast or when substantial repairs to the
structure are required from any cause
whatsoever, such signs shall not be reerected,
repaired or maintained unless the
sign, location and erection thereof are made
to conform with the provisions of this
Ordinance and any other applicable ordinance
or regulation of this Village, and any
existing sign which no longer advertises a
bonafide business, product or services
associated with that enterprise in the
Village of Paddock Lake shall be removed by
the owner, agent or person having beneficial
use of the premises upon which such sign may
be found within thirty (30) days after
written notification by the Building
Inspector. After such notice from the
Building Inspector is given to the owner,
agent or person having beneficial use of the
premises upon which the sign may be found,
the Building Inspector is hereby authorized
to enter upon the premises and remove any
such sign and any expense incurred shall be
paid by the owner of the premises upon which
the sign is located.
(8) Zoning Permit for Signs.
(a) Applications for a zoning permit
for a sign shall be made to the Building
Inspector and shall contain or have
attached thereto the following
information:
(1) The name, address and
telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The location of the building,
structure or lot to which or upon
which the sign is to be attached or
erected.
(3) The name of the person, firm,
corporation or association erecting
the sign.
(4) The written consent of the
owner or lessee of the building,
structure, or land to which or upon
which the sign is to be affixed, in
the event that the applicant is not
the owner.
(5) A scale drawing of such sign
indicating the dimensions, the
materials being used, the type of
illumination, if any, and the
method of construction and
attachment.
(6) A scale drawing indicating the
location and position of such sign
in relation to nearby buildings or
structures.
(7) Such additional information as
may be required by the Building
Inspector or the Village Board of
Appeals.
(b) Fee Receipt. The Building Inspector
shall collect the fee stated in Section
12.03(6) of this Ordinance for
applications filed with his office for a
zoning permit for a sign. This fee does
not include the fee for a building
permit for a sign which may be required
under the provisions of the Village of
Paddock Lake Building Code.
(c) Application for Zoning Permit for
Signs. The application for a zoning
permit for a sign shall be filed with
the Building Inspector with the
appropriate fee as set forth in Section
12.03(6) of this Ordinance and upon such
filing the Building Inspector shall
examine plans and specifications and
other data and the premises upon which
the sign is to be erected as set forth
in the application and if it shall
appear that the proposed sign is in
compliance with all of the requirements
of this and all other Ordinances of the
Village of Paddock Lake and the laws,
rules and regulations of the State of
Wisconsin and its administrative
agencies, the Building Inspector shall
then issue such zoning permit. If the
Building Inspector shall determine that
the permit cannot be issued as a
proposed sign does not conform to this
Ordinance, other ordinances of the
Village or state statute or the
Wisconsin Administrative Code, or if the
Building Inspector is of some doubt as
to whether or not the sign is a proper
sign considering all factors, or is of
the type of sign that should be referred
to the Village Board of Appeals, then
the Building Inspector shall refer the
application to the Village Board of
Appeals with his comments for the
Board's consideration and decision in
accordance with this Ordinance. The
Building Inspector shall attend the
meeting of the Board of Appeals and
present any comments or evidence that he
has for the benefit of the Board. A
signed permit issued under this
Ordinance shall be valid for a period of
four (4) months after the date of issue,
and after said four (4) months, said
permit shall automatically lapse and be
null and void without further notice or
action on the part of the Building
Inspector.
(d) Variances for Zoning Permits for
Signs.
(1) Upon application to the Design
Review Board either by the Building
Inspector or by an applicant, the
Board may grant a special exception
to the provisions of this
Ordinances as it relates to the
number, size, location and type of
signs that any organization or
business establishment may erect,
affix or display, and the Board
shall consider the following
relevant factors:
(a) The purpose of the
proposed sign.
(b) The type of the proposed
sign.
(c) The type of materials to
be used for the proposed sign.
(d) The type of construction
to be employed.
(e) The appearance of the
proposed appearance.
(f) The location of the
building or structure in a
particular zoning district to
which the business is situated
where the proposed sign is to
be located.
(g) The size of the proposed
sign in relation to area
facing of the building
structure in which the
business of the applicant is
located.
(h) The affect that the
proposed sign will have on the
appearance and character of
the applicant’s property, and
adjacent and neighboring
property, and the area in
general.
(i) The affect that the
proposed sign will have on
property values of the
applicant’s property, adjacent
and neighboring property and
the area in general.
(j) The legislative intent of
these Ordinances.
(k) Such other matters as the
Board deems relevant and
material considering the
individual circumstances.
(2) Prior to granting a variance
and based on the criteria set forth
in subsection (1) above, the Board
shall find and set forth in writing
that the appearance, nature and
type of the proposed sign is not so
at variance with the appearance and
character of other signs in the
area, nor so at variance with the
appearance and character of the
building or structure on which it
is to be located, and with the
adjacent general area, so as to
adversely affect or cause a
depreciation of property values;
but on the contrary, the proposed
sign would serve a public or
desirable or useful purpose and
would maintain or improve the
general appearance and character of
the building or structure where
located, the adjacent or
neighboring properties, and the
general area where erected or
displayed.
(e) Violations. Any person who shall
erect or cause to be erected any sign
subject to this Ordinance without first
obtaining a permit therefore as required
by this Ordinance, shall be subject to a
permanent fee in twice the amount set
forth in Section 12.03(6) of this
Ordinance and further, if said sign is
not in conformity with the provisions or
specifications of this Ordinance, it may
be summarily removed by the Building
Inspector upon forty-eight (48) hour's
notice to the owner or the business
which is served by such sign.
(f) Annual Inspection. The Building
Inspector shall inspect prior to July 1
of each year, every projecting sign. If
any such sign is found to be insecurely
fastened or in any way conflicts with
this Ordinance or state statute or the
Wisconsin Administrative Code, the
Building Inspector shall report this
fact to the owner of the sign or to the
owner or occupant of the premises on
which it is fastened. If the sign is not
made to comply within thirty (30) days
after such notice, it may be removed or
altered to comply at the expense of the
holder of the permit or the owner of the
property by the Building Inspector,
further provided that the Building
Inspector may cause any sign to be
removed summarily and without notice
whenever public safety requires this to
be done immediately.
(g) Liability. Acceptance of fees for a
zoning permit or building permit for a
sign as provided herein shall not be
deemed an assumption of any liability by
the Village and the owner of any
building or structure upon which a sign
is erected shall be liable for any
damages and injuries that may be caused
to person or property by the erection of
such sign.
(7) Violations. It shall be unlawful to construct or
use any structure, land, or water in violation of any of the
provisions of this Ordinance. In case of any violation, the Board
of Trustees, the Building Inspector, the Village Plan Commission
or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by such
violation may institute appropriate action or proceeding to
enjoin a violation of this Ordinance.
(8) Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who
fails to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than One Hundred ($100.00)
Dollars nor more than One Thousand ($1,000.00) Dollars and costs
of prosecution for each violation and in default of payment of
such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail
until payment thereof, but not exceeding six (6) months. Each day
a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
12.05 ZONING DISTRICTS
(1) Establishment. For the purpose of this Ordinance,
the Village of Paddock Lake is hereby divided into the following
zoning districts:
(a) R-1 Single-family Residential
(b) R-2 Single-family Residential
(c) R-3 Single-family Residential
(d) Rd-1 Two-family Residential
(e) Rm-1 Multiple-family Residential
(f) B-1 Community Business
(g) B-2 Integrated Business
(h) M-1 Light Industry
(i) M-2 General Industrial
(j) I-1 Institutional and Public Service
(k) P Park and Recreation
(l) A-1 Agricultural
(m) C Conservancy
(n) S-O Shoreland Protection Overlay District
(o) W Wastewater Treatment Plant District
(p) Wet Wetland Protection Overlay District.
(q) PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay
District
(r) A-2 Equine Agricultural
(2) Boundaries of Zoning Districts. Boundaries of
zoning districts are hereby established as shown on a map
entitled "Zoning Map, Village of Paddock Lake, Wisconsin", dated
February 1, 1990, as amended from time to time, which accompanies
and is part of this ordinance. Vacation of public streets and
alleys shall cause the land vacated to be automatically placed in
the same district as the abutting side to which the vacated land
reverts. In addition, the Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Maps
stamped "FINAL" on January 27, 1988, are herein incorporated by
reference as they relate to the wetland protection overlay
district.
(3) R-1 Single-family Residential District.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Gardening, nurseries and greenhouses
only for the propagation of plants, except
for commercial use.
(3) Accessory buildings and/or 1 private
garage.
(4) Not over two (2) boarders or lodgers not
members of the family.
(5) Uses customarily incident to any of the
above uses when located on the same lot and
not involving the conduct of a business;
including home occupations.
(b) Lot Area and Width. Lots shall have a
minimum area of 8,000 square feet and shall
not be less than 70 feet in width at front
setback lines.
(c) Building Height and Area.
(1) No principal building or parts of a
principal building shall exceed 35 feet in
height. No accessory building shall exceed
15 feet in height.
(2) The minimum floor area of a principal
building shall be 1,250 square feet. If the
principal building does not have a basement,
the minimum floor area required shall be
increased to 1,300 square feet.
(d) Setback and Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building
setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets.
(2) There shall be a side yard on each side
of all structures not less than 10 feet. On
corner lots, the street side yard shall be
increased to a minimum of 25 feet.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less
than 25 feet.
(4) R-2 Single-family Residential District.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Gardening, nurseries and greenhouses
only for the propagation of plants, except
for commercial use.
(3) Accessory buildings and/or one (1)
private garage.
(4) Not over two (2) boarders or lodgers not
members of the family.
(5) Uses customarily incident to any of the
above uses when located on the same lot and
not involving the conduct of a business;
including home occupations.
(b) Lot Area and Width. Lots shall have a
minimum area of 12,000 square feet and shall
not be less than 90 feet in width at front
setback lines.
(c) Building Height and Area.
(1) No principal building or parts of a
principal building shall exceed 35 feet in
height. No accessory building shall exceed
20 feet in height.
(2) The minimum floor area of a principal
building shall be 1,300 square feet. If the
principal building does not have a basement,
the minimum floor area required shall be
increased to 1,450 square feet.
(d) Setback and Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building
setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets.
(2) There shall be a side yard on each side
of all structures not less than 10 feet. On
corner lots, the street side yard shall be
increased to a minimum of 25 feet.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less
than 25 feet.
(5) R-3 Single-family Residential District.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Gardening, nurseries and greenhouses
only for the propagation of plants, except
for commercial use.
(3) Accessory buildings and/or one (1)
private garage.
(4) Not over two (2) boarders or lodgers not
members of the family.
(5) Uses customarily incident to any of the
above uses when located on the same lot and
not involving the conduct of a business;
including home occupations.
(b) Lot Area and Width. Lots shall have a
minimum area of 16,000 square feet and shall
not be less than 120 feet in width at front
setback lines.
(c) Building Height and Area.
(1) No principal building or parts of a
principal building shall exceed 35 feet in
height. No accessory building shall exceed
20 feet in height.
(2) The minimum floor area of a principal
building shall be 1,400 square feet. If the
principal building does not have a basement,
the minimum floor area required shall be
increased to 1,650 square feet.
(d) Setback and Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building
setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets.
(2) There shall be a side yard on each side
of all structures not less than 10 feet. On
corner lots, the street side yard shall be
increased to a minimum of 25 feet.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less
than 25 feet.
(6) Rd-1 Two-family Residential District.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) Two-family dwellings.
(2) Churches, public schools, parochial
schools, parks.
(3) Gardening, nurseries and greenhouses
only for the propagation of plants, except
for commercial use.
(4) Accessory buildings and/or two (2)
private garages.
(5) Uses customarily incident to any of the
above uses when located on the same lot and
not involving the conduct of a business;
including home occupations.
(b) Conditional Uses. See Section 12.06.
(c) Lot Area and Width. Lots shall be a minimum
of 10,000 square feet in area and shall not
be less than 90 feet in width at front
setback lines.
(d) Building Height and Area.
(1) No principal building or parts of a
principal building shall exceed 35 feet in
height. No accessory building shall exceed
20 feet in height.
(2) The minimum floor area of a principal
building shall be 720 square feet per family.
(e) Setback and Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building
setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets.
(2) There shall be a side yard on each side
of all buildings not less than 15 feet in
width. On corner lots, the street side yard
shall be increased to a minimum of 30 feet.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less
than 45 feet.
(7) Rm-1 Multiple-family Residential District.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) Multiple-family dwellings.
(2) Boarding houses and lodging houses.
(3) Churches, public schools, parochial
schools, parks.
(4) Gardening, nurseries and greenhouses
only for the propagation of plants, except
for commercial use.
(5) Accessory buildings and/or private
garages for use by the multiple-family
tenants.
(b) Conditional Uses. See Section 12.06.
(d) Building Height and Area.
(1) No principal building or parts of a
principal building shall exceed 35 feet in
height. No accessory building shall exceed
20 feet in height.
(c) Lot Area and Width. Lots shall be a minimum
of the larger of 15,000 square feet in area
of 3,500 square feet per family. Lots shall
not be less than 100 feet in width at front
setback lines.
(2) No principal building shall have a floor
area of less than the larger of 2,500 square
feet or 720 square feet per family.
(e) Setback and Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building
setback of 25 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets.
(2) There shall be a minimum side yard on
each side of all buildings not less than 20
feet in width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less
than 45 feet.
(8) B-1 Community Business District.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) Any of the following retail shops or
services:
Art Shop Ice Cream Store
Bakery (retail) Insurance Office
Bank Jewelry Store
Barber Shop Meat and Fish Market
Bath Houses Music and Radio
Store
Beauty Shop News Stand
Candy Store Notion Store
Cocktail Lounge Parking Lots
Confectionery Store Pharmacy
Clinic Photographer
Delicatessen Pet Shop (excluding
kennels and animal
Dress Shop hospitals)
Drug Store Professional Office
Dry Goods Store Restaurant
Florist Shop Real Estate Office
Food Products (retail) Soda Fountain
Fruit and Vegetable Soft Drink Stand
Market
Gift Shop Tailor Shop
Greenhouses Telegraph Offices
Grocery Store (retail) Theaters
Hardware and Plumbing Taverns
Hosery Shop Utility Company
Office
(2) Any other uses similar in character and
the manufacture or treatment of products
clearly incidental and required to conduct a
retail business on the premises.
(3) Accessory garages for storage of
vehicles used in conjunction with the
operation of the business or for occupants of
the premises.
(4) Residential quarters for the owner,
proprietor, commercial tenant, employer or
caretaker located in the same building as the
business.
(5) Rental apartment on a non-ground level
provided there shall be a minimum floor area
of 600 square feet for each residential unit
provided.
(b) Lot Area and Width. Lots in the B-1 business
district shall provide sufficient area for the
principal structure and its accessory structures,
off-street parking and loading areas, and all
required yards. There shall be a minimum lot
width of 75 feet at front setback lines.
(c) Building Height and Area. No principal
building or parts of a principal building shall
exceed 35 feet in height. No accessory building
shall exceed 20 feet in height.
(d) Setback and Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building
setback of 50 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets.
(2) No separation shall be required between
business, service or commercial uses, except
that where a separation, or side yard, is
provided, it shall be a rear yard of not less
than 30 feet.
(9) B-2 Integrated Business District.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) Any use permitted in the B-1 Business
District.
(2) Automobile sales and service
establishments.
(3) Boat liveries, boat maintenance and
repairs.
(4) Public garages.
(5) Hotels and motels.
(6) Places of amusement.
(7) Any other uses similar in character and
the manufacture or treatment of products
clearly incidental and required to conduct a
retail business on the premises.
(8) Accessory garages for storage of
vehicles used in conjunction with the
operation of the business or for occupants of
the premises.
(9) Residential quarters for the owner,
proprietor, commercial tenant, employee or
caretaker located in the same building as the
business.
(10) Rental apartment on a non-ground level
provided there shall be a minimum floor area
of 600 square feet for each residential unit
provided.
(b) Lot Area and Width. Lots in the B-2 business
district shall provide sufficient area for the
principal structure and its accessory structures,
off-street parking and loading areas, and all
required yards. There shall be a minimum lot
width of 75 feet at front setback lines.
(c) Building Height and Area. No principal
building or parts of a principal building shall
exceed 45 feet in height. No accessory building
shall exceed 20 feet in height.
(d) Setback and Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building
setback of 50 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets.
(2) No separation shall be required between
business, service or commercial uses, except
that where a separation, or side yard, is
provided, it shall be a minimum of 10 feet in
width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less
than 30 feet.
(10) M-1 Light Industry District. The M-1 Light
Industry District is intended to provide for manufacturing,
industrial and related uses of a limited nature and size in
situations where such uses are not located in basic industrial
groupings and where the relative proximity to other uses requires
more restriction regulations.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) Wholesale business.
(2) Manufacture of products from paper but
not the manufacture of paper or pulp.
(3) Printing and publishing.
(4) Manufacture of products from wood except
the manufacture of paper, pulp and plastics.
(5) Manufacture of sporting goods, home and
office supplies and appliances.
(6) Knitting mills and the manufacture of
products from finished fabrics.
(7) Manufacture of jewelry and cosmetics.
(8) Enameling and painting.
(9) Garages for storage of vehicles used in
conjunction with the operation of an
industry.
(10) Conditional uses compatible with the
foregoing allowance under §12.06 of this
Ordinance.
(b) Conditional Uses. See §12.06.
(c) Lot Area and Width. Lots in the M-1 light
industry district shall provide sufficient area
for the principal structure and its accessory
structures, off-street parking and loading areas,
and all required yards. There shall be a minimum
lot width of 75 feet at front setback lines.
(d) Building Height and Area. No principal
building or parts of a principal building shall
exceed 45 feet in height. No accessory building
shall exceed 20 feet in height.
(e) Setback and Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building
setback of 50 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets.
(2) No separation shall be required between
business, service or commercial uses, except
that where a separation, or side yard, is
provided, it shall be a minimum of 10 feet in
width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less
than 30 feet.
(11) M-2 General Industrial District. The M-2
industrial district is intended to provide for industrial
development of a more general and less restrictive nature than in
the M-1 light industry district in those areas where the
relationship to surrounding land use would create fewer problems
of compatibility and would not necessitate as stringent
regulatory controls. Such districts should not normally abut
directly upon any residence districts.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) The repair service and assembly of
motor-propelled or nonmotor-propelled
vehicles including the repair and
storage of automotive accessories except
the wrecking of motor-propelled
vehicles.
(2) The storage and warehousing of fuel
and materials, and contractors yards,
but not the storage of wrecked and
dismantled vehicles and junk or the
storage of explosives or inflammable
gases or liquids.
(3) Manufacture and bottling of
nonalcoholic beverages.
(4) Processing, packing and manufacture
of food, except meat and meat products,
fish and fish products, sauerkraut and
cabbage by-products or the vining of
peas or the husking of corn.
(5) Manufacture of goods from leather,
but not tanning of hides or manufacture
of leather.
(6) Cleaning, dyeing and pressing
establishments and laundries, but not
bag cleaning.
(7) Laboratories.
(8) Manufacture of cigars, cigarettes
and smoking tobacco.
(9) Blacksmithing, tinsmithing, sheet
metal working and plumbing shops.
(10) Manufacture of goods from plastics.
(11) Extraction and processing of
natural resources indigenous to Kenosha
County.
(12) Garages for storage of vehicles
used in conjunction with the operation
of an industry.
(13) Off-street parking and loading
areas.
(14) Office, storage, power supply and
other uses normally auxiliary to the
principal industrial operations.
(15) Conditional uses compatible with
the foregoing allowance under §12.06 of
this Ordinance.
(b) Conditional Uses. See §12.06.
(c) Lot Area and Width. Lots in the M-2
general industrial district shall provide
sufficient area for the principal structure
and its accessory structures, off-street
parking and loading areas, and all required
yards. The required minimum lot width is 75
feet.
(d) Building Height and Area. No principal
building or parts of a principal building
shall exceed 45 feet in height. No accessory
building shall exceed 20 feet in height.
(e) Setback and Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building
setback of 50 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets.
(2) No separation shall be required between
business, service or commercial uses, except
that where a separation, or side yard, is
provided, it shall be a minimum of 10 feet in
width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less
than 30 feet.
(12) I-1 Institutional and Public Service District.
The I-1 institutional and public service district is intended to
eliminate the ambiguity of maintaining, in unrelated use
districts, areas which are under public or public-related
ownership and where the use for public purpose is anticipated to
be permanent.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) Public or private schools, colleges and
universities.
(2) Churches.
(3) Hospitals, sanatoriums, nursing homes,
and clinics.
(4) Libraries, museums and art galleries.
(5) Public administrative offices, and
public service buildings, including fire and
police stations.
(6) Public utility offices.
(7) Wastewater treatment facilities,
including lift stations, potable water
buildings and other related facilities.
(8) Telephone offices, branch telephone
exchanges and static transformer stations,
provided there is no service garage or
storage yard.
(b) Conditional Uses. See §12.06.
(c) Lot Area and Width. Lots shall be a minimum
of 8,400 square feet in area and shall not be less
than 75 feet in width.
(d) Building Height and Area.
(1) No principal building or part of a
principal building shall exceed 35 feet in
height. No accessory building shall exceed
20 feet in height.
(2) The sum total of the floor area of the
principal building and all accessory
buildings shall not exceed 40 percent of the
lot area.
(e) Setback and Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building
setback of 50 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets.
(2) There shall be a side yard on each side
of all buildings not less than 10 feet in
width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less
than 25 feet.
(13) P Park and Recreation District. The P park and
recreation district is intended to provide for areas where the
recreational needs, both public and private, of the populace can
be met without undue disturbance of natural resources and
adjacent users.
(a) Permitted Uses.
Amphitheaters Forest reserves
(wildlife refuges)
Amusement parks General resorts
Arenas and field
houses
Golf courses with or
without country club
facilities
Art galleries Golf driving ranges
Aquariums Group or organized
camps
Auditoriums Gymnasiums and
athletic clubs
Boat rentals and
boat access sites
Historic and
monument sites
Botanical gardens
and arboretums
Hunting and fishing
clubs
Dude ranches Ice skating
Exhibition halls Miniature golf
Fairgrounds Museums
Forest reserves
(wilderness areas)
Recreation centers
Parks-general
recreation
Skiing and
tobagganing
Parks-leisure and
ornamental
Ski resorts
Penny arcades Swimming beaches
Picknicking areas Swimming pools
Planetaria Tennis courts
Playfields or
athletic fields
Zoos
Playgrounds Play lots or tot
lots
(b) Conditional Uses. See Section 12.06.
(c) Lot Area and Width. Lots in the P park and
recreational district shall provide sufficient
area for the principal structure and its accessory
structures, off-street parking and loading areas
as required by Section 12.04(6)(c)(3) of this
ordinance, and all required yards.
(d) Building Height. No building or parts of a
building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(e) Setback and Yards. No building or structure
shall be erected, altered, or moved closer than 40
feet to a lot line.
(14) A-1 Agricultural District.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) General farming, apiculture, dairying,
floriculture, forestry, grazing, greenhouses,
hatcheries, horticulture, livestock raising,
nurseries, orchards, paddocks, pasturage,
poultry raising, stables, truck farming, and
viticulture.
(2) Single-family dwellings.
(3) Additional dwellings for those resident
owners and laborers actually engaged in the
principal farming activity. The number of
dwellings on a single farm unit shall not
exceed three.
(4) Uses customarily incidental to any of
the above uses when located on the same
parcel and not involving the conduct of a
business; including home occupations.
(b) Conditional Uses. See Section 12.06.
(c) Lot Area and Width. No parcels in the
Agricultural District shall be less than ten (10)
acres in size. No parcel shall be less than 200
feet in width.
(d) Building Height and Area.
(1) No principal building or parts of a
principal building shall exceed 35 feet in
height.
(2) The minimum floor area of a principal
building shall be 750 square feet.
(e) Setback and Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building
setback of 80 feet from the right-of-way of
all streets.
(2) There shall be a side yard on each side
of all buildings not less than 50 feet in
width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less
than 50 feet.
(15) C Conservancy District.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) Fishing.
(2) Hunting.
(3) Preservation of scenic, historic and
scientific areas.
(4) Public fish hatcheries.
(5) Soil and water conservation.
(6) Sustained yield forestry.
(7) Stream bank and lake shore protection.
(8) Water retention.
(9) Wildlife preserves.
(b) Conditional Uses. See Section 12.06.
(c) Structures. None permitted except accessory
to the principal or conditional use.
(16) S-O Shoreland Protection Overlay District. The
shoreland protection overlay district is intended to provide for
orderly development of shorelands in the Village of Paddock Lake
while providing for the preservation of shore cover and
furthering the aesthetic appearance of the shoreline. The
district includes all lands within 100 feet of the highwater mark
of any navigable lake, pond, or stream within the Village.
(a) Permitted Uses. Any use permitted in the
underlying basic use district.
(b) Conditional Uses. See Section 12.06.
(c) Lot Areas and Width. Lot area and width
shall conform to that required in the underlying
basic use district.
(d) Building Height and Area. Building height
and area shall conform to the requirements of the
underlying basic use district.
(e) Setback and Yards. All buildings shall
conform to the setback and yard requirements of
the underlying district.
(f) Special Regulations.
(1) No building except boathouses and piers
in the shoreland protection overlay district
shall be located closer than 50 feet to the
highwater mark of a navigable lake, pond, or
stream.
(2) To preserve the scenic beauty of
shorelands, to control erosion, and to reduce
nutrient flow from the shorelands, the
following shore cover regulations shall be
enforced in the shoreland protection overlay
district:
(a) No more than 30 percent of the
vegetative cover in the shoreland
protection overlay district shall be
clear cut.
(b) Cutting of this 30 percent shall
not create in a clear cut opening in the
district greater than 30 feet wide for
every 100 feet of shoreline.
(c) In the remaining 70 percent,
cutting shall leave sufficient cover to
screen cars, dwelling and accessory
structures as seen from the water; and
preserve natural beauty and control
erosion.
(d) These provisions shall not apply to
the removal of dead, diseased or dying
trees at the discretion of the property
owner; or to silvicultural thinning upon
recommendation of a forester.
(3) Filling and grading in the shoreland
protection overlay district shall be
permitted only after the granting of a
conditional use permit by the Village of
Paddock Lake Plan Commission. In addition,
filling or grading which exposes more than
ten thousand (10,000) square feet of the bank
of a navigable body of water shall require a
permit from the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) pursuant to §30.19 of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
(4) Filling and grading existing beaches in
the shoreland protection overlay district for
the purpose of maintenance of existing
beaches to their previous historical
condition and grade shall be permitted upon
the issuance of a permit by the Building
Inspector. Requests for such permit shall
include a photograph of the existing beach.
A final photograph is required upon
completion of the maintenance, each
photograph to be submitted to the Building
Inspector.
(17) W Wastewater Treatment Plan District.
(a) The zoning classification of the property
described below is hereby changed from I-1
Institutional Public Service District, AA
Agricultural District, P Park and Recreation
District, and Rs-3 Single-Family Residential
District to W Wastewater Treatment Plant:
that area within five fundred (500) feet of
the boundaries of the proposed Wastewater
Treatment Addition to the Village of Paddock
Lake Sewage Disposal Plant and all remaining
property of the Village of Paddock Lake
Sewage Disposal Plant.
(b) This district is created to minimize any
potential odor, noise and nuisances caused by
sewage treatment facilities, and to isolate the
buildings occupied or intended for residential
use, and to prevent the development for such uses
of vacant land, all in accordance with
NR110.15(3)(d) of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code. The construction of commercial
establishments or residential structures shall be
prohibited, but this prohibition shall not apply
to the lots upon which are located commercial or
residential buildings at the time of the adoption
of this ordinance. Property in such district may
be used for industrial (excluding extractive,
primary and process manufacturing), public park,
forestry or open air recreation purposes when no
residences or commercial establishments are
erected.
(c) This ordinance shall take effect from and
after the date of its passage and publication as
provided by law and the Zoning Administrator is
hereby directed to make the necessary changes to
the zoning map forthwith.
(18) Wet - Wetland Protection Overlay District.
(a) The shoreland-wetland zoning district
includes all wetlands in the municipality which
are five (5) acres or more and are made a part of
this ordinance and which are:
(1) Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the
ordinary high-water mark of navigable lakes,
ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages
in the municipality shall be presumed to be
navigable if they are shown on the United
States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or
other zoning base maps which have been
incorporated by reference and made a part of
this ordinance.
(2) Within three hundred (300) feet of the
ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers
or streams, or to the landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be
navigable if they are designated as either
continuous or intermittent waterways on the
United States Geological Survey quadrangle
maps or other zoning base maps which have
been incorporated by reference and made a
part of this ordinance. Floodplain zoning
maps adopted in §12.05(2) shall be used to
determine the extent of floodplain areas.
(b) Determinations of navigability and ordinary
high-water mark location shall initially be made
by the Building Inspector. When questions arise,
the Building Inspector shall contact the
appropriate district office of the Department of
Natural Resources for a final determination of
navigability or ordinary high-water mark.
(c) When an apparent discrepancy exists between
the wetland district boundary shown on the
official zoning maps and actual field conditions
at the time the maps were adopted, the Building
Inspector shall contact the appropriate district
office of the Department of Natural Resources to
determine if the wetland district boundary as
mapped, is in error. If Department staff concur
with the Building Inspector that a particular area
was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Building
Inspector shall have the authority to immediately
grant or deny a zoning permit in accordance with
the regulations applicable to the correct zoning
district.
(d) Wetlands which are filled prior to January
27, 1988, the date on which the municipality
received "FINAL" Wetland Inventory Maps, in a
manner which affects their wetland characteristics
to the extent that the area can no longer be
defined as wetland, are not subject to this
ordinance.
(e) Wetlands located between the original
ordinary high water mark and a bulkhead line
established prior to May 7, 1982 under §30.11,
Stats., are not subject to this ordinance.
(f) Permitted uses. The following uses are
permitted subject to the provisions of chapters 30
and 31, Wis. Stats., and the provisions of other
local, state and federal laws, if applicable:
Activities and uses which do not require the
issuance of a zoning permit, provided that no
wetland alteration occurs:
(1) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting,
swimming, snowmobiling and boating;
(2) The harvesting of wild crops, such as
marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries,
tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that
is not injurious to the natural reproduction
of such crops;
(3) The practice of silviculture, including
the planting, thinning and harvesting of
timber;
(4) The pasturing of livestock;
(5) The cultivation of agricultural crops;
and
(6) The construction and maintenance of duck
blinds.
(g) Uses which do not require the issuance of a
zoning permit and which may involve wetland
alterations only to the extent specifically
provided below:
(1) The practice of silviculture, including
limited temporary water level stabilization
measures which are necessary to alleviate
abnormally wet or dry conditions that would
have an adverse impact on the conduct of
silvicultural activities if not corrected;
(2) The cultivation of cranberries,
including limited wetland alterations
necessary for the purpose of growing and
harvesting cranberries;
(3) The maintenance and repair of existing
drainage systems to restore pre-existing
levels of drainage, including the minimum
amount of filling necessary to dispose of
dredged spoil, provided that the filling is
otherwise permissible and that dredged spoil
is placed on existing spoil banks where
possible;
(4) The construction and maintenance of
fences for the pasturing of livestock,
including limited excavating and filling
necessary for such construction or
maintenance;
(5) The construction and maintenance of
piers, docks, walkways, observation decks and
trail bridges built on pilings, including
limited excavating and filling necessary for
such construction or maintenance;
(6) The installation and maintenance of
sealed tiles for the purpose of draining
lands outside the wetland zoning district
provided that such installation or
maintenance is done in manner designed to
minimize adverse impacts upon the natural
functions of the wetlands; and
(7) The maintenance, repair, replacement and
reconstruction of existing highways and
bridges, including limited excavating and
filling necessary for such maintenance,
repair, replacement or reconstruction.
(h) Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a
zoning permit and which may include wetland
alterations only to the extent specifically
provided below:
(1) The construction and maintenance of
roads which are necessary for the continuity
of the municipal street system, the provision
of essential utility and emergency services
or to provide access to uses permitted under
this ordinance, provided that:
(a) The road cannot, as a practical
matter, be located outside the wetland;
(b) The road is designed and
constructed to minimize adverse impacts
upon the natural functions of the
wetland;
(c) The road is designed and
constructed with the minimum crosssectional
area practical to serve the
intended use;
(d) Road construction activities are
carried out in the immediate area of the
roadbed only; and
(e) Any wetland alteration must be
necessary for the construction or
maintenance of the road.
(2) The construction and maintenance of
nonresidential buildings provided that:
(a) The building is used solely in
conjunction with the use permitted in
the shoreland-wetland district or for
the raising of waterfowl, minnows or
other wetland or aquatic animals;
(b) The building cannot, as a practical
matter, be located outside the wetland;
(c) The building does not exceed five
hundred (500) square feet in floor area;
and
(d) Only limited filling and excavating
necessary to provide structural support
for the building is allowed.
(3) The establishment and development of
public and private parks and recreation
areas, outdoor education areas, historic,
natural and scientific areas, game refuges
and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat
improvement projects, game bird and animal
farms, wildlife preserves and public boat
launching ramps, provided that:
(a) Any private development allowed
under this paragraph shall be used
exclusively for the permitted purpose;
(b) Only limited filling and excavating
necessary for the development of public
boat launching ramps, swimming beaches
or the construction of park shelters or
similar structures is allowed;
(c) The construction and maintenance of
roads necessary for the uses permitted
under this paragraph are allowed only
where such construction and maintenance
meets the criteria of this ordinance;
and
(d) Wetland alterations in game refuges
and closed areas, fish and wildlife
habitat improvement projects, game bird
and animal farms and wildlife preserves
shall be for the purpose of improving
wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance
wetland values.
(4) The construction and maintenance of
electric and telephone transmission lines,
water and gas distribution lines and sewage
collection lines and related facilities and
the construction and maintenance of railroad
lines provided that:
(a) The utility transmission and
distribution facilities and railroad
lines cannot, as a practical matter, be
located outside the wetland;
(b) Only limited filling or excavating
necessary for such construction or
maintenance is allowed; and
(c) Such construction or maintenance is
done in a manner designed to minimize
adverse impacts upon the natural
functions of the wetland.
(i) The lawful use of a building, structure or
property which existed at the time this ordinance,
or an applicable amendment to this ordinance, took
effect and which is not in conformity with the
provisions of the ordinance, including the routine
maintenance of such a building or structure, may
be continued, subject to the following conditions
(1) The wetland provisions of this ordinance
authorized by §61.351, Wis. Stats., shall not
limit the repair, reconstruction, renovation,
remodeling or expansion of a nonconforming
structure or of any environmental control
facility related to such a structure in
existence on the effective date of the
wetland provisions. All other modifications
to nonconforming structures are subject to
§62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., which limits total
lifetime structural repairs and alterations
to fifty (50%) percent of current fair market
value.
(2) If a nonconforming use or the use of a
nonconforming structure is discontinued for
twelve (12) consecutive months, any future
use of the building, structure or property
shall conform to this ordinance.
(3) Any legal nonconforming use of property
which does not involve the use of a structure
and which existed at the time of the adoption
or subsequent amendment of this ordinance
adopted under §61.351 or §62.231, Wis.
Stats., may be continued although such use
does not conform with the provisions of the
ordinance. However, such nonconforming use
may not be extended.
(4) The maintenance and repair of
nonconforming boathouses which are located
below the ordinary high-water mark of any
navigable waters shall comply with the
requirements of §30.121, Wis. Stats.
(5) Uses which are nuisances under common
law shall not be permitted to continue as
nonconforming uses.
(19) PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District.
(a) Primary Purpose and Characteristics. The
Village Board of Trustees has determined that
§62.23(7)(b), Wis. Stats., grants the Board
authority to create “planned development
districts" as granted to cities pursuant to
§62.23(7)(b), Wis. Stats. The PUD Planned Unit
Development Overlay District, set forth herein, is
intended to permit developments that will, over a
period of time, be enhanced by coordinated area
site planning and diversified location of
structures. Such developments are intended to
provide a safe and efficient system for pedestrian
and vehicle traffic; to provide attractive
recreation and open spaces as integral parts of
the developments; to enable economic design in the
location of public and private utilities and
community facilities; and to ensure adequate
standards of construction and planning. The PUD
Overlay District under this Ordinance will allow
for flexibility of ov6rall development design with
benefits from such design flexibility intended to
be derived by both the developer and the
community, while at the same time maintaining
insofar as possible the land use density and other
standards or use requirements set forth in the
underlying basic zoning district. The unified and
planned development of a site in a single or
corporate ownership or control or in common
ownership under the Unit Ownership Act set forth
in Chapter 703 of the Wisconsin Statutes
(condominiums) may be permitted by the Village
Board upon specific petition under this section of
the ordinance and after public hearing with such
development encompassing one (1) or more principle
uses or structures and related accessory uses or
structures when all regulations and standards as
set forth in this section of the ordinance have
been met.
(b) Planned Unit Development Overlay District
(PUD). So as to ensure a maximum benefit to both
the community and to developers and so as to
provide for flexibility in planning in all the
districts created under this ordinance except for
the A-1, R-l, R-2, R-3, S-0, I-1, and WET
districts, there is hereby created the Planned
Unit Development Overlay District.
(c) Principal, Accessory and Conditional Uses.
Principal, accessory and conditional uses
permitted in a Planned Unit Development Overlay
District shall conform to uses permitted in the
underlying basic use district. Individual
structures shall comply with the specific building
area and height requirements of the underlying
basic use district. All open space and parking
requirements of the underlying basic use district
shall be complied with either individually or by
providing the combined open space and parking
space required for the entire development in one
(1) or more locations within the development.
(d) Ownership. Areas designated as PUD Overlay
Districts shall be under single or corporate
ownership or control at the time of their
creation.
(e) Minimum Area Requirements. Areas designated
as PUD Overlay Districts shall contain a minimum
development area of:
Principal Uses Minimum Area of PUD
Residential Planned 10 acres
Unit Development
Commercial Planned 10 acres
Unit Development
Industrial Planned 40 acres
Unit Development
(f) Minimum Sanitary Sewer Requirements. All
Planned Unit Developments shall be on a public
sanitary sewer system except in the A-2 district
which may be serviced by private sanitary disposal
systems.
(g) Pre-petition Conference and General Lay-out
Conceptional Plan. Prior to the official
submission of the petition for the approval of a
Planned Unit Development Overlay District, the
owner or his agent making such petition shall meet
with the Building Inspector to discuss the scope
and proposed nature of the contemplated
development and data and other information as
deemed appropriate and pertinent for presentation
to the committee. At the pre-petition conference,
the owner or agent shall present a general lay-out
conceptional plan including drawings and sketches
of the proposed development and figures or
calculations that are pertinent to the development
using as a general guideline the requirements sot
forth in subsection 2a-n of this section.
(h) Petition. Following the pre-petition
conference, the owner or his agent may file a
petition with the Village Building Inspector for
approval of a Planned Unit Development Overlay
District. The petition shall be treated as a
conceptual plan review pursuant to Section
38.03(c) of the Village Ordinances. Such petition
shall be accompanied by any review fees required
by these ordinances as well es the following
information:
(1) A statement which sets forth the
relationship of the proposed Planned Unit
Development to any existing or proposed
master plans or any adopted component
thereof, and the general character of and the
uses to be included in the proposed Planned
Unit Development including the following
information:
(a) Total area to he included in the
Planned Unit Development, area of open
space, residential density computations,
proposed number of dwelling units,
population analysis, availability of or
requirements for municipal services and
any other similar data pertinent to a
comprehensive evaluation of the proposed
development.
(b) A general summary of the estimated
value of structures and site improvement
costs, including landscaping and special
features of common open spaces.
(c) A general outline of the
organizational structure of a property
owner's association, which may be
proposed to be established for the
purpose of providing any necessary
private services or maintenance of
common open spaces.
(d) Any proposed departures from the
standards of development as set forth in
the Village zoning ordinances or
regulations or administrative rules.
(e) The expected date of commencement,
schedule of development by phases, and
completion of physical development as
set forth in the proposal.
(2) A detailed development site plan
including:
(a) A survey and legal description of
the boundaries of the subject property
included in the proposed Planned Unit
Development and its relationship to
surrounding properties prepared by a
land surveyor registered by the State of
Wisconsin.
(b) The location of public and private
roads, driveways, and parking
facilities.
(c) The size, arrangement, and location
of any individual building sites and
proposed building groups on each
individual site.
(d) The location of institutional,
recreational, and open space areas and
areas reserved or dedicated for public
uses, including schools, parks, and
drainageways.
(e) The type, size, and location of all
structures.
(f) General landscape treatment.
(g) Architectural plans, elevation, and
perspective drawings and sketches
illustrating the design and character of
the proposed structures.
(h) The existing and proposed location
of public sanitary sewer and water
supply facilities.
(i) The existing and proposed location
of all private utilities or other
easements.
(j) The characteristics of soils
related to contemplated specific uses.
(k) Existing topography on the site
with contours at no greater than two (2)
foot intervals.
(l) Detail storm-water drainage plans
prepared by a professional engineer
registered by the State of Wisconsin.
(m) Anticipated uses of adjoining lands
in regard to roads, surface water
drainage, and compatibility with
existing adjacent land uses.
(n) Any other data or information
requested at the pre-petition
conference.
(i) Referral to Plan Commission. The petition
and detailed site plan for a Planned Unit
Development Overlay District shall be referred to
the Village’s Plan Commission for its review and
recommendation, which may include any additional
conditions or restrictions which it may deem
necessary or appropriate. Following such review,
the petition and recommendation shall be forwarded
to the Village Board for similar review and
recommendations.
(j) Public Hearing. The Plan Commission before
formulating its recommendations to the Village
Board shall hold a public hearing Pursuant to the
requirements of Section 12.38 of this ordinance.
Notice for such hearing shall include reference to
the development plans filed in conjunction with
the requested Planned Unit Development Overlay
District.
(k) Basis for Petition Approval.
(1) The Plan Commission in making its
recommendation to the Village Board and the
Village Board in making its determination,
shall find:
(a) That the petitioners for the
proposed Planned Unit Development
Overlay District have indicated that
they intend to begin the physical
development of the Planned Unit
Development within twelve (12) months
following the approval of the petition
and that the development will be carried
out according to a reasonable
construction schedule satisfactory to
the Village.
(b) That the proposed Planned Unit
Development Overlay District is
consistent in all respects to the
purpose of this section and to the
spirit and intent of this ordinance; is
in conformity with any existing or
proposed adopted master plans or any
adopted components thereof; and, that
the development would not be contrary to
the general welfare and economic
prosperity of the community.
(c) The Plan Commission in making its
recommendations and the Village Board in
making its determination shall further
find that:
(1) The proposed site is provided
with adequate drainage facilities
for surface and storm waters.
(2) The proposed site is
accessible from public roads that
are adequate to carry the traffic
that can be expected to be
generated by the proposed
development.
(3) No undue constraint or burden
will be imposed on public services
and facilities, such as, but not
limited to, fire and police
protection, street maintenance, and
maintenance of public areas by the
proposed development.
(4) The streets and driveways on
the site of the proposed
development are adequate to serve
the proposed development and do
meet the minimum standards of all
applicable ordinances or
administrative regulations of the
state of Village, whichever is more
restrictive.
(5) The entire tract or parcel of
land to be included in a Planned
Unit Development Overlay District
is held under single ownership, or
if there is more than one (1)
owner, the petition for such
Planned Unit Development Overlay
District is considered as one (1)
tract, lot or parcel and the legal
description defines said Planned
Unit Development as a single
parcel, lot or tract and is jointly
petitioned by the several owners.
This requirement shall not be
deemed to prevent further divisions
of the land after creation of the
Planned Unit Development Overlay
District provided that all further
divisions are in accordance with
the restrictions placed on the
particular Planned Unit
Development.
(d) That in the case of a proposed
residential Planned Unit Development
Overlay District:
(1) Such development creates an
attractive residential environment
of sustained desirability and
economic stability, including
structures in relation to terrain,
consideration of safe pedestrian
flow, ready access to recreational
space, and coordination with
overall plans for the Village.
(2) The Residential Planned Unit
Development project is limited to
development types as hereinafter
set forth:
(a) Cluster developments,
attached single-family
dwellings, town-houses, and
condominiums are permitted in
the Rd-1 district but shall
not exceed two (2) dwelling
units per structure.
(b) Cluster developments,
townhouses, and condominiums
are permitted in the Rm-1
district, but shall not exceed
four (4) dwelling units per
structure.
(c) Cluster developments,
townhouses, and condominiums
are permitted in the Rm-2
district, in which case, the
county planning and zoning
committee may set limits on
structural size and number of
units in each structure.
(3) Provision has been made for
the installation of adequate public
facilities and the continuing
maintenance and operation of such
facilities.
(4) Provision has been made for
adequate, continuing fire and
police protection.
(5) The population composition of
the development will not have an
adverse effect upon the individual
town's capacity to provide needed
school or other municipal service
facilities.
(6) Adequate guarantee is provided
for permanent preservation of open
space areas as shown on the
approved site plan either by
private reservation and maintenance
or by dedication to the public.
(e) That in the case of a proposed
commercial Planned Unit Development
Overlay District:
(1) The economic practicality of
the proposed development can be
justified.
(2) The proposed development will
be adequately served by off-street
parking and truck service
facilities.
(3) The proposed development is
adequately provided with and does
not impose any undue burden on
public services and facilities such
as fire and police protection,
street maintenance, and maintenance
of public areas.
(4) The locations for entrances
and exits have been designated to
prevent unnecessary interference
with the safe and efficient
movement of traffic on surrounding
streets, and that the development
will not create an adverse effect
upon the general traffic pattern of
the surrounding neighborhood.
(5) The architectural design,
landscaping, control of lighting,
and general site development will
result in an attractive and
harmonious service area compatible
with and not adversely affecting
the property values of the
surrounding neighborhood or area.
(f) That in the case of a proposed
industrial Planned Unit Development
Overlay District:
(1) The operational character,
physical plant arrangement, and
architectural design of buildings
will be compatible with the latest
in performance standards and
industrial development design and
will not result in adverse affects
upon the property values of the
surrounding neighborhood.
(2) The proposed development will
be adequately provided with and
will not impose any undue burden,
on public services and facilities,
such as, but not limited to, fire
and police protection, street
maintenance, and maintenance of
public areas.
(3) The proposed development will
include adequate provisions for
off-street parking and truck
service areas and will be
adequately served by rail and/or
arterial highway facilities.
(4) The proposed development is
properly related to the total
transportation system of the
community and will not result in an
adverse effect on the safety and
efficiency of the public streets.
(l) Determination. The Village Board, after due
consideration, may deny the petition, approve the
petition as submitted, or approve the petition
subject to additional conditions and restrictions.
The approval of a Planned Unit Development Overlay
District shall be based upon and include as
conditions thereto adherence to the building,
site, and operational plans for the development as
approved by the Village Board.
(m) Changes and Additions. Any subsequent change
or addition to the plans or uses shall first be
submitted for approval to the designated Building
Inspector and the Plan Commission and if in the
opinion of either such change or addition
constitutes a substantial alteration of the
original plan, a public hearing before the Plan
Commission shall be required and notice thereof
shall be given pursuant to the provisions of these
ordinances, and said proposed alterations shall be
submitted to the Village Board for approval.
(n) Subsequent Land Division. The division of
any land or lands within a Planned Unit
Development Overlay District for the purpose of
change or conveyance of ownership shall be
accomplished pursuant to the land division
regulations of the Village and the State of
Wisconsin.
(o) Failure to begin development if no
substantial construction has commenced or no use
established in the Planned Unit Development
District within the time schedule submitted to the
Village Board, the Building Inspector shall
petition the Village Board for the purpose of
rescinding the planned unit development overlay
designation so as to allow the land in question to
revert to its underlying zone. The procedures set
forth in this ordinance, relating to the amendment
of this ordinance shall be adhered to in its
discretion and for good cause, the Village Board
may extend for a reasonable period of time, not to
exceed one year, the period for the beginning of
construction or the establishment of a use. If the
Planned Unit Development Overlay District is
rescinded, the Building Inspector shall remove
said district from the official zoning map. Those
zoning regulations applicable before the creation
of said district shall then be in effect and no
vested rights in the Planned Unit Development
Overlay District shall be deemed to have accrued.
(20) A-2 Equine Agricultural District. The A-2
District is intended to preserve rural landscape character while
allowing for individual residences in conjunction with
agricultural activities, including horse farming, hobby farming,
orchards, and other activities typically associated with rural
surroundings.
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) General farming, apiculture,
floriculture, forestry, grazing, greenhouses
(not including retail sales of flowers and
plants), horticulture, plant nurseries,
orchards, raising of grain, grass, mint, seed
crops, tree fruits, nuts and berries,
vegetables, paddocks, pasturage, stables, and
viticulture.
(2) One (1) single-family dwelling.
(3) Accessory buildings, including detached
garages, pole barns, sheds, gazebos, pool
houses, playhouses, pergolas, barns, horse
stables, indoor riding arenas, storage
buildings and windmills.
(4) Equestrian trails, pastures, paddocks,
feed lots, roadside stand for selected farm
products produced on the premises, not to
exceed three hundred (300) square feet in
size.
(5) Home occupations and professional home
offices including, but not limited to:
(a) Accountant, architect.
(b) Artist, photographer, potter,
sculptor.
(c) Author.
(d) Doctor, dentist.
(e) Dressmaker, seamstress.
(f) Home daycare (three children or
less not related to principal resident).
(g) Insurance salesman.
(h) Lawyer.
(i) Minister.
(j) Music and dance teacher.
(k) Real estate sales.
(6) Swimming pools and spas.
(7) Fences suitable for agricultural, equine
or residential use.
(8) Keeping of large and small farm animals
as follows:
(a) Definitions.
(1) Large farm animals–horses,
donkeys, ponies, llamas, alpacas or
cows.
(2) Small farm animals–sheep and,
goats.
(3) Caged farm animals–rabbits.
(b) Limits on numbers of animals:
(1) Large farm animals shall be
limited to three (3) per acre.
(2) Small farm animals shall be
limited to four (4) per acre.
(3) Caged farm animals shall be
limited to one (1) per two thousand
(2,000) square feet.
(9) Keeping of domestic animals–dogs and
cats not more than three (3) each.
(b) Conditional Uses.
(1) Living quarters for farm caretakers (not
to exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet).
(2) Kennels.
(3) Indoor storage of recreational vehicles,
boats or snowmobiles.
(4) Utility substation.
(5) Wind energy conversion system.
(6) Bed and Breakfast establishments.
(7) Agri-tourism.
(8) Borrow pits (temporary); stockpiling of
filling of clean fill materials.
(9) Keeping of domestic animals. No
domestic animal, other than dogs or cats (no
more than three (3) each) may be kept or
housed without a conditional use permit which
shall be issued as follows:
(a) Definitions.
(1) Large animals in excess of
three (3) per acre–horses, donkeys,
ponies, llamas, alpacas or cows.
(2) Small animals in excess of
four (4) per acre–sheep, goats; no
fowl.
(3) Caged animals (rabbits) in
excess of one (1) per two thousand
(2,000) square.
(4) 4-H project animals
(temporary, limited duration).
(10) The conditions listed in Section
12.06(16)(a) of these ordinances.
(c) Lot Area and Width. No parcels in the Equine
Agricultural District shall be less than three (3)
acres in size. No parcel shall be less than an
average of one hundred fifty (150) feet in width,
except parcels fronting on a cul-de-sac.
(d) Building Height and Area.
(1) No principal building or parts of a
principal building shall exceed thirty-five
(35) feet in height with the exception of
cupolas, spires, domes, chimney, flues or
other architectural features.
(2) The minimum floor area of a principal
single-family dwelling building shall be one
thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet.
(3) Accessory building area, excluding the
principal residence, not to exceed ten (10%)
percent of total parcel area on parcels of
five (5) acres or less and not to exceed
fifteen (15%) percent of total parcel area on
parcels greater than five (5) acres.
(e) Accessory structures. Structures sheltering
animals shall have eave depth and/or gutter
systems as necessary for diverting watershed away
from structure foundation.
(f) Setback and Yards.
(1) There shall be a minimum building
setback of fifty (50) feet from the right-ofway
of all streets.
(2) There shall be a side yard on each side
of all buildings not less than twenty-five
(25) feet.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less
than thirty (30) feet.
(g) Authorized Sanitary Sewer System.
(1) On-site sewerage disposal absorption
system.
(2) Public sanitary sewer.
(21) RESERVED.
(22) RESERVED.
(23) RESERVED.
(24) RESERVED.
(25) RESERVED.
(26) RESERVED.
(27) AD-1 Adult Oriented Business Zoning Overlay
District.
(a) Recitals.
(1) The Village is experiencing increasing
growth pressure from Lake County, Illinois to
the south and from the City of Kenosha to the
east. The Village needs to accommodate the
orderly and logical growth and development,
particularly as it relates to its business
district which, generally, borders along STH
“50". The Village is beginning the process
of reviewing and possibly amending its zoning
ordinances and its comprehensive plan
pursuant to Section 66.1001 of the Wisconsin
Statutes (the “Planning Process”).
(2) Existing Village land use policies may
allow new development or the intensification
of existing development in the Village that
may hamper and curtail the effectiveness of
the planning process before it can be
completed by the Village. There is a
recognition on the part of the Village that
although adult oriented business development
may have a place in the Village, that the
location of such types of businesses may be
incompatible with other types of businesses
such that careful planning must occur in
determining where an adult oriented business
overlay district would properly be located so
as to be compatible with other present uses
in the Village.
(3) The planning process will be completed
in approximately twelve (12) months.
(4) A temporary stay on the acceptance,
review and approval of any request to locate
an adult oriented business within the Village
will provide the Village with the opportunity
to complete the planning process.
(5) That if there were no temporary stay,
hasty and ill-conceived development may occur
during the planning process because
landowners and developers may seek to rush
their projects in order to gain approval
before the planning process can be completed
by the Village.
(6) The Village Plan Commission, after
consideration, has recommended the adoption
of the following ordinance.
(7) Subsequent to a Class “3" published
notice, a public hearing was held on the 5th
day of September, 2007, regarding the
adoption of this temporary stay.
(8) The Village Board believes that the
adoption of this temporary stay of review of
any request for the location of an adult
oriented business within the Village will
promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the Village and encourage the
orderly layout and use of land throughout the
Village.
(9) Now, therefore, the Village Board of the
Village of Paddock Lake, Kenosha County,
Wisconsin, does hereby ordain as follows:
(b) Temporary moratorium on granting of adult
oriented business uses. There is hereby
established a temporary stay on the acceptance,
review and approval by Village officials, staff or
consultants of any applications for approval of
the location of adult-oriented businesses received
by the Village after the effective date of this
ordinance.
(c) Duration. This temporary stay shall expire
twelve (12) months after its effective date,
unless an earlier or later date is subsequently
adopted.
(d) Inconsistent ordinances voided. All
ordinances or provisions of ordinances
inconsistent with or contravening the provisions
of this ordinance are hereby temporarily voided
and shall have no legal force or effect during the
period that this ordinance is in effect.
(e) Scope. This temporary stay applies
throughout the corporate limits of the Village of
Paddock Lake.
(f) Severability. If any section or part of this
ordinance is adjudged to be unconstitutional,
unlawful, or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall
not be affected thereby.
(g) Effective date. This ordinances shall become
effective upon adoption and publication or
posting, as is provided by law.
12.06 CONDITIONAL USE.
(1) Purpose. A conditional use, as used in this
Ordinance is designed to be a flexibility device designed to cope
with situations where a particular use, although not inherently
inconsistent with the use classification of a particular
district, could create special problems and hazards if allowed to
develop and locate as a matter of right in a particular district
and therefore is in need of special consideration. Often the
effects of these uses on the surrounding environment cannot be
foreseen until a specific site has been proposed. The nature,
character or circumstances of these uses are so unique or so
dependent upon specific contemporary conditions that
predetermination of permissibility by right or the detailing in
the Ordinance of all of the specific standards, regulations or
conditions necessary or appropriate to such permissibility is not
practicable, it being recognized that the Village is faced with
practical difficulties in defining with precision in advance the
conditions under which a conditional use permit will be granted,
(2) Intent. It is the intent of the Village Board of
Paddock Lake to allow the hereinafter designated conditional uses
within the areas designated by this Ordinance and only when the
conditions imposed thereon are met. Any condition so imposed as a
basis for granting the conditional use permit shall be binding on
all grantees, assignees, heirs, legatees, donees, transferees,
and trustees of the applicant,
(3) Permit. The Village Board of Paddock Lake may
authorize the Building Inspector to issue a conditional use
permit for conditional uses after review and a public hearing,
provided that such conditional uses and structures are in
accordance with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance and are
found to be not hazardous, harmful, offensive, or otherwise
adverse to the environment, or the value of the neighborhood or
the community.
(4) Application. Applications for conditional use
permits shall be in duplicate to the Building Inspector on forms
furnished by the Building Inspector and shall include the
following for proper review by the Village Plan Commission:
(a) The names and addresses of the applicant, the
owner of the site, architect, professional
engineer, contractor, and all opposite and
abutting property owners of record.
(b) A description of the subject site by lot,
block and recorded subdivision or by metes and
bounds; address of the subject site; type of
structure; proposed operation or use of the
structure or site; number of employees; and the
zoning district within which the subject site
lies.
(c) A plat of survey prepared by a registered
land surveyor showing all of the information
required under Section 12.03 for a zoning permit
and, in addition, the following: mean and historic
high water lines, on or within forty (40) feet of
the subject premises and existing and proposed
landscaping.
(d) Any additional information as may be required
by the Village Plan Commission, Village Board,
Zoning, Building or Health Inspectors.
(e) A fee receipt from the Village
Clerk/Treasurer in the amount of One Hundred
Twenty-five ($125.00) Dollars.
(5) Review and Approval. In making its decision to
approve or deny the application for a conditional use, the
Village Plan Commission shall take into consideration and review
the following:
(a) Site;
(b) Existing and proposed structures;
(c) Architectural plan;
(d) Neighboring uses;
(e) Parking areas;
(f) Driveway location;
(g) Highway access, traffic generation and
circulation;
(h) Drainage, sewerage and water systems;
(i) Proposed operation; and
(j) In addition to the aforementioned
considerations, the Village Plan Commission shall
require that:
(1) Any development within five hundred
(500) feet of the existing or proposed
rights-of-way of freeways, expressways,
interstate and controlled access traffic ways
and within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of
their existing or proposed interchange or
turning lane rights-of-way shall be
specifically reviewed by the highway agency
that has jurisdiction over the traffic way.
The Village Plan Commission shall request
such review and await the highway agency's
recommendations for a period not to exceed
sixty (60) days before taking final action;
and
(2) Conditions, such as landscaping,
architectural design, type of construction,
construction commencement and completion
dates, sureties, lighting, fencing, planting
screens, operational control, hours of
operation, improved traffic circulation, deed
restrictions, highway access restrictions,
increased yards, or parking requirements
shall be fulfilled upon a finding by the
Village Plan Commission that these conditions
are necessary to fulfill the purpose and
intent of this Ordinance.
(6) Recommendation. Upon completing the review of an
application for a conditional use permit, the Village Plan
Commission shall report its findings and recommendations to the
Village Board.
(7) Public Hearing. The Village Board shall hold a
public hearing upon each conditional use application recommended
by the Village Plan Commission, giving notice of the time, place,
and the change or amendment proposed.
(8) Village Board's Action.
(a) Following such hearing and after careful
considerations of the Village Plan Commission’s
recommendations, the Village Board may grant a
conditional use permit as applied for, grant the
conditional use permit with conditions deemed
appropriate by the Board, or deny the permit.
(b) Compliance with all other provisions of this
Ordinance such as lot width and area, yard,
height, parking, loading, traffic, highway access
and performance standards, and setback
requirements shall be required of all conditional
uses.
(c) A conditional use permit shall remain in
effect provided that the conditions of the permit
are continued in the manner specified by the
permit or until the expiration of the permit as
provided by its terms. In the event the permit
holder fails to comply with the conditions
specified in the permit, the same may be revoked
by the Village Board upon ten (10) day's notice to
the permit holder. The permit holder shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Village Plan
Commission on the question of revocation of the
conditional use permit and approval of the Village
Plan Commission shall be required for the
reinstatement of any conditional use permit.
(9) Public and Semi-Public Uses. The following public
and semi-public uses shall be conditional uses and may be
permitted as specified as follows and subject to any condition
set forth by the Village Board:
(a) Airports, airstrips and landing fields, in
the A-A Agricultural District.
(b) Governmental and cultural uses, such as fire
and police stations, community centers, libraries,
public emergency shelters, parks, playgrounds and
museums, in all residential, business, and Rm-1
Multiple Family Dwellings districts.
(c) Utilities in all districts.
(d) Public passenger transportation terminals,
such as heliports, bus and rail depots, except,
airports, airstrips, and landing fields, in all
Business Districts and the A-A Agricultural
District.
(e) Public, parochial, and private elementary and
secondary schools and churches in the Rs Single-
Family Residential Districts.
(f) Colleges; universities; hospitals;
sanatoriums; religious, charitable, penal and
correctional institutions; cemeteries and
crematories in the Rm-1 Multiple Family
Residential District.
(10) Residential Uses. The following residential and
quasi-residential uses shall be conditional uses and may be
permitted as specified as follows and subject to any condition
set forth by the Village Board:
(a) Planned residential developments, such as
cluster developments in the Rd-1 Two-Family
Residential District and garden apartments, row
housing and group housing in the Rm-1 Multiple
Family District. The district regulations may be
varied provided that adequate open space shall be
provided so that the average intensity and density
of land use shall be no greater than that
permitted for the district in which it is located.
The proper preservation, care and maintenance by
the original and all subsequent owners of the
exterior design; all common structures,
facilities, utilities, access and open spaces
shall be assured by deed restrictions enforceable
by the Village.
(b) Clubs, fraternities, lodges and meeting
places of a non-commercial nature, rest homes,
nursing homes, homes for the aged, clinics, and
children's nurseries in the Rm-1 Multiple Family
District, home occupations and professional
offices in the B-1 Community Business District.
(11) Highway Oriented Uses. The following commercial
uses shall be conditional uses and may be permitted as specified
as follows and subject to any condition set forth by the Village
Board:
(a) Drive-in theaters in the B-2 Integrated
Business District.
(b) Drive-in establishments serving food or
beverages for consumption outside the structure in
the B-1 Community Business District.
(c) Motels in the B-2 Integrated Business
District.
(d) Funeral homes in the Rm-1 Multiple Family
District, provided all principal structures and
uses are not less than those listed in Section
12.05(7) - Rm-1 Multiple Family Residential
District.
(e) Drive-in banks in the B-1 Community Business
District.
(f) Tourist homes in the Rm-1 Multiple Family
Residential District provided such district is
located on a state trunk or U.S. numbered highway.
(g) Vehicle sales, service washing and repair
stations, garages, taxi stands and public parking
lots, in the B-2 Integrated Business District.
(h) Tatoo/body piercing studios in the B-2
Integrated Business District but shall not be
located closer than one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet from the entrance of any church or
school and subject to any other condition set
forth by the Village Board.
(12) Industrial and Agricultural Uses. The following
industrial and agricultural uses shall be conditional uses and
may be permitted as specified as follows and subject to any
conditions set forth by the Village Board:
(a) Animal hospitals in the A-A Agricultural
District and M-1 Light Industry District.
(b) Commercial raising, propagation, boarding or
butchering of animals, such as dogs, mink,
rabbits, foxes, goats and pigs; the commercial
production of eggs; and the hatching, raising,
fattening or butchering of fowl in the A-A
Agricultural District. Pea vineries, creameries,
and condenseries in the A-A Agricultural District
or M-1 Light Industry District.
(c) Commercial service facilities such as
restaurants and fueling stations, in the M-1 Light
Industry District provided all such services are
physically and sales-wise oriented toward
industrial district users and employees and other
users are only incidental customers.
(13) Commercial Recreation Uses. Commercial recreation
facilities, such as arcades, bowling alleys, clubs, dance halls,
gymnasiums, miniature golf, physical culture, pool and billiard
halls, turkish baths, skating rinks, horseshoe pits, outdoor
volleyball courts and swimming pools are conditional uses and may
be permitted in the B-1 Integrated Business District and M-1
Light Industry Districts but subject to any condition set forth
by the Village Board.
(14) Existing Uses. All uses existing at the effective
date of this ordinance which would be classified as conditional
uses in the particular zoning district concerned if they were to
be established after the effective date of this ordinance, are
hereby declared to be conforming conditional uses to the extent
of the existing operation only. Any addition, alteration,
extension, repair or other proposed change in the existing
operation shall be subject to the conditional use procedures as
if such use were being established anew.
(15) Conditional Use Permit for Fences. As a complete
alternative to the process delineated in §§12.06(5), (6), (7) and
(8), above, and only in those instances where the applicant is
required to obtain a zoning permit under §12.04 for the
construction of a fence on a legally non-conforming lot
contiguous to the principal homestead of the applicant where, in
such circumstances, the applicant would otherwise be required to
combine the lot on which the applicant's homestead is located
with the contiguous lot upon which the applicant seeks to erect a
fence, then, and limited only to such circumstances, the
following procedure shall apply:
(a) The applicant shall complete an application
in accordance with §12.06(4)(a), (b), (c) and (d),
above, and shall be required to submit a review
fee in the sum of Fifty ($50.00) Dollars.
(b) The application shall be reviewed by the
Village Building Inspector who shall make a
recommendation to the standing committee on
Building and Zoning of the Board of Trustees,
after first considering the criteria contained in
§12.06(5)(a) through (j) of this ordinance. The
standing committee on Building and Zoning may
authorize the Building Inspector to issue a
conditional use permit for conditional uses after
review, provided that such conditional use is
limited to the purposes stated herein, are in
accordance with the purpose and intent of this
ordinance and are found not to be hazardous,
harmful, offensive, or otherwise adverse to the
environment, or the value of the neighborhood or
the community.
(c) Any conditional use permit issued hereunder
may be granted by the standing committee on
Building and Zoning of the Village Board without
further review and may be granted as applied for,
may be granted with conditions deemed appropriate
by such committee, or may be denied. Compliance
with all other provisions of this ordinance such
as lot width and area, yard, height, parking,
loading, traffic, highway access and performance
standards, and setback requirements shall be
required of all conditional uses. In addition to
any other requirements imposed by the committee on
Building and Zoning, any conditional use permit
granted hereunder shall remain in effect until
such time as the lot upon which such use is
located is sold, transferred, exchanged or
otherwise conveyed either by voluntary or
involuntary transfer at which time such structure
shall be removed from the lot unless the lot is
combined with a contiguous lot so as to create a
legally conforming lot.
(16) Special Event/Wedding Barns and Venues in the A-1
and A-2 Zoning Districts.
(a) Conditional Uses.
(1) This conditional use is for the
conversion of existing farm buildings or
construction of new buildings of a farm
rustic or similar style, and the use of
surrounding grounds for organized meeting
and/or reception space as a gathering place
for weddings, parties, and corporate events.
(2) The minimum parcel size shall be five
(5) acres.
(3) A two hundred (200) foot open buffer
shall be provided on all sides of the
property not abutting a public roadway.
Special event/commercial business activities
are not permitted within this buffer area.
Where possible, agricultural crops shall
remain or be grown in the buffer area, or
suitable landscaping, to maintain the
rural/agricultural character of the site.
(4) Buffer plantings shall be provided along
a property line where there is an abutting
residence and which are intended to screen
views, lights and noise from the operation.
Plantings shall be as specified in the
conditional use permit.
(5) Parcels shall have unobstructed frontage
along a paved public road for direct access.
(6) All ingress/egress and parking areas
shall be located in such a manner to minimize
traffic hazards associated with entering and
exiting the public roadway.
(7) Access drives on private easements are
not permitted.
(8) The increase in traffic generated by the
commercial activity shall not create a
nuisance to nearby residents by way of
traffic, noise or significant increases in
parking on public ways.
(9) Parking may be either gravel or paved as
determined by the Plan Commission.
Sufficient parking spaces to accommodate the
guest capacity of the events facility shall
be provided, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, with stormwater management
addressed. Overflow parking on grass or hay
areas is permissible.
(10) Parking areas of any type shall not be
located in the required buffer area or within
any other setback areas required by the
Zoning Code.
(11) Handicapped parking spaces shall be
paved and meet all State and Village
standards.
(12) Signage and site lighting shall comply
with Village ordinances. Lighting shall be
the minimum necessary to provide for site
safety and comply with ordinance standards.
Lighting shall be directed away from adjacent
properties.
(13) Structures shall meet Fire Code
standards and shall be inspected by the Fire
Inspector and Building Inspector prior to
occupancy.
(14) The display of fireworks on the site is
prohibited. Outdoor bonfires are allowed
only after prior written approval of the Fire
Inspector. The launching of fire kites is
prohibited.
(15) Amplified music and dancing are
permitted only within the barn structure as
part of the conditional use permit. Village
noise ordinances shall be complied with.
(16) Outside amplified music events are only
permitted by special permit from the Village
Zoning Administrator prior to each such event
permit.
(17) The sale and consumption of alcohol
beverages on the premises are subject to
Village licensing requirements. A license is
not required for events where alcohol
beverages are brought to the barn premises
and offered on a complimentary basis to
guests. The serving area for alcohol
beverages shall not exceed one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet.
(18) The following affiliated uses are
permitted on the site following issuance of
the required conditional use permit:
(a) Non-motorized playground equipment.
(b) Wagon, sleigh and hay rides.
(c) Animal displays, petting farms and
pony rides.
(d) An outdoor site for conducting
wedding ceremonies.
(e) Food preparation facilities to
support on-site activities.
(f) A gift shop area for the sale of
agricultural-related products or
agriculture-related products. The sale
of non-agricultural products (crafts,
antiques, clothing, etc.) is limited to
twenty-five (25%) percent of gross
facility sales. “Non-agriculturerelated
products” are items not
connected to agriculture or the farming
operation, such as imported knickknacks,
novelty t-shirts, etc.
(g) Seasonal outdoor mazes of
agricultural origin, such as of corn or
hay-straw bales design.
(19) Applicants for a conditional use permit
under this subsection shall provide the
following information at the time of
application.
(a) Ownership of the property.
(b) Months (seasons) of operation.
(c) Proposed hours/days of operation.
(d) Primary types of events to be
hosted; events which will not be hosted.
Included should be descriptions of
proposed affiliated activities such as
hay rides, petting farms, bonfires, etc.
(e) The size of the barn facility and
guest capacity, including a floor plan
of the barn and other areas/structures
to be utilized.
(f) A site plan for the entire parcel,
including ingress/egress and parking
areas and capacity.
(g) The anticipated number of events
per year.
(h) The maximum number of attendees per
event.
(i) Number of full-time and part-time
employees.
(j) Provision of permanent restroom
facilities.
(k) Location of refuse and recycling
receptacles and method of disposal.
(l) Proposed signage.
(m) Proposed lighting plan.
(n) Use of music at the facility,
including types of sound amplification.
(o) Temporary structures or tents to be
used in association with events.
(p) Insurance coverage.
(q) Any other documentation required by
the Zoning Administrator.
(b) Fees. Annual permit fee of One Thousand
($1,000.00) Dollars for a permit granted under
this Section 12.06(16). License year shall be
March 1 to February 28 and shall be reviewed
annually.
(c) Severability. If any provision of this
ordinance is invalid or unconstitutional or if the
application of this ordinance to any person or
circumstance is invalid or constitutional, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect
the other provisions or applications of this
ordinance which can be given effect without the
invalid or unconstitutional provisions or
applications.
12.07 MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
(1) Height Exceptions. The following structures or
parts thereof are allowed to exceed the height limitations set
forth in the several districts as set forth in this ordinance
unless restrictions are provided pursuant to the issuance of a
conditional use permit, but such modifications shall be in accord
with the following:
(a) Architectural Projections. Spires, belfries,
steeples, parapet walls, cupolas, domes, chimneys
and flues are exempt from the height limitations
of this ordinance.
(b) Special Structures. Elevator penthouses, gas
tanks, grain elevators, radio and television
receiving antennas, manufacturing equipment and
necessary mechanical appurtenances, cooling
towers, fire towers, substations and smoke stacks,
are exempt from the height limitations of this
ordinance, provided, however, that said structure
shall not exceed in height three (3) times their
distance from the nearest lot line.
(c) Essential Services. Utility pools, water
towers, electric power and communication and
transmission lines are exempt from the height
limitations of this ordinance.
(d) Agricultural Structures. Barns, silos, and
windmills, shall not exceed in height twice their
distance from the nearest lot line.
(e) Public or Semi-public Facilities. Schools,
churches, hospitals, monuments, sanatariums,
libraries and governmental offices and stations,
may be erected to a height of sixty (60) feet,
provided all required yards are increased not less
than one (1) foot for each foot the structure
exceeds the district’s maximum height requirement.
(2) Yards. The following structures or parts thereof
shall be allowed to project into or to be constructed in a
required yard within the area otherwise prohibited by a building
yard line unless restrictions are provided pursuant to the
issuance of a conditional use permit under this Ordinance:
(a) Uncovered Stairs. Uncovered stairs, landings
and fire escapes may project into any yard but not
to exceed six (6) feet and not closer than three
(3) feet to any lot line.
(b) Architectural Projections. Architectural
projections, such as chimneys, flues, sills,
eaves, belt courses and ornaments, may project
into any required yard, but such projection shall
not exceed two (2) feet.
(c) Residential Fences. No person shall install,
construct or erect in a residential district a
solid fence, which fence shall be greater than
three (3) feet in height along the front street or
any side street of said property, except that a
chain link fence or any open, woven wire fence may
be four (4) feet in height along the street side
or side street of a residential property.
(d) Side Yard Fences. Side yard fences not
adjacent to a street shall not exceed a height of
three (3) feet in the case of a solid fence or
four (4) feet in the case of a chain link or open,
woven wire fence in front of the setback line for
the residential district as set forth in the
zoning ordinances. Fences to the rear of such
setback lines may, upon written approval of
adjoining land owners and the Building Inspector,
be erected to a height of six (6) feet. No person
shall plant or maintain a hedge row, shrubs, or
other plantings which serve as a fence or barrier
in excess of those heights set forth in this
Section.
(e) Security Fences. No person shall install,
erect or maintain an electrically charged fence or
a fence made of barbed wire or of any sharp
pointed material as a fence or fencing materials
in a residential district. Security fences are
permitted on the property lines in all districts,
except residential districts, but shall not exceed
ten (10) feet in height and shall be of an open
type similar to woven wire or wrought iron
fencing.
(f) Accessory Uses. For purposes of this
Ordinance accessory structures shall include
detached garages. Accessory uses and accessory
structures may modify yard requirements in the
following manner:
(1) Accessory uses and detached accessory
structures one hundred fifty (150) square
feet or less in area may be located only in a
side yard or rear yard provided that they are
at least ten (10) feet from a principal
structure; at least four (4) feet from any
lot line; not intended for human habitation
or animal shelter; and shall not exceed
sixteen (16) feet in height. The four (4)
foot setback requirement of the Village of
Paddock Lake Building Code does not apply to
accessory structures which are one hundred
fifty (150) square feet or less in area.
(2) Detached accessory structures between
one hundred fifty-one (151) square feet and
seven hundred twenty (720) square feet in
area may be located only in a side yard or
rear yard provided that they are at least ten
(10) feet from a principal structure; at
least five (5) feet from the lot line; and
not intended for human habitation or animal
shelter; and shall not exceed sixteen (16)
feet in height. The four (4) foot setback
requirement of the Village of Paddock Lake
Building Code does not apply to accessory
structures which are one hundred fifty (150)
square feet or less in area.
(3) Detached accessory structures greater
than seven hundred twenty (720) square feet
in area, but no greater than one thousand two
hundred square (1,200) feet in area, may be
located only in a side yard or rear yard provided
that they are at least ten (10) feet
from a principal structure; at least ten (10)
feet from any lot line; not intended for
human habitation or animal shelter; and shall
not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. The
four (4) foot setback requirement of the
Village of Paddock Lake Building Code does
not apply to detached accessory structures
between seven hundred twenty (720) square
feet and one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet in area. Furthermore, detached
accessory structures greater than seven
hundred twenty (720) square feet in area may
be located in the following zoning districts:
R-1 Single-family Residential district, R-2
Single-family Residential district, R-3
Single-family Residential district, Rd-1
Two-family Residential district.
(4) Detached garages of masonry construction
which are between one hundred fifty-one (151)
square feet and seven hundred twenty (720)
square feet shall not be less than five (5)
feet from any residential building as
provided for in the Village of Paddock Lake
Building Code. Detached garages of masonry
construction which are not between one
hundred fifty-one (151) square feet and seven
hundred twenty (720) square feet in area
shall be governed by all of the other
provisions set forth in this Section.
(5) Accessory uses and detached accessory
structures on lots and parcels within the
shoreland jurisdiction shall not extend into
the required shore yard unless otherwise
specifically permitted by this Ordinance.
(g) Essential services. Essential services, such
as utilities, electric power and communication
transmission lines are exempt from the yard and
distance requirements of this ordinance.
(h) Landscaping. Except as noted herein,
landscaping and vegetation are exempt from the
yard requirements of this ordinance.
(I) Awnings and canopies. Awnings and canopies
are not to exceed three (3) feet into any yard.
(j) Balconies. Balconies are not to exceed six
(6) feet into any yard and not closer than
three(3) feet into any lot line.
(k) Bay windows. Bay windows are not to exceed
four (4) feet into any yard.
(1) Boathouse. A boathouse accessory to
residential uses used strictly for the storage of
boats and water related recreational accessories
to be used by the owner or occupant of any given
parcel may be located within a shore yard but
shall not be closer to a lake, stream, pond, or
wetland than the average high water elevation and
shall not exceed one (1) boathouse on the premises
for each shoreland lot; shall not exceed the
height of twelve (12) feet above the existing
shoreline grade except when bluff and/or steep
slope conditions exist, (in such cases it shall
not exceed the height of the tope grade elevation
of said shoreline lot), shall not exceed five
hundred seventy-six (576) square feet in size;
shall not be closer than three (3) feet to any
side lot line; and the boathouse shall be
constructed in such a manner as to orient the main
opening of the boathouse toward the lake.
(m) Clothesline posts. Clothesline posts may be
located in the rear or side yard only.
(n) Decks and porches. For purposes of this
section, a deck shall be defined as a flat
roofless area which adjoins and is attached to a
house; a porch is a covered entrance to a building
which adjoins and is attached to the building and
which has a separate roof. Pursuant to the
Wisconsin State Building Code, a porch cannot be
used as "Habitable Space". Decks shall not extend
more than ten (10') feet into any front, rear,
side, or shore yard. Porches shall not extend
more than five (5') feet into any front, rear,
side, or shore yard. Decks shall not be closer
than three (3') feet to any side yard lot line.
Decks shall not be closer than fifteen (15') feet
to any street right-of-way. Porches shall not be
closer than twenty (20') feet to any street rightof-
way.
(o) Off-street parking. Off-street parking is
permitted in rear yards and all districts and in
front and side yards in the business districts
provided the parking shall not be closer than
twenty-five (25) feet to the public right-of-way
if the business abuts a residential district and
not closer than ten (10) feet to a lot line if the
business district abuts a residential district.
(p) Over Hanging Roof. Over hanging roofs,
eaves, gutters, cornices or other architectural
feature are not to exceed three (3) feet.
(3) Additions. Additions in the street yard of
existing structures shall not project beyond the average of the
existing street yards on the abutting lots or parcels.
(4) Average Street Yards. The required street yards
may be decreased in any residential or business districts to the
average of the existing street yards of the abutting structures
on each side but in no case less than fifteen (15) feet in any
residential or business district.
(5) Noise. Sirens, whistles and bells which are
maintained and utilized solely to serve a public purpose are
exempt from the sound level standards of this Ordinance.
12.08 NON-CONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
(1) Intent. Within the districts established by this
Ordinance or amendment thereof, there may exist lots, structures
and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this
Ordinance was enacted or amended, but which would be prohibited
in the future under the terms of this Ordinance or amendment. It
is the intent of the Village Board of the Village of Paddock Lake
to permit these non-conforming lots, structures and uses existing
as of the effective date of this Ordinance or amendment thereof
to remain and continue in accordance with the provisions
hereinafter set forth until they are removed by economic forces
or otherwise. It is not the intent of this section to encourage
the survival of non-conformities since it has been determined
that they are incompatible with the character of the districts
involved, or to permit non-conformities to be enlarged upon,
expanded, or extended except as provided for herein. Existing
non-conformity shall not be used to justify adding structures or
uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. It is the
further intention of the Village Board of the Village of Paddock
Lake that guidelines be set forth the purpose of determining:
(a) That the non-conforming lot, structure or use
existed prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance or amendment thereto;
(b) The ways in which the right of the nonconforming
lot or structure to remain can be
served and the ways in which the right to continue
non-conforming uses can be lost;
(c) The extent of permissible variation in the
non-conforming lot, structure and use; and
(d) The devices available for eliminating such
non-conforming lots, structures and uses.
(2) Current Record of Non-conforming Uses. A current
file of all non-conforming uses shall be maintained by the
Building Inspector listing the following:
(a) The owner's name and address;
(b) Use of the structure, land or water; and
(c) Assessed value at the time of its becoming a
non-conforming use.
(3) Burden of Proof. Any property owner asserting as
a defense to a charge of violating this Ordinance that his
property was a valid non-conforming use has the burden of
demonstrating to a reasonable certainty by the greater weight of
credible evidence that:
(a) The non-conforming use was legally in
existence at the time the Ordinance was passed or
amended; and
(b) That the use of the property prior to the
Ordinance was so active and actual that it can be
said the property owner acquired a vested interest
in its continuance. For purposes of this
Ordinance, a property owner shall be deemed to
have a vested right in the use of his property
where that use at the time of the effective date
of this Ordinance or amendment thereto is both
active and actual (non-contemplated) and a
substantial degree of activity or expense had been
undertaken prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance or amendment thereto; and
(c) that the use is substantially the same use
that existed prior to the enactment of the
Ordinance or amendment thereto.
(4) Existing Vacant Non-conforming (substandard) Lots.
In any residential, upland conservancy or agricultural district,
a one-family detached dwelling and its accessory structures may
be erected on any vacant legal lot or parcel record in the County
Register of Deeds Office recorded before the effective date or
amendment of this Ordinance, provided such lot or parcel meets
all of the following minimum requirements – and further provided
that all state, county and local requirements relating to
sanitary disposal systems are met:
(a) Lot Width Minimum 50 feet (public sewage)
or setback line on a culde-
sac or curve
65 feet (private sewage
system)
Area Minimum 5,000 sq. feet (public
sewage)
10,000 sq. feet (private
sewage system)
(b) Yards–Street Minimum required in the district
Rear Minimum 25 feet from lot line
Side Minimum 12 percent of the lot
width on each side, but
not less than 5 feet from
lot line
(5) Common Ownership of Abutting Non-Conforming Lots.
Abutting non-conforming lots of record owned by the same
individual or individuals shall be combined prior to the issuance
of a zoning permit. No zoning permit or building permit shall be
issued to the owner of abutting non-conforming lots or to any
successor, purchaser, or other transferee until such time as the
lots are combined. In the event that an owner(s) of abutting
non-conforming lots transfers an ownership interest in one or
more of such lots without combining the lots, no zoning permit or
building permit shall be issued for such lots until title to such
lots is unified and the lots are combined.
(6) Existing Non-conforming (substandard) Structures.
The lawful non-conforming structure existing at the time of the
adoption or amendment of this Ordinance may be continued although
its size or location does not conform with the lot width, lot
area, yard, height, parking and loading, and access provisions of
this Ordinance.
(a) The use of a structure existing at the time
of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance may
be continued although the structure size or
location does not conform with the established lot
area and width, building setback line along
streets and highways, or the yard, height,
parking, loading, or access provisions of this
Ordinance.
(b) Substandard structures which encroach upon
the yard requirements of this Ordinance, but which
met yard requirements of the applicable zoning
ordinance at the time of construction, may be
structurally altered, provided that the use of the
structure conforms to those uses permitted in the
district, and further provided that the alteration
does not create a greater degree of encroachment
on yard, height, parking, loading, or access
requirements.
(c) Existing substandard structures which are
damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, flood, or
other calamity to the extent of more than fifty
percent (50%) of its current assessed value, may
be reconstructed and insofar as is practicable
shall conform with the established building
setback lines along streets and highways and the
yard, height, parking, loading, and access
provisions of this Ordinance. The provisions of
this section with respect to reconstruction, are
applicable only if the lot or parcel conforms with
the existing sanitary code requirements or is
serviced by a public sanitary sewer.
(d) Existing substandard structures may be moved
or reconstructed and insofar as is practicable
shall conform with the established building
setback lines along streets or highways and the
yard, height, parking, loading, and access
provisions of this Ordinance. The provisions of
this section, with respect to moving, are
applicable only if the lot or parcel conforms with
the existing sanitary code requirements or service
by public sanitary sewer.
(7) Existing Non-conforming Uses. The lawful nonconforming
use of the structure, land or water existing at the
time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance may be
continued although the use does not conform with the provisions
of this Ordinance, except that:
(a) Only that portion of the land or water and
actual use may be so continued and the nonconforming
use may be extended, enlarged or moved;
(b) The alteration or, or addition to, or repair,
to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of
its current assessed value of any existing
building or structure used for the purpose of
carrying on any prohibited trade or new industry
under the terms of this Ordinance within the
district where such buildings or structures are
located is prohibited;
(c) The continuance of a non-conforming use of a
temporary structure is prohibited by the terms of
this Ordinance;
(d) Substitution of new equipment may be
permitted by the Board of Appeals if such
equipment will reduce the incompatibility of the
non-conforming use or structure with the
neighboring uses;
(e) If such non-conforming use is discontinued or
terminated for a period of twelve (12) months, any
future use of the structure, land, or water, shall
conform to the provisions of this Ordinance; and
(f) When a non-conforming structure is damaged by
fire, explosion, flood, or other calamity, to the
extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its
current assessed value, as defined within this
Ordinance, it shall not be restored except so as
to comply with the use provisions of this
Ordinance.
(8) Abolishment or Replacement. If such nonconforming
use is discontinued or terminated for a period of
twelve (12) months, any future use of the structure, land or
water shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. When a
non-conforming use or structure is damaged by fire, explosion,
flood, the public enemy, or other calamity, to the extent of more
than fifty (50) per cent of its current assessed value, it shall
not be restored except so as to comply with the use provisions of
this Ordinance.
(9) Changes and Substitutions. Once a non-conforming
use or structure has been changed to conform, it shall not revert
back. to a non-conforming use or structure. Once the Board of
Appeals has permitted the substitution of a more restrictive nonconforming
use for an existing non-conforming use, the
substituted use shall lose its status as a legal non-conforming
use and become subject to all the conditions required by the
Board of Appeals.
(10) Floodplain Non-conforming Uses. Non-conforming
uses located in the floodplain district shall comply with the
provisions of Section NR116.15 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code. No structural repairs, modifications or additions to a
structure shall exceed over the life of the structure fifty
percent (50%) of its present equalized assessed value shall be
allowed unless the entire structure is flood proof by means other
than the use of fill to the flood protection elevation.
(11) Non-conforming Performance Standards. The use of
any lot or parcel failing to comply with the performance
standards set forth in Section 12.04(6)(d) of this Ordinance at
the time of the adoption of this Ordinance shall not be expanded
unless such expansion conforms with the performance standards set
forth by this Ordinance.
12.09 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
(a) Board of Zoning Appeals Established. There is
hereby established a Board of Zoning Appeals for the Village of
Paddock Lake for the purpose of hearing and deciding appeals and
applications for variances from the provisions of the Village
land use ordinances which are in harmony with the purpose and
intent of that ordinance.
(b) Board Membership And Organization.
(1) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of
five (5) members and two (2) alternates appointed
by the Village President and confirmed by a threequarters
majority of the Village Board.
(2) Terms for Board members shall be for a period
of three (3) years, except that of those first
appointed, one (1) shall serve for one (1) year,
two (2) for two (2) years and two (2) for three
(3) years. Terms for the alternate members shall
be for a period of three (3) years, except that of
those first appointed, one (1) shall serve for two
(2) years and one (1) shall serve for three (3)
years. Annually, the Village President shall
designate one (1) of the alternates as first
alternate and the other as second alternate.
(3) Members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
be eligible for such position only if they reside
within the Village. In making appointments to the
Board of Zoning Appeals, the Village President and
the Village Board shall attempt to appoint
individuals having a background in land use
planning, geography, urban affairs, or such other
prior experience in related areas whenever
feasible. Prior membership on the Board of
Zoning Appeals or Planning Commission shall
constitute prior experience. Attempts should be
made to insure that individuals appointed to the
Board of Zoning Appeals have no conflict of
interest with said appointment.
(4) The Village President shall designate one (1)
of the members chairman.
(5) Office room shall be provided by the Village
Board and the actual and necessary expenses
incurred by the Board of Zoning Appeals in the
performance of its duties shall be paid and
allowed as in cases of other claims against the
Village. The Village Board may likewise
compensate the members of said Board and such
assistants as may be authorized by said Village
Board. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term of any member whose seat becomes vacant in
the same manner as appointments for a full term.
(6) Official oaths shall be taken by all members
in accordance with §19.01, Wis. Stats., within ten
(10) days of receiving notice of their
appointments.
(c) Rules, Minutes And Subpoena Powers.
(1) The Board of Zoning Appeals may adopt rules,
not in conflict with either state law or Village
ordinances, as necessary to carry into effect the
regulations of the Village Board. Meetings of the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call
of the Chairman and at such other times as the
Board may determine. Such Chairman, or in his
absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. All
meetings of the Board shall be open to the public
and tape recorded in accordance with the Wisconsin
Open Meetings Law, §19.82, Wis. Stats. The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the
vote of each member upon each question, or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact,
and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board and
shall be a public record.
(2) The concurring vote of four (4) members of
the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of any
administrative official, or to decide in favor of
the applicant in any matter upon which it is
required to pass under the Village ordinance, or
to effect any variation in the Village ordinance.
(3) Minutes of the proceedings and a taped record
of all actions shall be kept by the Board, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, the
reasons for the Board's determination, and its
findings of fact. These records shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board and
shall be a public record unless a closed session
of the Board is permitted under §19.85, Wis.
Stats. Records shall not be destroyed except
pursuant to law. Where necessary, conclusions and
orders of the Board may be filed with the Register
of Deeds Office.
(d) Jurisdiction and Powers of the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
(1) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the
following powers:
(a) To hear and decide appeals as may be
authorized by §62.23(7)(e)7, Wis. Stats. or
the Village land use ordinances.
(b) To hear and to authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such variance from the terms
of the Village land use ordinances as will
not be contrary to the public interest, or,
when owing to special circumstances, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of such
ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship
and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall
be observed and substantial justice done.
(c) To hear and decide applications for
interpretations of the zoning regulations and
the location of the boundaries of the zoning
district, floodlands, and shorelands after
the Plan Commission has made a review and
recommendation. Floodland and shoreland
boundaries shall be altered by the Board of
Zoning Appeals only when the applicant
presents evidence that clearly and
conclusively establishes that the location as
shown on the zoning map is incorrect.
(d) To hear and grant applications for
substitution of more or equally restrictive
nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming
uses provided no structural alterations are
to be made and the Village Administrator has
made a review and recommendation. Whenever
the Board permits such a substitution, the
use may not thereafter be changed without
application and hearing.
(e) To hear and grant applications for
temporary uses, in any district, provided
that such uses are of a temporary nature, do
not involve the erection of a substantial
structure, and are compatible with the
neighboring uses and the Building Inspector
has made a review and recommendation. The
permit shall be temporary, revocable, subject
to any conditions required by the Board of
Zoning Appeals, and shall be issued for a
period not to exceed twelve (12) months.
Compliance with all other provisions of the
Village ordinances shall be required.
(f) To hear and to decide applications or
interpretations, upon appeal of the specific
case, from the Village of Paddock Lake
Building Code. The appeal shall not be
contrary to any other Village, County, State
or agencies requirements, the public
interest, or, when owing to special
circumstances, a literal enforcement of the
provisions will result in an unnecessary
hardship and so that the spirit of the
ordinance shall be observed and substantial
justice done.
(2) No variance shall have the effect of
permitting any use in a district that is
prohibited in that district, nor shall a variance
have the effect of a rezoning.
(3) The Board may reverse, affirm wholly or
partly or modify the order, requirement, decision,
or determination appealed from, and may make such
order, requirement, decision or determination as
ought to be made.
(4) The Board may request assistance from other
Village officers, departments, commissions, and
boards.
(5) The Chairman may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses by subpoena.
(e) Appeals and Applications for Variances.
(1) Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be
taken by any persons aggrieved, or by any officer,
department, board or bureau of the Village
affected by any order, requirement, decision or
determination of an administrative officer or body
in the enforcement of §62.23, Wis. Stats., the
Village land use ordinances or any other ordinance
adopted pursuant to §62.23, Wis. Stats. Such
appeals shall be commenced by filing with the
administrative officer or body and with the Board
of Zoning Appeals a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds thereof. Such notice of appeal shall
be filed within thirty (30) days after the date of
written notice of the decision or order. The
administrative officer or body shall forthwith
transfer to the Board all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken. In addition, such appeals and application
shall include the following as deemed appropriate
by the Board of Zoning Appeals:
(a) Name, addresses and phone numbers of the
applicant, owner of the site, architect,
professional engineer, contractor, and
authorized agent if applicable.
(b) A description of the subject site by
lot, block and recorded subdivisions or by
meets and bounds; address of the subject
site, tax parcel number, type of structure;
existing or proposed use of the structure or
site; the zoning district within which the
subject site is located; classification of
the subject site either being conforming or
nonconforming in its use; and whether or not
the property is located within a shoreland or
floodplain area.
(c) A plat of survey and/or site plan layout
consisting of a survey prepared by a land
surveyor registered by the State of Wisconsin
or other map drawn to scale showing all of
the information required by the Village
zoning ordinance for a zoning permit. In
addition, the plat of survey or site plan
layout or map shall show the location,
elevation and use of any abutting lands and
the location and foundation elevations of
structures within fifty (50) feet of the
subject site; soil mapping unit lines; mean
and historic high water lines and floodlands
on or within fifty (50) feet of the subject
premises, and existing and proposed
landscaping.
(d) Additional information relative to those
standards and guidelines which must be met
prior to the issuance of the variance.
(e) A list of property owners whose property
abuts the parcel(s) in question or who own
property within three hundred (300) feet of
such parcel(s) and their addresses.
(f) A filing in the amount of Five Hundred
($500.00) Dollars, from which a per diem
allowance shall be paid to each member and/or
alternate in attendance at the rate of Forty
($40.00) Dollars per meeting. In addition,
the applicant shall pay such additional
amounts as are incurred by the Village for
consultant’s fees, including legal,
engineering and planning.
(2) Any application for a variance under this
ordinance shall be accompanied by a sworn
statement by the owner of the subject property or
the applicant for a variance for said property
that said property and its use will be operated in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(f) Stays. An appeal shall stay all proceedings and
furtherance of the action appealed from unless the administrative
official or body whose decision is appealed from shall certify to
the Board of Zoning Appeals after the notice and appeal shall
have been filed that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, notice shall be given to the appellant
and proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals or by a Court of Record, on application and notice to the
administrative official and for good cause shown.
(g) Hearing Procedures. In hearing a petition
requesting an appeal or allowance of a variance, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall call the petition. Upon the call of the
petition, the petition shall be read by the Chairman of the Board
and at the conclusion thereof, the chairman shall hear and
receive any evidence or sworn testimony presented by the
petitioner or his authorized agent or attorney. At the conclusion
of the petitioner's presentation, the Chairman shall first ask
for any public comments from those in support of the petition and
secondly from those in opposition to the petition. Any relevant
and material evidence or sworn testimony presented by interested
individuals either in favor of or in opposition to the petition
shall be received by the Chairman provided however that said
evidence or sworn testimony is properly identifiable for the
record. Lastly, the Chairman shall ask for a recommendation from
the Village Building Inspector or other designated representation
of the Village.
(h) Continuances. Upon receiving the recommendation
of the Building Inspector, the Board may table the petition so as
to allow the petitioner or any opponent to the Petition an
opportunity to provide any further information deemed pertinent
by the Board or so as to allow the Board members an
opportunity to view the site or similar situations already in
existence if a comparison is warranted in accordance with the
guidelines set forth in Section (i) below or consider the
conditions for allowing the appeal or variance.
(i) Site Views. En route to view a site as provided
for in this ordinance, Board members traveling together or
visiting the site at the same time shall refrain from discussing
Board business. Furthermore, testimony shall not be received
during such view nor shall any argument be heard. The Board may,
however, gather information and ask questions provided that
information, data, and questions and answers are recited into the
record if that information will not be entered by testimony or
exhibits.
(j) Findings And Conclusions. Upon having received all
evidence and hearing all sworn testimony relating to the
petition, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall review the site plan,
existing and proposed structures, architectural plans,
neighboring land and water uses, parking areas, driveway
locations, highway access, traffic generation and circulation,
drainage, sewage and water systems, the proposed operation, the
effects of the proposed use, structure, operation and improvement
upon flood damage protection, water quality, shoreland cover,
natural beauty and wildlife habitat, and any other pertinent
requirements deemed necessary by the Board when considering the
standards set forth in this ordinance. Upon completion of said
review, the Board Chairman shall entertain a motion that the
Board either grant or deny the appeal or application for a
variance based upon specific findings and conclusions which shall
be part of the Board's written decision and minutes.
(k) Standards And Guidelines.
(1) In determining whether a variance is to be
granted, the following standards and guidelines
must be met. In making its decision, these
standards and guidelines shall be addressed by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
(a) The existence of special conditions or
exceptional circumstances on the land in
question.
(b) The experiencing of unnecessary
hardships or practical difficulties on the
land in question either presently or in the
future.
(c) That these hardships or difficulties are
the result of the aforementioned special
conditions existing on the land and are not
self-inflicted.
(d) That the existence of these special
conditions will restrict the use of the land
if the Ordinance is applied literally so as
to render the land useless.
(e) That the limitation on the use of the
land does not apply generally to other
properties in the district.
(f) That limiting the use of the property
does not afford compensating gains to the
public health, safety and welfare.
(g) That the variance(s) requested are the
minimum variance(s) needed to alleviate
difficulties or hardships.
(h) That the use of the parcel in question
presently does conform to the ordinance.
(i) That granting the variance applied for
will not affect the public health, safety,
morals and welfare of the community and other
properties in the area.
(2) Variances may be granted for example for
reasons of topography, environmental protection or
where permitted by state statute but in no event
may a variance be granted where the primary reason
for obtaining a variance is to obtain a more
profitable use of the property, personal
inconvenience, construction errors, economic
reasons, self-created hardships, or where the
property is presently a non-conforming use.
Furthermore, variances may not be granted for the
purpose of altering the sanitary requirements of
the Village ordinances except for existing
structures.
(3) The Board of Zoning Appeals in considering
the propriety of granting a variance shall not
consider the number of persons for or against the
granting of a variance.
(4) Variances may be granted in the form of an
area or distance variance, however, use variances
shall be specifically prohibited under this
Ordinance.
(l) Conditions. In order to insure that any variance
so granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals is consistent with the
spirit of the Village ordinances and recognizing that there could
be fact situations where the spirit of the ordinances could be
observed only if conditions were imposed upon the granting of the
variance, the Board of Zoning Appeals is specifically empowered
to grant a variance upon conditions such as, but not limited to,
landscaping, type of construction, hours of operation, traffic
patterns, parking requirements, yard sizes, time periods, deed
restrictions, bonds, etc. and further provide that in the absence
of said conditions being met, said variance shall be null and
void.
(m) Decisions.
(1) The concurring vote of four (4) members of
the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the
administrative official or body appealed from, or
to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this
ordinance, or to effect any variation in the
Village land use ordinances.
(2) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall decide all
appeals and applications in compliance with the
Wisconsin Open Meeting Law and within thirty (30)
days after final hearing and shall transmit a
signed copy of the Board's decision and order to
the appellant or applicant and the administrative
official or body whose decision was appealed along
with the Board's Findings and Conclusions and a
statement as to which members of the Board viewed
the property in question and the date of such
viewing.
(3) Variances granted by the Board shall expire
within six (6) months unless substantial work has
commenced pursuant to such grant.
(n) Order on Appeal. In exercising the above-mentioned
powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals may, in conformity with the
provisions of this section, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all
the powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken.
(o) Conflict of Interest. Any member of the Board of
Zoning Appeals having a conflict of interest in any matter coming
before the board shall refrain from any voting or discussion
either prior to, at, or after the matter has been heard by the
Board.
(p) Motion to Reconsider And Re-appeal.
(1) Where an error in judgment or procedure
resulted in granting an improper variance or in
denying an appeal, a motion to reconsider made by
a Board member or upon motion of any interested
party, may be considered and the prior action of
the Board rescinded if vested rights are not
violated.
(2) A petition for a variance having been denied
or a decision or order of an administrative
official or body having been affirmed, a petition
seeking a similar variance or relief shall not be
entertained by the Board of Zoning Appeals until
the expiration of a minimum of one (1) year.
(q) Appeal of Board Ruling or Order. Any decision of
the Board of Zoning Appeals may be appealed as provided in
§62.23(7)(e)10, Wis. Stats.
(r) Recording of Ruling or Order. Any variance granted
by the Board or by a court of law shall not be valid unless
recorded by the applicant in the office of the Kenosha County
Register of Deeds within five (5) days after the variance is
granted and evidence of such filing is presented to the Village
Building Inspector. Any recording fees shall be paid by the
applicant. In addition, the Village Building Inspector shall
keep a record and/or map of all such variances which shall be
open to the public. Failure to comply with this provision shall
render the variance null and void.
12.10 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
(1) Intent. While it is the intent of this Ordinance
to provide stability and regularity in zoning and land use in the
Village of Paddock Lake, it is recognized that zoning is by no
means static. It is the intent of this section to recognize that
changed or changing conditions call for changed plans, and
persons who own property in a particular zone or use district
cannot enjoy an eternally vested right to that classification if
the public interest demands otherwise.
(2) Authority. By the authority granted under Section
62.23(7)(e)(10) of the Wisconsin Statutes, whenever the public
necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice
require, the Village Board of Trustees may, by ordinance, change
the district boundaries or amend, change or supplement the
regulations established by this Ordinance or amendments thereto.
(a) Such change or amendment shall be subject to
the review and recommendation of the Village Plan
Commission.
(3) Initiation. A change or amendment may be initiate
by the Village Board, Village Plan Commission, or by a petition
of one or more of the owners or lessees of property within the
area proposed to be changed.
(4) Petitions. Petitions for any change or amendment
to the district boundaries or amendments to the text of this
ordinance shall be filed with the Village Clerk/Treasurer who
shall immediately refer it to the Village Plan Commission for its
consideration, report and recommendation. Said petition shall
describe the premises to be rezoned and the sections of this
ordinance to be amended, list the reasons justifying the
petition, specify the proposed use and have attached the
following:
(a) Petitioner’s name, address, phone number and
interest in the property.
(b) Existing zoning district.
(c) Proposed zoning district.
(d) Proposed use (a statement of the type,
extent, area, etc. of any development project).
(e) A statement of conditions warranting a change
in zoning.
(f) Compatibility with adjacent lands (a
statement of land uses and impact of zoning
change).
(g) Legal description of property to be zoned.
(h) Plat plan drawn to a scale of 1 inch equals
100 feet showing the area proposed to be rezoned,
its location, its dimensions, the location and
classification of adjacent zoning districts, and
the location and existing use of all properties
within two hundred (200) feet of the area proposed
to be rezoned.
(i) Owner’s names and addresses of all properties
lying within two hundred (200) feet of the area
proposed to be rezoned.
(j) A fee receipt from the Village
Clerk/Treasurer in the amount of One Hundred Fifty
($150.00) Dollars.
(5) Referral. All petitions referred to herein shall
be brought to the attention of the Village Board at the monthly
meeting immediately following the filing of the petition. At such
meeting of the Village Board, the petition shall be formally
referred directly to the Village Plan Commission for its
consideration, report and recommendations.
(6) Recommendations. Upon receipt of such petition
from the Village Board by the Village Plan Commission, the
Village Plan Commission shall call a public hearing for the
purpose of reviewing all proposed changes and amendments within
the corporate limits and shall recommend that the petition be
granted as requested, modified, or denied. The recommendations
referred to in this subsection shall be made in writing and
addressed to the Village Board.
(7) Hearings. The Village Board shall hold a public
hearing upon each recommendation, giving at least ten (10) days
prior notice of the hearing by publication at least three (3)
times during the proceeding thirty (30) days, listing the time,
place and the changes or amendments proposed. The Village Board
shall also give at least ten (10) days prior written notice to
the Clerk of any municipality within one thousand (1,000) feet of
any land to be affected by the proposed change or amendment. In
the event the Village Board does not receive the recommendations
referred to in Section 12.26(4) of this Ordinance within sixty
(60) days of submitting the proposed amendments to the Village
Plan Commission, the Village Board may hold hearings without
first receiving the recommendations and report.
(8) Village Board's Action. Following such hearing
and after careful consideration of the Village Plan Commission's
recommendation, the Village Board shall hold a hearing for the
purpose of voting on the passage of the proposed change or
amendment.
(9) Protest. In the event of a protest against such
district change or amendment to the regulations of this
Ordinance, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty
(20) percent or more either of the areas of the land included in
such proposed change or amendment, or by the owners of twenty
(20) percent or more of the land immediately adjacent extending
one hundred (100) feet therefrom, or by the owners of twenty (20)
percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending
one hundred (100) feet from the street frontage of such opposite
land, such changes or amendments shall not become effective
except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the
members of the Village Board voting on the proposed change or
amendment.
12.11 DEFINITIONS.
(1) Access. A way of approaching or entering a
property. Access also includes ingress, the right to enter, and
egress, the right to leave.
(2) Accessory use, building or structure. A use,
building or structure which:
(a) Is or will be subordinate to and serves a
principal use, building or structure;
(b) Is or will be subordinate in area, extent, or
purpose to the principal use, building or
structure served;
(c) Contributes to the comfort, convenience or
necessity of occupants of the principal use,
building or structure; and
(d) Is or will be located on the same zoning lot
as the principal use, building or structure.
(3) Adjacent; Adjoining. Nearby, but not necessarily
touching.
(4) Alley. A special public right-of-way which is
narrow, less in size than a street, and which is not designed for
general travel, which is used primarily as a means of access to
the rear of residences and business establishments and which,
generally, affords only a secondary means of access to the
property abutting along its length.
(5) Alterations. A physical change in a building or
an addition to it. As applied to a building or structure, means
a change or rearrangement, in the structural parts or in the exit
facilities or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side, by
increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position
to another.
(6) Arterial Street. A public street or highway used
or intended to be used primarily for fast or heavy through
traffic. Arterial streets and highways shall include freeways
and expressways as well as arterial streets, highways, and
parkways.
(7) Assessed Value. The full market value placed upon
the structure or lot by the Kenosha County Assessor.
(8) Awning, canopy signs. Any sign which is painted
upon the vertical faces of any roof-like cover that projects from
the wall of a building for the purposes of shielding a doorway or
window from the elements.
(9) Basement. An area below the first floor, having
part but no more than one-half of its height above grade.
(10) Billboard. Any sign constructed and maintained
for the purpose of displaying outdoor advertising when such sign
is supported by uprights or braces placed in the ground and not
attached to any part of any building.
(11) Boarding House. A building other than a hotel or
restaurant where meals or lodging are regularly furnished by
prearrangement for compensation for four (4) or more persons not
members of a family, but not exceeding twelve (12) persons and
not open to transient customers.
(12) Building. Any structure having a roof supported
by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattels. When any portion thereof is completely
separated from every other portion thereof by a division wall
without openings then each such portion shall be deemed to be a
separate building.
(13) Building Area. The total living area bounded by
the exterior walls of a building at the floor level, but not
including basement, utility rooms, garages, porches, breezeways,
and unfinished attics.
(14) Building Height. The vertical distance measured
from the mean elevation of the finished lot grade along the
street yard face of the structure to the highest point of flat
roofs; to the mean height level between the eaves and ridges of
gable, gambrel, hip and pitch roofs; or to the deck line of
mansard roofs.
(15) Building Setback Lines. The line nearest the
street and across a lot establishing the minimum open space to be
provided between buildings and specified structures and street
lines.
(16) Bulletin Signs. Any sign used for the purpose of
identifying public, charitable or religious institutions.
(17) Business Signs. Any sign used for the purpose of
advertising or identifying the owner's name, business name,
profession or trade conducted within the building or on the
premises on which such sign is erected or maintained and the
names of the manufacturers of products used or trade slogan used
by the occupants of the building or premises in carrying on their
business, profession or trade.
(18) Clothing, Repair Shops. Shops where clothing is
repaired, such as shoe repair shops, seamstress, tailor shops,
shoeshine shops, clothes pressing shops, but none employing over
five (5) persons.
(19) Clothing Stores. Retail stores where clothing is
sold, such as department stores, dry goods and shoe stores,
dress, hosiery and millinery shops.
(20) Conditional Uses. Uses of a special nature as to
make impractical the pre-determination as a principal use in a
district.
(21) Contractors Signs. Any sign used for identifying
and naming the contractors engaged in construction on the
property where the sign is located.
(22) Corner Lot. A lot which occupies the interior
angle at the intersection of two street lines which make an angle
of less than 135 degrees with each other.
(23) Detached Sign. Any sign not structured by or
attached to any side of a building or structure and for purposes
of this Ordinance does not include a portable sign.
(24) Development. Any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to construction
of or additions or substantial improvements to buildings, other
structures, or accessory uses, mining, drudging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
disposition of materials.
(25) Districts. A part or parts of the Village for
which the regulations of this Ordinance governing the use and
location of land and buildings are uniform.
(26) Dwe11ing. A building or portion thereof, used
exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, twofamily
and multiple dwellings, but not including hotels, motels,
lodging houses, boarding houses or tourist homes.
(27) Easement. A right given by the owner of land to
another party for specific limited use of that land.
(28) Efficiency. A dwelling unit consisting of one
principal room with no separate sleeping rooms.
(29) Election Campaign Signs. Any sign used for the
purpose of identifying and naming persons who are candidates
for public office.
(30) Emergency Shelter. Public or private enclosures
designed to protect people from aerial, radiological, biological,
or chemical warfare; fire, flood, windstorm, riots and invasions.
(31) Essential Services. Services provided by public
and private utilities, necessary for the exercise of the
principal, accessory or conditional use or service of the
principal, accessory or conditional structure. These services
include underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam,
water, sanitary sewage, stormwater drainage, and communication
systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires,
mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch
basins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations and
hydrants but not including buildings.
(32) Expressway. A divided arterial street or highway
with full or partial control of access and with or without grade
separated intersections.
(33) Externally Illuminated Signs. Any sign in which
the source of illumination is not an integral part of the sign.
(34) Family. Any number of persons related by blood,
adoption or marriage, or not to exceed four (4) persons not so
related, living together in one dwelling as a single house
keeping entity.
(35) Flat Sign. Any sign, the back of which is
attached flat against any side of a building or structure and
which does not extend outward more than six (6) inches.
(36) Freeway. An expressway with full controlled
access and with fully graded separated intersections.
(37) Front; Frontage. That side of a lot abutting on a
street or way and ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot,
but it shall not be considered as the ordinary side of a corner
lot.
(38) Gift Stores. Retail stores where items such as
art, antiques, jewelry, books, and notions are sold.
(39) Governmental Signs. Any sign used for posting
legal notices, identification of streets, traffic regulations,
notice of danger, or other emergencies or the posting of notice
of trespassing.
(40) Grade. In cases where all walls of the principal
building are more than five (5) feet from the nearest street
line, the mean elevation of the ground adjoining the building on
all sides; and in all other cases, the mean elevation of the
nearest sidewalk.
(41) Gross Surface Area of a Sign. For all signs
except skeleton cutout letter signs, the gross surface area shall
include the area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing
the extreme limits of its display area, and in no case passing
through or between any adjacent elements of it. Such perimeter
shall not include any structural elements lying outside the
display area. Each sign face or display area used for
advertising or identification purposes shall be included in the
total gross surface area of a sign.
(42) Group Directory Signs. Any sign, whose purpose is
limited to the group listing and identification of offices or
business establishments within a single building or structure.
(43) Hardware Stores. Retail stores where items such
as plumbing, heating and electrical supplies, sporting goods, and
paints are sold.
(44) Household Occupation. Any occupation for gain or
support conducted entirely within buildings by resident occupants
which is customarily incidental to the principal use of the
premises, does not exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of the area
of one floor, employs no more than one non-resident employee,
uses only household equipment, and no stock and trade is kept or
sold except that made on the premises. A home occupation includes
but not limited to uses such as baby-sitting, millinery,
dressmaking, canning, laundrying, music teaching to not more than
two pupils at one time, and crafts, but does not include a
display of any goods nor such occupations as barbering, beauty
shops, dance schools, real estate brokerage, or photographic
studios.
(45) Improvement. Any building, structure, place, work
of art, or other object constituting the physical betterment of
real property, or any part of such betterment including street
grading and surfacing with or without curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers,
culverts, bridges, streets, and trees.
(46) Interchange. A grade separated intersection with
one or more turning lanes for travel between intersection lanes.
(47) Internally Illuminated Signs. Any sign in which
the source of illumination is an integral part of the sign.
(48) Legally Existing Lot, Structure or Use. A lot,
structure or use existing on the effective date of this Ordinance
or amendment thereto which was created, built or established in
accordance with zoning and land use regulations in effect in the
Village wherein the parcel is located immediately prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance or amendment thereto or a lot,
structure or use for which a zoning permit was issued prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance or amendment thereto.
(49) Lift Station. A pumping station for purposes of
pumping raw sewage from a collection system to the treatment
plant.
(50) Living Rooms. All rooms within a dwelling except
closets, foyers, storage areas, utility rooms and bathrooms.
(51) Loading Area. A completely off-street space or
berth on the same lot for the loading or unloading of freight
carriers, having adequate ingress and egress to a public street
or alley.
(52) Lot. A parcel of land having frontage on a public
street, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal use,
building or structure and sufficient in size to meet the lot
width, lot frontage, lot area, yard, parking area, and other open
space provision of this Ordinance.
(53) Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between
the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction
of the side lot lines.
(54) Lot Lines and Area. The peripheral boundaries of
a parcel of land in the total area line within such boundaries.
(55) Lot Width. The width of a parcel of land measured
at the rear of the specified street yard.
(56) Machine Shops. Includes without limitation due to
enumeration shops with lathes, presses, grinders, shapers, and
other wood and metal working machines, such as blacksmith,
tinsmith, welding and sheet metal shops; plumbing, heating and
electrical repair and overhaul shops.
(57) Memorial Signs. Any sign or tablet used for the
purpose of identifying the names of buildings and the date of
erection and which are cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so
as to be part of the building or structure, or which are attached
to a building or structure and which are constructed of bronze or
other non-combustible materials.
(58) Minor Structures. Any smal1, movable accessory
erection or construction such as birdhouses; toolhouses;
pethouses; play equipment; arbors; and walls and fences under
four (4) feet in height.
(59) Mobile Home. A vehicle designed to be towed as a
single unit or in sections upon a highway by a motor vehicle and
equipped and used or intended to be used, primarily for human
habitation, with walls of rigid uncollapsable construction.
(60) Motel. A building or group of buildings which:
(a) Contains living or sleeping accommodations
used primarily for transient occupancy, and
(b) Has individual entrances from outside the
building to serve each such living or sleeping
unit.
(61) Motor Home. A motor vehicle designed to be
operated upon a highway for use as a temporary or recreational
dwelling and having the same internal characteristics and
equipment as a mobile home.
(62) Non-conforming Lot. A parcel of land legally
created prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or
subsequent amendments thereto having frontage on a public street,
occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or
structure together with accessory buildings and uses having
insufficient size to meet the lot width, lot area, yard, offstreet
parking areas, or other open space provisions of this
Ordinance.
(63) Non-conforming Structure. A structure which was
legally constructed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance
or subsequent amendment thereto, which would not be permitted as
a new structure under the terms of this Ordinance or amendment
thereto because the structure is not in conformance with the
yards, height, coverage or floor area ratio requirements of the
district in which it is located. A structure located on a
nonconforming lot shall not be classified as a nonconforming
structure solely because of insufficient lot area or width.
(64) Nonconforming Use. An activity utilizing land or
structures or both legally established prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance or subsequent amendment thereto, which
would not be permitted as a new use in the district in which it
is located under the terms of this Ordinance.
(65) Noxious Matter. Material which is capable of
causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is
capable of causing detrimental effects upon the physical or
economic well-being of individuals.
(66) Nuisance. Anything that interferes with the use
or enjoyment of propetty, endangers personal health or safety or
is offensive to the senses.
(67) Odorous Matter. Any matter or material that
yields an odor which is offensive in any way or any matter or
material that produces a response in a normal human nose.
(68) Operational Signs. A sign designating an
entrance, exit, service area, parking area, restroom, or other
such signs relating to the functional operation of a building or
lot without further elaboration or display.
(69) Painted Sign. Any sign other than a skeleton
cutout letter sign which is painted upon the side of any building
or upon any structure and for which no separate background
structure is used.
(70) Park. A pleasure ground set apart for recreation
of the public to promote its health and enjoyment.
(71) Park, Amusement. An area, publically or privately
owned, containing amusement and recreation facilities and
devices, whether operated for profit or not.
(72) Park, Public. An area owned by the County of
Kenosha or the Village of Paddock Lake, operated for the
convenience and recreation of the public, and containing such
facilities as the County of Kenosha or the Village of Paddock
Lake shall see fit.
(73) Parking Area. An off-street area containing one
or more parking spaces, with passage ways and driveways
appurtenant thereto.
(74) Parking Area, Private. An open area, other than a
street or alley, used for the parking of the automobiles of
occupants of a dwelling.
(75) Parking Area, Public. An area other than a
private parking area, street or alley, used for the parking of
automobiles and available for public or quasi-public use.
(76) Parking Lot. An open area other than a street
used for the parking of more than four (4) automobiles and
available for public use whether free, for compensation, or as an
accommodation for clients or customers.
(77) Parking Space. A graded and surfaced area either
enclosed or open for the parking of motor vehicles, having
adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley.
(78) Parties in Interest. Includes all abutting
property owners, all property owners within one hundred (100)
feet and all property owners of opposite frontages and of
properties that may be directly and immediately affected by a
proposed change in this Ordinance.
(79) Performance Standards. A criterion established
for the purpose of making judgments in the control of air
pollution; electrical, radioactive or other disturbances; fire
and explosive hazards; emission of glare and heat; noise; odors;
and discharge of liquid or solid gases' generated by, or inherent
in, uses of lands, buildings or structures.
(80) Portable Signs. A billboard ground sign which is
not permanently affixed to any structure or building, not
permanent in nature but is not necessarily a temporary sign as
defined within this Ordinance.
(81) Principal Building. A building in which is
conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
(82) Principal Use. The primary purpose or function
that a lot serves or is intended to serve.
(83) Professional Home Offices. Residences of doctors
of medicine, practitioners, dentists, clergymen, architects,
landscape architects, professional engineers, registered land
surveyors, lawyers, artists, teachers, authors, musicians, or
other recognized professions used to conduct the professions
where the office does nor exceed one-half (1 /2) the area of only
one floor of the residence and only one non-resident person is
employed.
(84) Professional Nameplate Signs. Any sign indicating
the occupant name and or address or a professional office.
(85) Projecting Signs. Any sign which is attached to
any side of a buitding or to a structure and which extends
outward and shall not be at its lowest point less than ten (10)
feet above any street, walkway, driveway or parking lot.
(86) Real Estate Signs. Any sign used for the purpose
of advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon
which said sign is located.
(87) Rear Yard. A yard extending across the full width
of the lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal
distance between the rear lot line and the line parallel thereto
through the nearest point of the principal structure. This yard
shall be opposite the street yard or one of the street yards on
a corner lot.
(88) Residential Name Plate Sign. Any sign indicating
the occupant name and/or address of residence.
(89) Restricted Signs. Any sign requiring a sign
permit under the provisions of this Ordinance.
(90) Right-of-way Line. The dividing line between a
highway and the abutting lots or other divisions of land.
(91) Setback. The distance between a street line and
the front building line of a principal building or structure
projected to the side lines of the lot, and including driveways
and parking areas, except where otherwise restricted by this
Ordinance.
(92) Shorelines. The intersection of the land surfaces
abutting lakes, ponds, streams, flowages and wetlands with the
average annual high-water elevation.
(93) Side Yard. A yard extending from the street yard
to the rear yard of the lot, the width of which shall be the
minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and a line
parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal
street.
(94) Signs. Any words, letters, figures, numerals,
phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, tradenames, or
trademarks by which any thing is made known and which are used to
advertise or promote an individual, firm, association,
corporation, profession, business, commodity or product and which
is visible from any public street or highway.
(95) Skeleton Cutout Letter Sign. Any sign composed of
letters so constructed and assembled or painted as to use no
other structure for background other than the building structure
itself.
(96) Smoke Unit. The number obtained when the smoke
density and the Ringelmann Number is multiplied by the time of
emission in minutes. For the purpose of this calculation, a
Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least once a minute
during the period of observation; each reading is then multiplied
by the time in minutes in which it was observed. Various
products are then added together to give the total number of
smoke units observed during the entire observation.
(97) Street. A public thoroughfare, avenue, road,
highway, boulevard, parkway, way, drive, lane, court or private
easement, providing, generally, the primary roadway to an egress
from the property abutting along its length.
(98) Street Yard. A yard extending across the full
width of the lot, the depth of which shall be the minimum
horizontal distance between the existing or proposed street or
highway line and a line parallel thereto to the nearest point of
the principal structure. Corner lots shall have two such yards.
(99) Structural Alterations. Any change in the
supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change
in the roof or in the exterior walls.
(100) Structure. Any production or piece of work,
artificially built up or composed of parts enjoined together in
some definite manner and form.
(101) Subdivision Entrance Signs. Any sign whose
purpose is exclusively limited to the identification of a plated
subdivision or residential area, and which names such subdivision
or area without further elaboration, display or advertisement.
(102) Swimming Pool. Any structure, portable or
permanent, containing a body of water eighteen (18) inches or
more in depth, intended for recreational purposes, including a
wading pool, but not including an ornamental reflecting pool or
fish pond or similar type pool, located and designed so as not to
create a hazard or to be used for swimming or wading.
(103) Temporary Sign. A sign not permanently wired
or mounted.
(104) Temporary Use. A use of land, buildings or
structures not intended to be of permanent duration and not
located on a parcel for more than twelve (12) months.
(105) Toxic Matter. Those materials which are capable
of causing injury to living organisms by chemical means when
present in relatively small amounts.
(106) Travel Trailer. A vehicle without motive power
designed for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own
structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, but does not
include a mobile home.
(107) Turning Lanes. An existing or proposed
connecting roadway between two arterial streets or between an
arterial street and any other street. Turning lanes include
grade separated interchange ramps.
(108) Unrestricted Signs. All signs designated in this
Ordinance for which a sign permit is not required, but are
regulated by this Ordinance as to location, number and size.
(109) Use. Any purpose for which a building or other
structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended,
maintained, or occupied, or any activity, occupation, business,
or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a
building or other structure or on a tract of land.
(110) Use, Private. A use which is restricted to the
occupants of a lot or building, together with their guests, where
compensation for such use is not received and where no business
or commercial activity is associated with such use or building.
(111) Utilities. Public and private facilities such as
water wells, water and sewage pumping stations, water storage
tanks, power and communication transmission lines, electrical
power substations.
12.12 PADDOCK LAKE DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS.
(1) Objectives. The design review process is hereby
implemented pursuant to §62.23(3), Stats., for the purposes of
guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious
development of the municipality which will, in accordance with
existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety,
morals, order, convenience, prosperity or the general welfare, as
well as the efficiency and economy in the process of development
within the Village of Paddock Lake. Requirements for design
review and approval apply uses and developments regardless of the
characterization of the use or development of this ordinance as a
"permitted use" or "conditional use."
(2) Applicability. The following types of development
shall be subject to the Design Review Process:
(a) Site and structural development or
residential projects having two or more
dwelling units.
(b) Site and structural development in all
business districts in the Village of Paddock
Lake.
(c) Site and structural development in all
industrial districts within the Village of
Paddock Lake.
(d) Site and structural development in all
planned development districts within the
Village of Paddock Lake.
(e) All utility and governmental facilities
within the Village of Paddock Lake.
(f) Those variance cases deemed by the Zoning
Board of Appeals to justify design review.
Design review shall be advisory to the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Any applications submitted
for design review shall include information
normally required under §12.12(3). The
decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to
accept the recommendation of Village Plan
Commission shall carry the full force and
effect of these ordinance provisions.
(g) Any parking area, even if not accompanying an
otherwise included development, if it has ten
(10) or more parking spaces.
(h) In addition, Design Review Districts may be
designated by ordinance adopted by the
Village Board. Once adopted, design review
standards shall apply to such districts
within the terms of such designation
Ordinance.
(3) Administration of Design Review.
(a) The Village Building Administrator of the
Village of Paddock Lake shall advise
applicants when they apply for
zoning/building permits or other approvals
whether design review applies. If design
review applies, the applicant shall be given
checklists, application forms, and time
tables. These documents shall have prior
Village Plan Commission approval as to format
and content. Applicant may request and have
pre-application conference with staff (PWD,
Build & Zoning Administrator).
(b) Completed applications and supporting
materials must be reviewed by the Village
Staff prior to placement on the Village Plan
Commission agenda. The Village Staff must be
satisfied that a complete packet of
information will be available to the Plan
Commission prior to the commencement of the
Plan Commission meeting at which the item is
set for decision review.
(c) The Plan Commission will review applications
set for design review. Following such review,
discussions with applicants and agents, and
discussion with the Village Plan Commission
and with the Village Staff, the Plan
Commission shall render a decision of
approval, conditional approval or rejection.
Decisions shall be in writing and shall
identify those elements of the approved
design which the Village Plan Commission
intends to be mandatory. The Village Building
& Zoning Administrator shall have applicants
sign acknowledgments of receipts of written
Village Plan Commission design review decisions
prior to issuance of a zoning/building
permit.
(d) A project that has had design review and that
has a zoning/building permit is approved for
execution only in accord with the directives
included in the design review approval.
Construction or execution that deviates in
any way from directives may not occur within
the terms of this ordinance without prior
written Village approval.
(4) Design Review Standards. The following
requirements have as its primary purpose to achieve development
which is practical, feasible and an economic asset to each owner,
the neighbors and community:
(a) Buildings.
(1) The front facade and street site facade
shall be faced with concrete, brick
masonry, stone, metals or other
materials architecturally integrated in
the building design. Unfaced concrete
block, structural concrete and prefabricated
metal siding and the like are
not permitted on facade areas. The
facing materials should extend on each
side of the front of the building a
minimum distance equal to one-fourth
(1/4) of the side dimension.
(2) All elevations of the building shall be
designed in a consistent and coherent
architectural manner. Changes in
material, color and/or texture shall
occur at points relating to the massing,
fenestration and overall design concept
of the building.
(3) All electrical and air-conditioning
structures, including towers and airhandling
units, regardless of location
and whether to screen roof or otherwise,
shall be screened by landscaping or by
decorative screening which form an
integral part of the design.
(4) All buildings should be sited on the lot
to present their most desirable face to
the street and, where possible, should
be related to buildings on adjoining
lots.
(b) Landscaping.
(1) Landscape design and planting is to be
an integral part of the site design
concept and not an afterthought merely
added onto the report.
(2) The front yard set back area shall be
landscaped with an effective combination
of street trees, trees, ground cover and
shrubbery. All unpaved areas not
utilized for parking shall be landscaped
in a similar manner. The entire area
between the right-of-way and the
building set back line of any property
shall be landscaped with a combination
of landscape plantings and earth berms
to interrupt or screen all of the use
areas with the exception of the building
facade.
(3) Side and rear yard set back areas not
used for parking, drives or storage,
shall be landscaped using ground cover
and/or shrub and tree materials. There
shall be a minimum of a ten (10) foot
buffer area reserved along sides and
rear lot line. Where a rear or side yard
abuts the natural area or conservancy
area, the landscape plan shall be
designed to be integrated with the
nature area.
(4) Undeveloped areas proposed for future
expansion shall be maintained in a
weed-free condition and shall be
landscaped if required by the Village
Plan Commission.
(5) Areas used for parking and loading shall
be landscaped and/or fenced in a manner
so as to interrupt said areas from view
from public streets and public use areas
on adjoining properties. Plant materials
used for this purpose shall consist of
lineal or group masses of shrubs and/or
trees.
(6) Any approved outdoor storage areas and
refuse collection areas shall be
visually screened from view from public
streets and public use areas on adjacent
properties. Such screening shall form a
complete opaque screen up to a point
eight (8) feet in vertical height.
(7) The front yard, any street side yard and
the side yards abutting the front
one-quarter (1/4) of the building shall
have a minimum of an eight (8) foot
strip for landscaping or walkway
immediately adjacent to the building.
Paved pedestrian walks to building
entrances may cross or be made part of
said strip.
(8) All existing vegetation shall be
preserved wherever possible and
practical. Measures shall be taken to
protect existing trees in the areas of
natural vegetation (including wetland
and native prairie) during construction.
(c) Parking and Loading Area Standards.
(1) Parking lots shall be located to the
rear of the building or in the side yard
behind the front yard setback. Front
yard parking lot shall be located at
least six (6) feet from any lot line and
at least eight (8) feet from the
building.
(2) The Village Plan Commission will require
on-site parking sufficient to
accommodate the needs of each respective
business.
(3) All drives, parking lots, storage areas
and loading berths shall be paved and
properly marked.
(4) It is intended that driveways be laid
out in order to avoid a direct,
unscreened view from the street to
employee parking areas, loading docks,
maneuvering areas and permitted outdoor
storage areas. No parking should be
permitted on entry driveways.
(5) Loading berths shall be located to the
rear of the building or in the side yard
behind the front yard setback.
(d) Utilities.
(1) All utilities shall be installed
underground. Electric substations and
similar utility structures shall comply
with the building and landscape
standards specified elsewhere herein.
(e) Snow Removal.
(1) Snow removal areas and procedures must
be described in the plans. Snow removal
areas shall not interfere with
commercial driveway intersection
visability. Snow removal storage areas
shall not interfere with driveway
intersection visability. The
intersection visability standards
contained in the Village Zoning
Ordinance shall be applied. Snow
storage areas shall be adequately
drained so that snow melt does not drain
across public roadways or sidewalks.
(f) Lighting.
(1) All side lighting shall be controlled so
as not to extend a direct light source
onto abutting properties. Cutoff type
luminaries shall be used and all
lighting sheds shall be indicated in the
plans.
(g) Fire Protection.
(1) All plans indicate how fire protection
will be provided. Provisions shall be
made for fire lanes. Larger scale
projects such as water features and
ponds may be incorporated into water
supply features. Fire walls may be
required on infill projects. The
extension of water mains may be required
through the Design Approval Process if
deemed feasible and practical by the
Public Works Director and the Village
Plan Commission.
(h) Stormwater Drainage and Erosion Control
Ordinance.
(1) All sites shall be planned to provide
erosion control measures and storm water
drainage improvements acceptable to the
Village Public Works Director. In no
case shall the requirements be stricter
than the standards required under
Chapter 38 of the Code of Ordinances of
the Village of Paddock Lake.
(i) Street Standards.
(1) All projects require design review shall
also be subject to the dedication and
improvement of abutting roadways and
walkways to meet the standards described
in the Village's adopted plans and
ordinances.
12.13 CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
(a) Authority.
(1) This ordinance is adopted under the authority
granted by §61.354, Wis. Stats. This ordinance
supersedes all provisions of an ordinance
previously enacted under §60.62 or §61.35, Wis.
Stats., that relate to construction site erosion
control. Except as otherwise specified in §61.354,
Wis. Stats., §61.35, Wis. Stats., applies to this
ordinance and to any amendments to this ordinance.
(2) The provisions of this ordinance are deemed
not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of
the same governing body.
(3) The Village Board hereby designates the
Village Administrator or his designee to
administer and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance.
(4) The requirements of this ordinance do not
pre-empt more stringent erosion and sediment
control requirements that may be imposed by any of
the following:
(a) Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources administrative rules, permits or
approvals, including those authorized under
§281.16 and §283.33, Wis. Stats.
(b) Targeted non-agricultural performance
standards promulgated in rules by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
under Section NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) Findings of Fact. The Village Board acknowledges
that runoff from land disturbing construction activity carries a
significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the waters
of the state in Village of Paddock Lake.
(c) Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to
maintain safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water
pollution; prevent and control soil erosion and sediment
discharge; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life;
control building sites, placement of structures and land uses;
preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound
economic growth by minimizing the amount of sediment and other
pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from land disturbing
construction activity to waters of the state in the Village of
Paddock Lake.
(d) Applicability and Jurisdiction.
(1) Applicability.
(a) Except as provided under §12.13(d)(1)(b)
(2), this ordinance applies to any
construction site as defined under
§12.13(e)(6).
(b) This ordinance does not apply to the
following:
(1) Transportation facilities, except
transportation facility construction
projects that are part of a larger
common plan of development such as local
roads within a residential or industrial
development.
(2) A construction project that is
exempted by federal statutes or
regulations from the requirement to have
a national pollutant discharge
elimination system permit issued under
chapter 40, Code of Federal Regulations,
part 122, for land disturbing
construction activity.
(3) Nonpoint discharges from
agricultural facilities and practices.
(4) Nonpoint discharges from
silviculture activities.
(5) Routine maintenance for project
sites that have less than five (5) acres
of land disturbance if performed to
maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity or original purpose
of the facility.
(c) Notwithstanding the applicability
requirements in §12.13(d))(1)(b)(1), this
ordinance applies to construction sites of
any size that, as determined by the Village
Administrator, are likely to result in runoff
that exceeds the safe capacity of the
existing drainage facilities or receiving
body of water, that causes undue channel
erosion, or that increases water pollution by
scouring or transporting of particulate.
(2) Jurisdiction. This ordinance applies to land
disturbing construction activities on lands within
the boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village of
Paddock Lake, as well as all lands located within
the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of
Village of Paddock Lake, even if plat approval is
not involved.
(3) Exclusions. This ordinance is not applicable
to activities conducted by a state agency, as
defined under §227.01 (1), Wis. Stats.
(e) Definitions.
(1) "Administering authority" means a
governmental employee, or a regional planning
commission empowered under §61.354 or §62.2341,
Wis. Stats., that is designated by the Village
Board to administer this ordinance.
(2) "Agricultural facilities and practices" has
the meaning in §281.16 (1), Wis. Stats.
(3) "Best management practice" or "BMP" means
structural or non-structural measures, practices,
techniques or devices employed to avoid or
minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in
runoff to waters of the state.
(4) "Business day" means a day the office of the
Village Administrator is routinely and customarily
open for business.
(5) "Cease and desist order" means a
court-issued order to halt land disturbing
construction activity that is being conducted
without the required permit or in violation of a
permit issued by the Village Administrator.
(6) "Construction site" means an area upon which
one or more land disturbing construction
activities occur, including areas that are part of
a larger common plan of development or sale where
multiple separate and distinct land disturbing
construction activities may be taking place at
different times on different schedules but under
one plan. A long-range planning document that
describes separate construction projects, such as
a twenty (20) year transportation improvement
plan, is not a common plan of development.
(7) "Design Storm" means a hypothetical discrete
rainstorm characterized by a specific duration,
temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return
frequency and total depth of rainfall.
(8) "Division of land" means the creation from
one parcel of four (4) or more parcels or building
sites of five (5) or fewer acres each in area
where such creation occurs at one time or through
the successive partition within a five (5) year
period.
(9) "Erosion" means the process by which the
land's surface is worn away by the action of wind,
water, ice or gravity.
(10) "Erosion and sediment control plan" means a
comprehensive plan developed to address pollution
caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil
particles or rock fragments during construction.
(11) "Extraterritorial" means the unincorporated
area within three (3) miles of the corporate
limits of a first, second, or third class city, or
within one and one-half (1.5) miles of a fourth
class city or village.
(12) "Final stabilization" means that all land
disturbing construction activities at the
construction site have been completed and that a
uniform perennial vegetative cover has been
established with a density of at least seventy
(70%) percent of the cover for the unpaved areas
and areas not covered by permanent structures or
that employ equivalent permanent stabilization
measures.
(13) "Governing body" means town board of
supervisors, county board of supervisors, city
council, village board of trustees or village
council.
(14) "Land disturbing construction activity"
means any man-made alteration of the land surface
resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover,
that may result in runoff and lead to an increase
in soil erosion and movement of sediment into
waters of the state. Land disturbing construction
activity includes clearing and grubbing,
demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering,
filling and grading activities.
(15) "Landowner" means any person holding fee
title, an easement or other interest in property,
which allows the person to undertake cropping,
livestock management, land disturbing construction
activity or maintenance of stormwater BMPs on the
property.
(16) "Maximum extent practicable" means the
highest level of performance that is achievable
but is not equivalent to a performance standard
identified in this ordinance as determined in
accordance with §17.055 of this ordinance.
(17) "Performance standard" means a narrative or
measurable number specifying the minimum
acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
(18) "Permit" means a written authorization made
by the Village Administrator to the applicant to
conduct land disturbing construction activity or
to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of
the state.
(19) "Pollutant" has the meaning given in §283.01
(13), Wis. Stats.
(20) "Pollution" has the meaning given in §281.01
(10), Wis. Stats.
(21) "Responsible party" means the landowner or
any other entity performing services to meet the
requirements of this ordinance through a contract
or other agreement.
(22) "Runoff" means stormwater or precipitation
including rain, snow or ice melt or similar water
that moves on the land surface via sheet or
channelized flow.
(23) "Sediment" means settleable solid material
that is transported by runoff, suspended within
runoff or deposited by runoff away from its
original location.
(24) "Silviculture activity" means activities
including tree nursery operations, tree harvesting
operations, reforestation, tree thinning,
prescribed burning, and pest and fire control.
Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction
site is not a silviculture activity.
(25) "Site" means the entire area included in the
legal description of the land on which the land
disturbing construction activity is proposed in
the permit application.
(26) "Stop work order" means an order issued by
the Village Administrator which requires that all
construction activity on the site be stopped.
(27) "Technical standard" means a document that
specifies design, predicted performance and
operation and maintenance specifications for a
material, device or method.
(28) "Transportation facility" means a highway, a
railroad, a public mass transit facility, a
public-use airport, a public trail or any other
public work for transportation purposes such as
harbor improvements under §85.095 (1)(b), Wis.
Stats. "Transportation facility" does not include
building sites for the construction of public
buildings and buildings that are places of
employment that are regulated by the Department
pursuant to §281.33, Wis. Stats.
(29) "Waters of the state" includes those
portions of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within
the boundaries of this state, and all lakes, bays,
rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding
reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage
systems and other surface water or groundwater,
natural or artificial, public or private, within
this state or its jurisdiction.
(f) Applicability of Maximum Extent Practicable.
Maximum extent practicable applies when a person who is subject
to a performance standard of this ordinance demonstrates to the
Village Administrator’s satisfaction that a performance standard
is not achievable and that a lower level of performance is
appropriate. In making the assertion that a performance standard
is not achievable and that a level of performance different from
the performance standard is the maximum extent practicable, the
responsible party shall take into account the best available
technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other
competing interests such as protection of public safety and
welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and
preservation of historic properties.
(g) Technical Standards. All BMPs required for
compliance with this ordinance shall meet design criteria,
standards and specifications based on any of the following:
(1) Design guidance and technical standards
identified or developed by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under subchapter V
of chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) Soil loss prediction tools (such as the
Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE)) when using an
appropriate rainfall or runoff factor (also
referred to as the R factor) or an appropriate
design storm and precipitation distribution, and
when considering the geographic location of the
site and the period of disturbance.
(3) Technical standards and methods approved by
the Village Administrator.
(h) Performance Standards for Construction Sites under
One Acre.
(1) Responsible Party. The responsible party
shall comply with this section.
(2) Erosion and Sediment Control Practices.
Erosion and sediment control practices at each
site where land disturbing construction activity
is to occur shall be used to prevent or reduce all
of the following:
(a) The deposition of soil from being
tracked onto streets by vehicles.
(b) The discharge of sediment from
disturbed areas into on-site stormwater
inlets.
(c) The discharge of sediment from disturbed
areas into adjacent waters of the state.
(d) The discharge of sediment from drainage
ways that flow off the site.
(e) The discharge of sediment by dewatering
activities.
(f) The discharge of sediment eroding from
soil stockpiles existing for more than seven
(7) days.
(g) The transport by runoff into waters of
the state of chemicals, cement, and other
building compounds and materials on the
construction site during the construction
period.
However, projects that require the placement
of these materials in waters of the state,
such as constructing bridge footings or BMP
installations, are not prohibited by this
subdivision.
(3) Location. The BMPs shall be located so that
treatment occurs before runoff enters waters of
the state.
(4) Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with
this section shall be implemented as follows:
(a) Erosion and sediment control practices
shall be constructed or installed before land
disturbing construction activities begin.
(b) Erosion and sediment control practices
shall be maintained until final
stabilization.
(c) Final stabilization activity shall
commence when land disturbing activities
cease and final grade has been reached on any
portion of the site.
(d) Temporary stabilization activity shall
commence when land disturbing activities have
temporarily ceased and will not resume for a
period exceeding fourteen (14) calendar days.
(e) BMPs that are no longer necessary for
erosion and sediment contrai shall be removed
by the responsible party.
(i) Performance Standards for Construction Sites of
One Acre or More.
(1) Responsible Party. The responsible party
shall comply with this section and implement the
erosion and sediment control plan developed in
accordance with §12.13(k).
(2) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A written
site-specific erosion and sediment control plan
shall be developed in accordance with §12.13(k) of
this ordinance and implemented for each
construction site.
(3) Erosion and Other Pollutant Control
Requirements. The erosion and sediment control
plan required under §12.13(i)(2) shall include the
following:
(a) Erosion and Sediment Control Practices.
Erosion and sediment control practices at
each site where land disturbing construction
activity is to occur shall be used to prevent
or reduce all of the following:
(1) The deposition of soil from being
tracked onto streets by vehicles.
(2) The discharge of sediment from
disturbed areas into on-site stormwater
inlets.
(3) The discharge of sediment from
disturbed areas into adjacent waters of
the state.
(4) The discharge of sediment from
drainage ways that flow off the site.
(5) The discharge of sediment by
dewatering activities.
(6) The discharge of sediment eroding
from soil stockpiles existing for more
than seven (7) days.
(7) The discharge of sediment from
erosive flows at outlets and in
downstream channels.
(8) The transport by runoff into waters
of the state of chemicals, cement, and
other building compounds and materials
on the construction site during the
construction period. However, projects
that require the placement of these
materials in waters of the state, such
as constructing bridge footings or BMP
installations, are not prohibited by
this subdivision.
(9) The transport by runoff into waters
of the state of untreated wash water
fromd vehicle and wheel washing.
(b) Sediment Performance Standards. In
addition to the erosion and sediment control
practices under §12.13(i)(3)(b)(1), the
following erosion and sediment control
practices shall be employed:
(1) BMPs that, by design, discharge no
more than five (5) tons per acre per
year, or to the maximum extent
practicable, of the sediment load
carried in runoff from initial grading
to final stabilization.
(2) No person shall be required to
employ more BMPs than are needed to meet
a performance standard in order to
comply with maximum extent practicable.
Erosion and sediment control BMPs may be
combined to meet the requirements of
this paragraph. Credit may be given
toward meeting the sediment performance
standard of this paragraph for limiting
the duration or area, or both, of land
disturbing construction activity, or for
other appropriate mechanisms.
(3) Notwithstanding §12.13(i)(3)(b)(1),
if BMPs cannot be designed and
implemented to meet the sediment
performance standard, the erosion and
sediment control plan shall include a
written, site-specific explanation of
why the sediment performance standard
cannot be met and how the sediment load
will be reduced to the maximum extent
practicable.
(c) Preventive Measures. The erosion and
sediment control plan shall incorporate all
of the following:
(1) Maintenance of existing vegetation,
especially adjacent to surface waters
whenever possible.
(2) Minimization of soil compaction and
preservation of topsoil.
(3) Minimization of land disturbing
construction activity on slopes of
twenty (20%) percent or more.
(4) Development of spill prevention and
response procedures.
(d) Location. The BMPs used to comply with
this section shall be located so that
treatment occurs before runoff enters waters
of the state.
(4) Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with
this section shall be implemented as follows:
(a) Erosion and sediment control practices
shall be constructed or installed before land
disturbing construction activities begin in
accordance with the erosion and sediment
control plan developed in §12.13(i)(2).
(b) Erosion and sediment control practices
shall be maintained until final
stabilization.
(c) Final stabilization activity shall
commence when land disturbing activities
cease and final grade has been reached on any
portion of the site.
(d) Temporary stabilization activity shall
commence when land disturbing activities have
temporarily ceased and will not resume for a
period exceeding fourteen (14) calendar days.
(e) BMPs that are no longer necessary for
erosion and sediment control shall be removed
by the responsible party.
(j) Permitting Requirements, Procedures and Fees.
(1) Permit Required. No responsible party may
commence a land disturbing construction activity
subject to this ordinance without receiving prior
approval of an erosion and sediment control plan
for the site and a permit from the Village
Administrator.
(2) Permit Application and Fees. The responsible
party that will undertake a land disturbing
construction activity subject to this ordinance
shall submit an application for a permit and an
erosion and sediment control plan that meets the
requirements of §12.13(k), and shall pay an
application fee to the Village Treasurer in the
amount specified in §12.13(l). By submitting an
application, the applicant is authorizing the
Village Administrator to enter the site to obtain
information required for the review of the erosion
and sediment control plan.
(3) Permit Application Review and Approval. The
Village Administrator shall review any permit
application that is submitted with an erosion and
sediment control plan, and the required fee. The
following approval procedure shall be used:
(a) Within fifteen (15) business days of the
receipt of a complete permit application, as
required by §12.13(j)(2), the Village
Administrator shall inform the applicant
whether the application and erosion and
sediment control plan are approved or
disapproved based on the requirements of this
ordinance.
(b) If the permit application and erosion
and sediment control plan are approved, the
Village Administrator shall issue the permit.
(c) If the permit application or erosion and
sediment control plan is disapproved, the
Village Administrator shall state in writing
the reasons for disapproval.
(d) The Village Administrator may request
additional information from the applicant. If
additional information is submitted, the
Village Administrator shall have ten (10)
business days from the date the additional
information is received to inform the
applicant that the erosion and sediment
control plan is either approved or
disapproved.
(4) Surety Bond. As a condition of approval and
issuance of the permit, the Village Administrator
may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond
or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a
good faith execution of the approved erosion and
sediment control plan and any permit conditions.
(5) Permit Requirements. All permits shall
require the responsible party to:
(a) Notify the Village Administrator within
forty-eight (48) hours of commencing any land
disturbing construction activity.
(b) Notify the Village Administrator of
completion of any BMPs within fourteen (14)
days after their installation.
(c) Obtain permission in writing from the
Village Administrator prior to any
modification pursuant to §12.13(k)(3) of the
erosion and sediment control plan.
(d) Install all BMPs as identified in the
approved erosion and sediment control plan.
(e) Maintain all road drainage systems,
stormwater drainage systems, BMPs and other
facilities identified in the erosion and
sediment control plan.
(f) Repair any siltation or erosion damage
to adjoining surfaces and drainage ways
resulting from land disturbing construction
activities and document repairs in a site
inspection log.
(g) Inspect the BMPs within twenty-four (24)
hours after each rain of one-half (0.5)
inches or more which results in runoff during
active construction periods, and at least
once each week. Make needed repairs and
install additional BMPs as necessary, and
document these activities in an inspection
log that also includes the date of
inspection, the name of the person conducting
the inspection, and a description of the
present phase of the construction at the
site.
(h) Allow the Village Administrator to
enter the site for the purpose of inspecting
compliance with the erosion and sediment
control plan or for performing any work
necessary to bring the site into compliance
with the erosion and sediment control plan.
Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment
control plan at the construction site.
(6) Permit Conditions. Permits issued under this
section may include conditions established by
Village Administrator in addition to the
requirements set forth in §12.13(j)(5), where
needed to assure compliance with the performance
standards in §12.13(h) or §12.13(i).
(7) Permit Duration. Permits issued under this
section shall be valid for a period of one hundred
eighty (180) days, or the length of the building
permit or other construction authorizations,
whichever is longer, from the date of issuance.
The Village Administrator may grant one or more
extensions not to exceed one hundred eighty (180)
days cumulatively. The Village Administrator may
require additional BMPs as a condition of an
extension if they are necessary to meet the
requirements of this ordinance.
(8) Maintenance. The responsible party throughout
the duration of the construction activities shall
maintain all BMPs necessary to meet the
requirements of this ordinance until the site has
undergone final stabilization.
(k) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Statement and
Amendments.
(1) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Statement.
For each construction site identified under
§12.13(d)(1)(c), an erosion and sediment control
plan statement shall be prepared. This statement
shall be submitted to the Village Administrator.
The erosion and sediment control plan statement
shall briefly describe the site, the development
schedule, and the BMPs that will be used to meet
the requirements of the ordinance. A site map
shall also accompany the erosion and sediment
control plan statement.
(2) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
Requirements.
(a) An erosion and sediment control plan
shall be prepared and submitted to the
Village Administrator.
(b) The erosion and sediment control plan
shall be designed to meet the performance
standards in §12.13(h) and §12.13(i) and
other requirements of this ordinance.
(c) The erosion and sediment control plan
shall address pollution caused by soil
erosion and sedimentation during construction
and up to final stabilization of the site.
The erosion and sediment control plan shall
include, at a minimum, the following items:
(1) Name(s) and address(es) of the
owner or developer of the site, and of
any consulting firm retained by the
applicant, together with the name of the
applicant's principal contact at such
firm. The application shall also include
start and end dates for construction.
(2) Description of the construction
site and the nature of the land
disturbing construction activity,
including representation of the limits
of land disturbance on a United States
Geological Service 7.5 minute series
topographic map.
(3) Description of the intended
sequence of major land disturbing
construction activities for major
portions of the construction site,
including stripping and clearing; rough
grading; construction of utilities,
infrastructure, and buildings; and final
grading and landscaping. Sequencing
shall identify the expected date on
which clearing will begin, the estimated
duration of exposure of cleared areas,
areas of clearing, installation of
temporary erosion and sediment control
measures, and establishment of permanent
vegetation.
(4) Estimates of the total area of the
construction site and the total area of
the construction site that is expected
to be disturbed by land disturbing
construction activities.
(5) Calculations to show the compliance
with the performance standard in
§12.13(h)(3)(b)(1).
(6) Existing data describing the
surface soil as well as subsoils.
(7) Depth to groundwater, as indicated
by Natural Resources Conservation
Service soil information where
available.
(8) Name of the immediate named
receiving water from the United States
Geological Service seven and one-half
(7.5) minute series topographic maps.
(d) The erosion and sediment control plan
shall include a site map. The site map shall
include the following items and shall be at a
scale not greater than one hundred (100) feet
per inch and at a contour interval not to
exceed five (5) feet.
(1) Existing topography, vegetative
cover, natural and engineered drainage
systems, roads and surface waters.
Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels,
ditches and other watercourses on and
immediately adjacent to the site shall
be shown. Any identified one hundred
(100) year flood plains, flood fringes
and floodways shall also be shown.
(2) Boundaries of the construction
site.
(3) Drainage patterns and approximate
slopes anticipated after major grading
activities.
(4) Areas of soil disturbance.
(5) Location of major structural and
non-structural controls identified in
the erosion and sediment control plan.
(6) Location of areas where
stabilization BMPs will be employed.
(7) Areas which will be vegetated
following land disturbing construction
activities.
(8) Area(s) and location(s) of wetland
on the construction site, and locations
where stormwater is discharged to a
surface water or wetland within
one-quarter (1/4) mile downstream of the
construction site.
(9) Areas(s) used for infiltration of
post-construction stormwater runoff.
(10) An alphanumeric or equivalent grid
overlying the entire construction site
map.
(e) Each erosion and sediment control plan
shall include a description of appropriate
control BMPs that will be installed and
maintained at the construction site to
prevent pollutants from reaching waters of
the state. The erosion and sediment control
plan shall clearly describe the appropriate
erosion and sediment control BMPs for each
major land disturbing construction activity
and the timing during the period of land
disturbing construction activity that the
erosion and sediment control BMPs will be
implemented. The description of erosion and
sediment control BMPs shall include, when
appropriate, the following minimum
requirements:
(1) Description of interim and
permanent stabilization practices,
including a BMP implementation schedule.
The erosion and sediment control plan
shall ensure that existing vegetation is
preserved where attainable and that
disturbed portions of the site are
stabilized.
(b) Description of structural practices
to divert flow away from exposed soils,
store flows or otherwise limit runoff
and the discharge of pollutants from the
site. Unless otherwise specifically
approved in writing by the Village
Administrator, structural measures shall
be installed on upland soils.
(c) Management of overland flow at all
areas of the construction site, unless
otherwise controlled by outfall
controls.
(d) Trapping of sediment in channefized
flow.
(e) Staging land disturbing
construction activities to limit exposed
soil areas subject to erosion.
(6) Protection of downslope drainage
inlets where they occur.
(7) Minimization of tracking at all
vehicle and equipment entry and exit
locations of the construction site.
(8) Clean up of off-site sediment
deposits.
(9) Proper disposal of building and
waste material.
(10) Stabilization of drainage ways.
(11) Installation of permanent
stabilization practices as soon as
possible after final grading.
(12) Minimization of dust to the maximum
extent practicable.
(f) The erosion and sediment control plan
shall require that velocity dissipation
devices be placed at discharge locations and
along the length of any outfall channel as
necessary to provide a non-erosive flow from
the structure to a water course so that the
natural physical and biological
characteristics and functions are maintained
and protected.
(3) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Amendments.
The applicant shall amend the erosion and sediment
control plan if any of the following occur:
(a) There is a change in design,
construction, operation or maintenance at the
site which has the reasonable potential for
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
state and which has not otherwise been
addressed in the erosion and sediment control
plan.
(b) The actions required by the erosion and
sediment control plan fail to reduce the
impacts of pollutants carried by construction
site runoff.
(c) The Village Administrator notifies the
applicant of changes needed in the erosion
and sediment control plan.
(l) Fee Schedule. The fees referred to in other
sections of this ordinance shall be established by the Village
Board and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A
schedule of the fees established by the Village Board shall be
available for review in the office of the Village
Clerk/Treasurer.
(m) Inspection. If land disturbing construction
activities are occurring without a permit required by this
ordinance, the Village Administrator may enter the land pursuant
to the provisions of §66.0119 (1), (2), and (3), Wis. Stats.
(n) Enforcement.
(1) The Village Administrator may post a stop
work order if any of the following occurs:
(a) Land disturbing construction activity
regulated under this ordinance is occurring
without a permit.
(b) The erosion and sediment control plan is
not being implemented in good faith.
(c) The conditions of the permit are not
being met.
(2) If the responsible party does not cease
activity as required in a stop work order posted
under this section or fails to comply with the
erosion and sediment control plan or permit
conditions, the Village Administrator may revoke
the permit.
(3) If the responsible party, where no permit has
been issued or the permit has been revoked, does
not cease the activity after being notified by the
Village Administrator, or if a responsible party
violates a stop work order posted under
§12.13(n)(1), the Village Administrator may
request the Village Attorney to obtain a cease and
desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
(4) The Village Administrator or Board of Appeals
may retract the stop work order issued under
§12.13(n)(1) or the permit revocation under
§12.13(n)(2).
(5) After posting a stop work order under
§12.13(n)(1), the Village Administrator may issue
a notice of intent to the responsible party of its
intent to perform work necessary to comply with
this ordinance. The Village Administrator may go
on the land and commence the work after issuing
the notice of intent. The costs of the work
performed under this subsection by the Village
Administrator, plus interest at the rate of
eighteen (18%) percent per annum, shall be billed
to the responsible party. In the event a
responsible party fails to pay the amount due, the
Clerk/Treasurer shall enter the amount due on the
tax rolls and collect as a special assessment
against the property pursuant to subch. VII of ch.
66, Wis. Stats.
(6) Any person violating any of the provisions of
this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of
not less than Five ($50.00) Dollars nor more than
Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars and the costs of
prosecution for each violation. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
(7) Compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance may also be enforced by injunction in
any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be
necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease
and desist order before resorting to injunctional
proceedings.
(o) Appeals.
(1) Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals
created pursuant to §12.09 of the Village’s Code
of Ordinances pursuant to §61.354 (4)(b), Wis.
Stats.:
(a) Shall hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged that there is error in any order,
decision or determination made by the Village
Administrator in administering this ordinance
except for cease and desist orders obtained
under §12.13(n)(3).
(b) May authorize, upon appeal, variances
from the provisions of this ordinance which
are not contrary to the public interest and
where owing to special conditions a literal
enforcement of the provisions of the
ordinance will result in unnecessary
hardship; and
(c) Shall use the rules, procedures, duties
and powers authorized by statute in hearing
and deciding appeals and authorizing
variances.
(2) Who May Appeal. Appeals to the Board of
Appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by
any office, department, board, or bureau of the
Village of Paddock Lake affected by any decision
of the Village of Paddock Lake.
(p) Severability. If a court of competent
jurisdiction judges any section, clause, provision or portion of
this ordinance unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the
ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected by such
judgment.
12.14 ENFORCEMENT OF STATE BUILDING CODE.
(a) Authority. These regulations are adopted under
the authority granted by §101.12, Wis. Stats.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to
promote the general health, safety and welfare by enforcing the
adopted codes.
(c) Adoption of Codes. The following Wisconsin
Administrative Codes and subsequent revisions are adopted for
municipal enforcement by the building inspector, who shall be
commercially certified by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services.
Chs. SPS 361-366 Wisconsin Building and
Heating, Ventilating and Air
Conditioning Code
Chs. SPS 375-379 Existing Building Code
Ch. SPS 316 Electrical Inspection Agency
(d) Building Inspector. The Building Inspector
authorized by the municipality to enforce the adopted codes shall
be properly certified by the Department of Industry, Labor and
Human Relations.
(e) Building Permit Required. No person shall build
or cause to be built any new public building containing less than
50,000 cubic feet in total volume or alter a public building
involving less than 100,000 cubic feet in total volume, without
first submitting plans and specifications to the building
inspector and obtaining a building permit for such building.
(f) Building Permit Fee. Building permit fees shall
be determined by resolution.
(g) Penalties. Enforcement of this section shall be
by means of withholding of building permits, imposition of
forfeitures and injunctive action. Forfeitures shall be not less
than $25.00 nor more than $1,000 for each day of noncompliance.
(h) Effective Date. This ordinance shall be effective
September 1, 1993, upon passage and publication as provided by
law.
12.15 BUILDING SITE START TIMES.
No person shall build or cause to built any new
building, addition, remodeling or other type of construction,
destruction or earth moving activity prior to 7:00 a.m. local
time nor shall such construction extend beyond 8:00 p.m. local
time.
12.16 RESERVED.
12.17 RESERVED.
12.18 POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
(a) Authority.
(1) This ordinance is adopted by the Village
Board under the authority granted by §61.354, Wis.
Stats. This ordinance supersedes all provisions of
an ordinance previously enacted under §60.62 or
§61.35, Wis. Stats., that relate to stormwater
management regulations. Except as otherwise
specified in §61.354, Wis. Stats., §61.35, Wis.
Stats., applies to this ordinance and to any
amendments to this ordinance.
(2) The provisions of this ordinance are deemed
not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers of
the same governing body.
(3) The Village Board hereby designates the
Village Administrator or his designee to
administer and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance.
(4) The requirements of this ordinance do not
pre-empt more stringent stormwater management
requirements that may be imposed by any of the
following:
(a) Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources administrative rules, permits or
approvals including those authorized under
§281.16 and §283.33, Wis. Stats.
(b) Targeted non-agricultural performance
standards promulgated in rules by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
under §NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) Findings of Fact. The Village Board acknowledges
that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a
significant impact upon water resources and the
health, safety and general welfare of the
community and diminishes the public enjoyment and
use of natural resources. Specifically,
uncontrolled post-construction runoff can:
(1) Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing
stream bank erosion, increasing streambed scour,
diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing
stream base flows and increasing stream
temperature.
(2) Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to
support fish, aquatic life, recreational and water
supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of
sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy
metals, bacteria, pathogens and other urban
pollutants.
(3) Alter wetland communities by changing wetland
hydrology and by increasing pollutant loads.
(4) Reduce the quality of groundwater by
increasing pollutant loading.
(5) Threaten public health, safety, property and
general welfare by overtaxing storm
sewers,drainage ways, and other minor drainage
facilities.
(c) Purpose and Intent.
(1) Purpose. The general purpose of this
ordinance is to establish long-term, postconstruction
runoff management requirements that
will diminish the threats to public health,
safety, welfare and the aquatic environment.
Specific purposes are to:
(1) Further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions.
(2) Prevent and control the adverse effects
of stormwater; prevent and control soil
erosion; prevent and control water pollution;
protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic
life; control building sites, placement of
structures and land uses; preserve ground
cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound
economic growth.
(3) Control exceedance of the safe capacity
of existing drainage facilities and receiving
water bodies; present undue channel erosion;
and control increases in the scouring and
transportation of particulate matter.
(4) Minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged from the separate storm sewer to
protect the waters of the state.
(2) Intent. It is the intent of the Village Board
that this ordinance regulates post-construction
stormwater discharges to waters of the state. This
ordinance may be applied on a site-by-site basis.
The Village Board recognizes, however, that the
preferred method of achieving the stormwater
performance standards set forth in this ordinance
is through the preparation and implementation of
comprehensive, systems-level stormwater management
plans that cover hydrologic units, such as
watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale.
Such plans may prescribe regional stormwater
devices, practices or systems, any of which may be
designed to treat runoff from more than one site
prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where
such plans are in conformance with the performance
standards developed under §281.16, Wis. Stats.,
for regional stormwater management measures and
have been approved by the Village Board, it is the
intent of this ordinance that the approved
stormwater management plan be used to identify
post-construction management measures acceptable
for the community.
(d) Applicability and Jurisdiction.
(1) Applicability.
(a) Except as provided under
§12.18(d)(1)(b), this ordinance applies to a
post-construction site whereupon one acre or
more of land disturbing construction activity
occurs during construction.
(b) A site that meets any of the criteria in
this paragraph is exempt from the
requirements of this ordinance:
(1) A post-construction site with less
than ten (10%) percent connected
imperviousness, based on the area of
land disturbance, provided the
cumulative area of all impervious
surfaces is less than one (1) acre.
However, the exemption of this paragraph
does not include exemption from the
protective area standard of this
ordinance.
(2) Agricultural facilities and
practices.
(c) Underground utility construction,
but not including the construction of
any above ground structures associated
with utility construction.
(c) Notwithstanding the applicability
requirements in §12.18(d)(1)(a), this
ordinance applies to post-construction sites
of any size that, as determined by the
Village Administrator, are likely to result
in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of
the existing drainage facilities or receiving
body of water, causes undue channel erosion,
or increases water pollution by scouring or
the transportation of particulate matter.
(2) Jurisdiction. This ordinance applies to post
construction sites within the boundaries and
jurisdiction of the Village of Paddock Lake as
well as all lands located within the
extraterritorial plat approval Jurisdiction of the
Village of Paddock Lake, even if plat approval is
not involved.
(3) Exclusions. This ordinance is not applicable
to activities conducted by a state agency, as
defined under §227.01 (1), Wis. Stats.
(e) Definitions.
(1) "Adequate sod, or self-sustaining vegetative
cover" means maintenance of sufficient vegetation
types and densities such that the physical
integrity of the streambank or lakeshore is
preserved. Self-sustaining vegetative cover
includes grasses, forbs, sedges and duff layers of
fallen leaves and woody debris.
(2) "Administering authority" means a
governmental employee, or a regional planning
commission empowered under §61.354, Wis. Stats.,
that is designated by the Village Board to
administer this ordinance.
(3) "Agricultural facilities and practices" has
the meaning given in §281.16 (1), Wis. Stats.
(4) "Atlas 14" means the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOM) Atlas 14
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Volume 8 (Midwestern States), published in
2013.
(5) "Average annual rainfall" means a typical
calendar year of precipitation as determined by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for
users of models such as WinSLAMM, P8 or equivalent
methodology. The average annual rainfall is chosen
from a department publication for the location
closest to the municipality.
(6) "Best management practice" or "BMP" means
structural or non-structural measures, practices,
techniques or devices employed to avoid or
minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff
to waters of the state.
(7) "Business day means a day the office of the
Village Administrator is routinely and customarily
open for business.
(8) "Cease and desist order" means a court-issued
order to halt land disturbing construction
activity that is being conducted without the
required permit or in violation of a permit issued
by the Village Administrator.
(9) "Combined sewer system" means a system for
conveying both sanitary sewage and stormwater
runoff.
(10) "Connected imperviousness" means an
impervious surface connected to the waters of the
state via a separate storm sewer, an impervious
flow path, or a minimally pervious flow path.
(11) "Design storm" means a hypothetical discrete
rainstorm characterized by a specific duration,
temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return
frequency and total depth of rainfall.
(12) "Development" means residential, commercial,
industrial or institutional land uses and
associated roads.
(13) "Direct conduits to groundwater" means wells,
sinkholes, swallets, fractured bedrock at the
surface, mine shafts, non-metallic mines, file
inlets discharging to groundwater, quarries, or
depressional groundwater recharge areas over
shallow fractured bedrock.
(14) "Division of land" means the creation from
one (1) parcel of four (4) or more parcels or
building sites of five (5) or fewer acres each in
area where such creation occurs at one time or
through the successive partition within a five (5)
year period.
(15) "Effective infiltration area" means the area
of the infiltration system that is used to
infiltrate runoff and does not include the area
used for site access, berms or pretreatment.
(16) "Erosion" means the process by which the
land's surface is worn away by the action of wind,
water, ice or gravity.
(17) "Exceptional resource waters" means waters
listed in §NR 102.11, Wis. Adm. Code.
(18) "Extraterritorial" means the unincorporated
area within three (3) miles of the corporate
limits of a first, second, or third class city, or
within one and a half (1 ½) miles of a fourth
class city or village
(19) "Filtering layer" means soil that has at
least a three (3) foot deep layer with at least
twenty (20%) percent fines; or at least a five (5)
foot deep layer with at least ten (10%) percent
fines; or an engineered soil with an equivalent
level of protection as determined by the
regulatory authority for the site.
(20) "Final stabilization" means that all land
disturbing construction activities at the
construction site have been completed and that a
uniform perennial vegetative cover has been
established with a density of at least seventy
(70%) percent of the cover for the unpaved areas
and areas not covered by permanent structures or
that employ equivalent permanent stabilization
measures.
(21) "Financial guarantee" means a performance
bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable
letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted
to the Village Administrator by the responsible
party to assure that requirements of the ordinance
are carried out in compliance with the stormwater
management plan.
(22) "Governing body" means town board of
supervisors, county board of supervisors, city
council, village board of trustees or village
council.
(23) Impervious surface" means an area that
releases as runoff all or a large portion of the
precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen
soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, gravel or
paved parking lots and streets are examples of
areas that typically are impervious.
(24) "In-fill" means an undeveloped area of land
located within an existing urban sewer service
area, surrounded by development or development and
natural or man-made features where development
cannot occur.
(25) "Infiltration" means the entry of
precipitation or runoff into or through the soil.
(26) "Infiltration system" means a device or
practice such as a basin trench, rain garden or
swale designed specifically to encourage
infiltration, but does not include natural
infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns,
redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns or
minimal infiltration from practices, such as
swales or road side channels designed for
conveyance and pollutant removal only.
(27) "Land disturbing construction activity" means
any man-made alteration of the land surface
resulting in a change in the topography or
existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover,
that may result in runoff and lead to an increase
in soil erosion and movement of sediment into
waters of the state. Land disturbing construction
activity includes clearing and grubbing,
demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering,
filling and grading activities.
(28) "Landowner" means any person holding fee
title, an easement or other interest in properly,
which allows the person to undertake cropping,
livestock management, land disturbing construction
activity or maintenance of stormwater BMPs on the
property.
(29) "Maintenance agreement" means a legal
document that provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
(30) "Maximum extent practicable" means the
highest level of performance that is achievable
but is not equivalent to a performance standard
identified in this ordinance as determined in
accordance with §17.21 of this ordinance.
(31) "New development" means development resulting
from the conversion of previously undeveloped land
or agricultural land uses.
(32) "NRCS MSE3 or MSE4 distribution" means a
specific precipitation distribution developed by
the United States Department of Agriculture,
Natural Resources Conservation Service, using
precipitation data from Atlas 14.
(33) "Off-site" means located outside the property
boundary described in the permit application.
(34) "On-site" means located within the property
boundary described in the permit application.
(35) "Ordinary high-water mark" has the meaning
given in §NR 115.03 (6), Wis. Adm. Code.
(36) "Outstanding resource waters" means waters
listed in §NR 102.10, Wis. Adm. Code.
(37) "Percent fines" means the percentage of a
given sample of soil, which passes through a #200
sieve.
(38) "Performance standard" means a narrative or
measurable number specifying the minimum
acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
(39) "Permit" means a written authorization made
by the Village Administrator to the applicant to
conduct land disturbing construction activity or
to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of
the state.
(40) "Permit administration fee" means a sum of
money paid to the Village by the permit applicant
for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred
by the authority in administering the permit.
(41) "Pervious surface" means an area that
releases as runoff a small portion of the
precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens,
parks, forests or other similar vegetated areas
are examples of surfaces that typically are
pervious.
(42) "Pollutant" has the meaning given in §283.01
(13), Wis. Stats.
(43) "Pollution" has the meaning given in §281.01
(10), Wis. Stats.
(44) "Post-construction site" means a construction
site following the completion of land disturbing
construction activity and final site
stabilization.
(45) "Pre-development condition" means the extent
and distribution of land cover types present
before the initiation of land disturbing
construction activity, assuming that all land uses
prior to development activity are managed in an
environmentally sound manner.
(46) "Preventive action limit" has the meaning
given in §NR 140.05 (17), Wis. Adm. Code.
(47) "Protective area" means an area of land that
commences at the top of the channel of lakes,
streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary
of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the
following widths, as measured horizontally from
the top of the channel or delineated wetland
boundary to the closest impervious surface.
(48) "Redevelopment" means areas where development
is replacing older development.
(49) "Responsible party" means the landowner or
any other entity performing services to meet the
requirements of this ordinance through a contract
or other agreement. "Runoff' means stormwater or
precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt or
similar water that moves on the land surface via
sheet or channelized flow.
(50) "Separate storm sewer" means a conveyance or
system of conveyances including roads with
drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm
drains, which meets all of the following criteria:
(a) Is designed or used for collecting water
or conveying runoff.
(b) Is not part of a combined sewer system.
(c) Is not part of a publicly owned
wastewater treatment works that provides
secondary or more stringent treatment.
(d) Discharges directly or indirectly to
waters of the state.
(51) "Silviculture activity" means activities
including tree nursery operations, tree harvesting
operations, reforestation, tree thinning,
prescribed burning, and pest and fire control.
Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction
site is not a silviculture activity.
(52) "Site" means the entire area included in the
legal description of the land on which the land
disturbing construction activity occurred.
(53) "Stop work order" means an order issued by
the Village Administrator which requires that all
construction activity on the site be stopped.
(54) "Stormwater management plan" means a
comprehensive plan designed to reduce the
discharge of pollutants from stormwater, after the
site has under gone final stabilization, following
completion of the construction activity.
(55) "Stormwater management system plan" is a
comprehensive plan designed to reduce the
discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic
units on a regional or municipal scale.
(56) "Technical standard" means a document that
specifies design, predicted performance and
operation and maintenance specifications for a
material, device or method.
(57) "Top of the channel" means an edge, or point
on the landscape landward from the ordinary highwater
mark of a surface water of the state, where
the slope of the land begins to be less than
twelve (12%) percent continually for at least
fifty (50) feet. If the slope of the land is
twelve (12%) percent or less continually for the
initial fifty (50) feet landward from the ordinary
high-water mark, the top of the channel is the
ordinary high-water mark.
(58) "Total maximum daily load" or "TWIDL" means
the amount of pollutants specified as a function
of one or more water quality parameters, that can
be discharged per day into a water quality limited
segment and still ensure attainment of the
applicable water quality standard.
(59) "TP-40" means Technical Paper No. 40,
Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the United States,
published in 1961.
(60) "TR-55" means the United States department of
agriculture, natural resources conservation
service (previously soil conservation service),
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second
Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986, which is
incorporated by reference for this chapter.
(61) "Transportation facility' means a highway, a
railroad, a public mass transit facility, a
public-use airport, a public trail or any other
public work for transportation purposes such as
harbor improvements under §85.095 (1)(b), Wis.
Stats. "Transportation facility" does not include
building sites for the construction of public
buildings and buildings that are places of
employment that are regulated by the Department
pursuant to §281.33, Wis. Stats.
(62) "TSS" means total suspended solids.
(63) "Type Il distribution" means a rainfall type
curve as established in the "United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, Technical Paper 149, published in 1973".
(64) "Waters of the state" includes those portions
of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within the
boundaries of this state, and all lakes, bays,
rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding
reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage
systems and other surface water or groundwater,
natural or artificial, public or private, within
this state or its jurisdiction.
(f) Applicability of Maximum Extent Practicable.
Maximum extent practicable applies when a person who is subject
to a performance standard of this ordinance demonstrates to the
Village Administrator’s satisfaction that a performance standard
is not achievable and that a lower level of performance is
appropriate. In making the assertion that a performance standard
is not achievable and that a level of performance different from
the performance standard is the maximum extent practicable, the
responsible party shall take into account the best available
technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other
competing interests such as protection of public safety and
welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and
preservation of historic properties.
(g) Technical Standards. The following methods shall
be used in designing the water quality, peak discharge, and
infiltration components of stormwater practices needed to meet
the water quality standards of this ordinance:
(1) Consistent with the technical standards
identified, developed or disseminated by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
subchapter V of chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) Where technical standards have not been
identified or developed by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources other technical
standards may be used provided that the methods
have been approved by the Village Board.
(h) Performance Standards.
(1) Responsible Party. The responsible party
shall comply with this section.
(2) Stormwater Management Plan. A written
stormwater management plan in accordance with
§12.18(j) shall be developed and implemented for
each post-construction site.
(3) Maintenance of Effort. For redevelopment
sites where the redevelopment will be replacing
older development that was subject to
post-construction performance standards of §NR 151
in effect on or after October 1, 2004, the
responsible party shall meet the total suspended
solids reduction, peak flow control, infiltration,
and protective areas standards applicable to the
older development or meet the redevelopment
standards of the ordinance, whichever is more
stringent.
(4) Requirements. The stormwater management plan
required under §12.18(h)(2) shall include the
following:
(a) Total Suspended Solids. BMPs shall be
designed, installed and maintained to control
total suspended solids carried in runoff from
the post-construction site as follows:
(1) BMPs shall be designed in
accordance with Table 1 or to the
maximum extent practicable as provided
in §12.18(h)(4)(a)(2). The design shall
be based on an average annual rainfall,
as compared to no runoff management
controls.
Table 1
TSS Reduction Standards
Development Type TSS Reduction
New Development 80 percent
In-Fill Development 80 percent
Redevelopment 40 percent of load from
parking areas and roads
(2) Maximum Extent Practicable. If the
design cannot meet a total suspended
solids reduction performance standard of
Table1, the stormwater management plan
shall include a written, site-specific
explanation of why the total suspended
solids reduction performance stnadard
cannot be met and why the total
suspended solids load will be reduced
only to the maximum extent practicable.
(30) Off-Site Drainage. When designing
BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from
off-site shall be taken into account in
determining the treatment efficiency of
the practice. Any impact on the
efficiency shall be compensated for by
increasing the size of the BMP
accordingly.
(b) Peak Discharge.
(1) By design, BMPs shall be employed
to maintain or reduce the one (1) year,
twenty-four (24) hour and the two (2)
year , twenty-four (24) hour postconstruction
peak runoff discharge rates
to the one (1) year, twenty-four (24)
hour; and the two (2) years, twenty-four
(24) hour pre-development peak runoff
discharge rates respectively, or to the
maximum extent practicable. The runoff
curve numbers in Table 2 shall be used
to represent the actual pre-development
conditions. Peak discharges shall be
calculated using TR-55 runoff curve
number methodology, Atlas 14
precipitation depths, and the
appropriate NRCS Wisconsin MSE3 or MSE4
precipitation distribution. On a
case-by-case basis, the Town
Administrator may allow the use of TP-40
precipitation depths and the Type II
distribution.
Table 2
Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers
Runoff Curve
Number
Hydrologic Soil Group
A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Grassland 39 61 71 78
Cropland 55 69 78 83
(2) This subsection of the ordinance
does not apply to any of the following:
(a) A post-construction site where
the discharge is directly into a
lake over five thousand (5,000)
acres or a stream or river segment
draining more than five hundred
(500) square miles.
(b) Except as provided under
§12.18(h)(3), a redevelopment
post-construction site.
(c) An in-fill development area
less than five (5) acres.
Note to Users: The intent of the
peak discharge standard is to
minimize stream bank erosion,
under bank-full conditions. For
water quantity concerns, the
post-development peak flow rate for
the ten (10), twenty-five (25),
fifty (50) and one hundred (100)
year twenty-four (24) hour storm
events should also be controlled
either at or below pre-development
discharge rates. This has not been
addressed in this model ordinance
but may need to be included in the
local ordinance to address local
flood control issues.
(c) Infiltration.
(1) Best Management Practices. BMPs
shall be designed, installed, and
maintained to infiltrate runoff in
accordance with the following or to the
maximum extent practicable:
(a) Low imperviousness. For
development up to forty (40%)
percent connected imperviousness,
such as parks, cemeteries, and low
density residential development,
infiltrate sufficient runoff volume
so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at
least ninety (90%) percent of the
pre-development infiltration
volume, based on an average annual
rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to
meet this requirement, no more than
one (1%) percent of the
post-construction site is required
as an effective infiltration area.
(b) Moderate imperviousness. For
development with more than forty
(40%) percent and up to eighty
(80%) percent connected
imperviousness, such as medium and
high density residential,
multi-family development,
industrial and institutional
development, and office parks,
infiltrate sufficient runoff volume
so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at
least seventy-five (75%) percent
of the pre-development infiltration
volume, based on an average annual
rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to
meet this requirement, no more than
two (2%) percent of the postconstruction
site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
(c) High imperviousness. For
development with more than eighty
(80%) percent connected
imperviousness, such as commercial
strip malls, shopping centers, and
commercial downtowns, infiltrate
sufficient runoff volume so that
the post-development infiltration
volume shall be at least sixty
(60%) percent of the
pre-development infiltration
volume, based on an average annual
rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to
meet this requirement, no more than
two (2%) percent of the
post-construction site is required
as an effective infiltration area.
(2) Pre-development. The
pre-development condition shall be the
same as specified in Table 2 of the Peak
Discharge section of this ordinance.
(3) Source Areas.
(a) Prohibitions. Runoff from the
following areas may not be
infiltrated and may not qualify as
contributing to meeting the
requirements of this section unless
demonstrated to meet the conditions
identified in §12.18(h)(4)(c)(6).
(i) Areas associated with a
tier 1 industrial facility
identified in §NR216.21
(2)(a), including storage,
loading and parking. Rooftops
may be infiltrated with the
concurrence of the regulatory
authority.
(ii) Storage and loading areas
of a tier 2 industrial
facility identified in §NR
216.21 (2)(b).
Note to Users: Runoff from the
employee and guest parking and
rooftop areas of a tier 2
facility may be infiltrated
but runoff from the parking
area may require pretreatment.
(iii)Fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas. Runoff from
rooftops of fueling and
vehicle maintenance areas may
be infiltrated with the
concurrence of the regulatory
authority.
(b) Exemptions. Runoff from the
following areas may be credited
toward meeting the requirement
when infiltrated, but the decision
to infiltrate runoff from these
source areas is optional:
(i) Parking areas and access
roads less than five thousand
(5,000) square feet for
commercial development.
(ii) Parking areas and access
roads less than five thousand
(5,000) square feet for
industrial development not
subject to the Prohibitions
under §12.18(h)(4)(c)(3)(a).
(iii) Except as provided under
§12.18(h)(3), redevelopment
post-construction sites.
(iv) In-fill development areas
less than five (5) acres.
(v) Roads on commercial,
industrial and institutional
land uses, and arterial
residential roads.
(4) Location of Practices.
(a) Prohibitions. Infiltration
practices may not be located in the
following areas:
(i) Areas within one thousand
(1,000) feet upgradient or
within one hundred (100) feet
downgradient of direct
conduits to groundwater.
(ii) Areas within four hundred
(400) feet of a community
water system well as specified
in §NR 811.16 (4) or within
the separation distances
listed in §NR 812.08 for any
private well or non-community
well for runoff infiltrated
from commercial, including
multi-family residential,
industrial and institutional
land uses or regional devices
for one- and two-family
residential development.
(iii) Areas where contaminants
of concern, as defined in §NR
720.03 (2), are present in the
soil through which
infiltration will occur.
(b) Separation distances.
(i) Infiltration practices
shall be located so that the
characteristics of the soil
and the separation distance
between the bottom of the
infiltration system and the
elevation of seasonal high
groundwater or the top of
bedrock are in accordance with
Table 3:
Table 3
Separation Distances and Soil Characteristics
Source Area Separation
Distance
Soil
Characteristics
Industrial,
Commercial,
Institutional
Parking Lots and
Roads
5 feet or more Filtering
Layer
Residential
Arterial Roads
5 feet or more Filtering
Layer
Roofs Draining to
Subsurface
Infiltration
Practices
1 foot or more Native or
Engineered
Soil
with Particles
Finer than
Coarse Sand
Roofs Draining to
Surface
Infiltration
Practices
Not Applicable Not Applicable
All Other
Impervious Source
Areas
3 feet or more Filtering
Layer
(ii) Notwithstanding
§12.18(h)(4)(c)(4)(b),
applicable requirements for
injection wells classified
under ch. NR 815 shall be
followed.
(c) Infiltration rate exemptions.
Infiltration practices located in
the following areas may be
credited toward meeting the
requirements under the following
conditions, but the decision to
infiltrate under these conditions
is optional:
(i) Where the infiltration
rate of the soil measured at
the proposed bottom of the
infiltration system is less
than 0.6 inches per hour
using a scientifically
credible field test method.
(ii) Where the least permeable
soil horizon to five (5) feet
below the proposed bottom of
the infiltration system using
the U.S. Department of
Agriculture method of soils
analysis is one of the
following: sandy clay loam,
clay loam, silty clay loam,
sandy clay, silty clay, or
clay.
(5) Alternate Use. Where alternate uses
of runoff are employed, such as for
toilet flushing, laundry, or irrigation
or storage on green roofs where an
equivalent portion of the runoff is
captured permanently by rooftop
vegetation, such alternate use shall be
given equal credit toward the
infiltration volume required by this
section.
(6) Groundwater Standards.
(a) Infiltration systems designed
in accordance with this section
shall, to the extent technically
and economically feasible, minimize
the level of pollutants
infiltrating to groundwater and
shall maintain compliance with the
preventive action limit at a point
of standards application in
accordance with ch. NR 140.
However, if site specific
information indicates that
compliance with a preventive action
limit is not achievable, the
infiltration BMP may not be
installed or shall be modified to
prevent infiltration to the maximum
extent practicable.
(b) Notwithstanding
§12.18(h)(4)(c)(6)(a), the
discharge from BMPs shall remain
below the enforcement standard at
the point of standards application.
(7) Pretreatment. Before infiltrating
runoff, pretreatment shall be required
for parking lot runoff and for runoff
from new road construction in
commercial, industrial and institutional
areas that will enter an infiltration
system The pretreatment shall be
designed to protect the infiltration
system from clogging prior to scheduled
maintenance and to protect groundwater
quality in accordance with
§12.18(h)(4)(c)(6). Pretreatment
options may include, but are not limited
to, oil and grease separation,
sedimentation, biofiltration,
filtration, swales or filter strips.
(8) Maximum Extent Practicable. Where
the conditions of §12.18(h)(4)(c)(3) and
(4) limit or restrict the use of
infiltration practices, the performance
standard of §12.18(h)(4)(c) shall be met
to the maximum extent practicable.
(d) Protective Areas.
(1) Definition. In this section,
"protective area" means an area of land
that commences at the top of the channel
of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the
delineated boundary of wetlands, and
that is the greatest of the following
widths, as measured horizontally from
the top of the channel or delineated
wetland boundary to the closest
impervious surface However, in this
section, "protective area" does not
include any area of land adjacent to any
stream enclosed within a pipe or
culvert, so that runoff cannot enter the
enclosure at this location.
(a) For outstanding resource
waters and exceptional resource
waters, seventy-five (75) feet.
(b) For perennial and intermittent
streams identified on a U.S.
Geological Survey 7.5-minute series
topographic map, or a county soil
survey map, whichever is more
current, fifty (50) feet.
(c) For lakes, fifty (50) feet.
(d) For wetlands not subject to
§12.18(h)(4)(d)(1)(e) or (f), fifty
(50) feet.
(e) For highly susceptible
wetlands, seventy-five (75) feet.
Highly susceptible wetlands include
the following types: calcareous
fens, sedge meadows, open and
coniferous bogs, low prairies,
coniferous swamps, lowland hardwood
swamps, and ephemeral ponds.
(f) For less susceptible wetlands,
ten (10%) percent of the average
wetland width, but no less than
ten (10) feet nor more than thirty
(30) feet. Less susceptible
wetlands include: degraded wetland
dominated by invasive species such
as reed canary grass; cultivated
hydric soils; and any gravel pits,
or dredged material or fill
material disposal sites that take
on the attributes of a wetland.
(g) In §12.18(h)(4)(d)(1)(d) to
(f), determinations of the extent
of the protective area adjacent to
wetlands shall be made on the basis
of the sensitivity and runoff
susceptibility of the wetland in
accordance with the standards and
criteria in §NR 103.03.
(h) Wetland boundary delineation
shall be made in accordance with
§NR 103.08 (1m). This paragraph
does not apply to wetlands that
have been completely filled in
compliance with all applicable
state and federal regulations. The
protective area for wetlands that
have been partially filled in
compliance with all applicable
state and federal regulations shall
be measured from the wetland
boundary delineation after a fill
has been placed. Where there is a
legally authorized wetland fill,
the protective area standard need
not be met in that location.
(i) For concentrated flow channels
with drainage areas greater than
one hundred thirty (130) acres, ten
(10) feet.
(j) Notwithstanding
§12.18(h)(4)(d)(1)(a) to (i), the
greatest protective area width
shall apply where rivers, streams,
lakes and wetlands are contiguous.
(2) Applicability. This section applies
to post-construction sites located
within a protective area, except those
areas exempted pursuant to
§12.18(h)(4)(d)(4).
(3) Requirements. The following
requirements shall be met:
(a) Impervious surfaces shall be
kept out of the protective area
entirely or to the maximum extent
practicable. If there is no
practical alternative to locating
an impervious surface in the
protective area, the stormwater
management plan shall contain a
written, site-specific explanation.
(b) Where land disturbing
construction activity occurs within
a protective area, adequate sod or
self-sustaining vegetative cover of
seventy (70%) percent or greater
shall be established and maintained
where no impervious surface is
present. The adequate sod or
self-sustaining vegetative cover
shall be sufficient to provide for
bank stability, maintenance of fish
habitat, and filtering of
pollutants from upslope overland
flow areas under sheet flow
conditions. Non-vegetative
materials, such as rock riprap, may
be employed on the bank as
necessary to prevent erosion such
as on steep slopes or where high
velocity flows occur.
Note to Users: It is recommended
that seeding of non-invasive
vegetative cover be used in the
protective areas. Some invasive
plants that should not be used are
listed in ch. NR 40, Wis. Adm.
Code. Flood and drought-tolerant
vegetation that can provide
long-term bank stability because of
an extensive root system is
preferable. Vegetative cover may be
measured using the line transect
method described in the University
of Wisconsin extension publication
number A3533, titled "Estimating
Residue Using the Line Transect
Method".
(c) BMPs such as filter strips,
swales, or wet detention ponds,
that are designed to control
pollutants from non-point sources
may be located in the protective
area.
(4) Exemptions. This section does not
apply to any of the following:
(a) Except as provided under
§12.18(h)(3), redevelopment
post-construction sites.
(b) In-fill development areas less
than five (5) acres.
(c) Structures that cross or
access surface water such as boat
landings, bridges, and culverts.
(d) Structures constructed in
accordance with §59.692 (1v),
Stats.
(e) Areas of post-construction
sites from which the runoff does
not enter the surface water,
including wetlands, without first
being treated by a BMP to meet the
local ordinance requirements for
total suspended solids and peak
flow reduction, except to the
extent that vegetative ground cover
is necessary to maintain bank
stability.
Note to Users: A vegetated
protective area to filter runoff
pollutants from post-construction
sites described in par. (e) is not
necessary since the runoff at that
location is treated prior to
entering the surface water. Other
practices necessary to meet the
requirements of this section, such
as a swale or pond, will need to be
designed and implemented to reduce
runoff pollutants prior to runoff
entering a surface water of the
state.
(e) Fueling and Maintenance Areas. Fueling
and vehicle maintenance areas shall have BMPs
designed, installed, and maintained to reduce
petroleum within runoff, so that the runoff
that enters waters of the state contains no
visible petroleum sheen, or to the maximum
extent practicable.
Note to Users: A combination of the following
BMPs may be used: oil and grease separators,
canopies, petroleum spill cleanup materials,
or any other structural or nonstructural
method of preventing or treating petroleum in
runoff.
(f) Swale Treatment for Transportation
Facilities.
(1) Requirement. Except as provided in
§12.18(h)(4)(f)(2), transportation
facilities that use swales for runoff
conveyance and pollutant removal are
exempt from the requirements of local
ordinance requirements for peak flow
control, total suspended solids control,
and infiltration, if the swales are
designed to do all of the following or
to the maximum extent practicable:
(a) Swales shall be vegetated.
However, where appropriate,
non-vegetative measures may be
employed to prevent erosion or
provide for runoff treatment, such
as rock riprap stabilization or
check dams.
Note to Users: It is preferred that
tall and dense vegetation be
maintained within the swale due to
its greater effectiveness at
enhancing runoff pollutant removal.
(b) Swales shall comply with
sections V.F. (Velocity and Depth)
and V.G. (Sale Geometry Criteria)
with a swale treatment length as
long as that specified in section
V.C. (Pre-Treatment) of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources technical standard 1005
“Vegetated Infiltration Swales”,
dated May 2007, or a superseding
document. Transportation facility
swale treatment does not have to
comply with other sections of
technical standard 1005.
(2) Other requirements.
(a) Notwithstanding
§12.18(h)(4)(f)(2)(i), the Village
Administrator may, consistent with
water quality standards, require
that other requirements, in
addition to swale treatment, be met
on a transportation facility with
an average daily traffic rate
greater than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) and where the
initial surface water of the state
that the runoff directly enters is
one of the following:
(i) An outstanding resource
water.
(ii) An exceptional resource
water.
(iii) Waters listed in
section 303 (d) of the Federal
Clean Water Act that are
identified as impaired in
whole or in part, due to
non-point source impacts.
(v) Water where targeted
performance standards are
developed pursuant to s. NR
151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) The transportation facility
authority shall contact the Village
Administrator to determine if
additional BMPs beyond a water
quality swale are needed under this
subsection.
(5) General Considerations for Stormwater
Management Measures. The following considerations
shall be observed in on-site and off-site runoff
management:
(a) Natural topography and land cover
features such as natural swales, natural
depressions, native soil infiltrating
capacity, and natural groundwater recharge
areas shall be preserved and used, to the
extent possible, to meet the requirements of
this section.
(b) Emergency overland flow for all
stormwater facilities shall be provided to
prevent exceeding the safe capacity of
downstream drainage facilities and prevent
endangerment of downstream property or public
safety.
(6) BMP Location.
(a) To comply with the performance standards
required under §12.18(h) of this ordinance,
BMPs may be located on!site or off!site as
part of a regional stormwater device,
practice or system, but shall be installed in
accordance with §NR 151.003, Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) The Village Administrator may approve
off-site management measures provided that
all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The Village Administrator
determines that the post-construction
runoff is covered by a stormwater
management system plan that is approved
by the Village of Paddock Lake and that
contains management requirements
consistent with the purpose and intent
of this ordinance.
(2) The off-site facility meets all of
the following conditions:
(a) The facility is in place.
(b) The facility is designed and
adequately sized to provide a level
of stormwater control equal to or
greater than that which would be
afforded by on-site practices
meeting the performance standards
of this ordinance.
(c) The facility has a legally
obligated entity responsible for
its long-term operation and
maintenance.
(c) Where a regional treatment option exists
such that the Village Administrator exempts
the applicant from all or part of the minimum
on-site stormwater management requirements,
the applicant shall be required to pay a fee
in an amount determined in negotiation with
the Village Administrator. In determining
the fee for post-construction runoff, the
Village Administrator shall consider an
equitable distribution of the cost for land,
engineering design, construction, and
maintenance of the regional treatment option.
(7) Additional Requirements. The Village
Administrator may establish stormwater management
requirements more stringent than those set forth
in this ordinance if the Village Administrator
determines that the requirements are needed to
control stormwater quantity or control flooding,
comply with federally approved total maximum daily
load requirements, or control pollutants
associated with existing development or
redevelopment.
(a) Permittig Requirements, Procedures and Fees.
(1) Permit Required. No responsible party may
undertake a land disturbing construction activity
without receiving a post-construction runoff
permit from the Village Administrator prior to
commencing the proposed activity.
(2) Permit Application and Fees. Unless
specifically excluded by this ordinance, any
responsible party desiring a permit shall submit
to the Village Administrator a permit application
on a form provided by the Village Administrator
for that purpose.
(a) Unless otherwise excluded by this
ordinance, a permit application must be
accompanied by a stormwater management plan,
a maintenance agreement and a non-refundable
permit administration fee.
(b) The stormwater management plan shall be
prepared to meet the requirements of
§12.18(h) and §12.18(j), the maintenance
agreement shall be prepared to meet the
requirements of §12.18(k), the financial
guarantee shall meet the requirements of
§12.18(l), and fees shall be those
established by the Village Board as set forth
in §12.18(m).
(3) Permit Application Review and Approval. The
Village Administrator shall review any permit
application that is submitted with a stormwater
management plan, maintenance agreement, and the
required fee. The following approval procedure
shall be used:
(a) Within fifteen (15) business days of the
receipt of a complete permit application,
including all items as required by
§12.18(i)(2), the Village Administrator shall
inform the applicant whether the application,
stormwater management plan and maintenance
agreement are approved or disapproved based
on the requirements of this ordinance.
(b) If the stormwater permit application,
stormwater management plan and maintenance
agreement are approved, or if an agreed upon
payment of fees in lieu of stormwater
management practices is made, the Village
Administrator shall issue the permit.
(c) If the stormwater permit application,
stormwater management plan or maintenance
agreement is disapproved, the Village
Administrator shall detail in writing the
reasons for disapproval.
(d) The Village Administrator may request
additional information from the applicant If
additional information is submitted, the
Village Administrator shall have ten (10)
business days from the date the additional
information is received to inform the
applicant that the stormwater management plan
and maintenance agreement are either approved
or disapproved.
(4) Permit Requirements. All permits issued under
this ordinance shall be subject to the following
conditions, and holders of permits issued under
this ordinance shall be deemed to have accepted
these conditions. The Village Administrator may
suspend or revoke a permit for violation of a
permit condition, following written notification
of the responsible party. An action by the Village
Administrator to suspend or revoke this permit may
be appealed in accordance with §12.18(o).
(a) Compliance with this permit does not
relieve the responsible party of the
responsibility to comply with other
applicable federal, state, and local laws and
regulations.
(b) The responsible party shall design and
install all structural and non-structural
stormwater management measures in accordance
with the approved stormwater management plan
and this permit.
(c) The responsible party shall notify the
Village Administrator at least five (5)
business days before commencing any work in
conjunction with the stormwater management
plan, and within fifteen (15) business days
upon completion of the stormwater management
practices or otherwise as agreed upon in
writing by the Village Administrator and the
responsible party. If required as a special
condition under §12.18(i)(5), the responsible
party shall make additional notification
according to a schedule set forth by the
Village Administrator so that practice
installations can be inspected during
construction.
(d) Practice installations required as part
of this ordinance shall be certified "as
built" or "record" drawings by a licensed
professional engineer. Completed stormwater
management practices must pass a final
inspection by the Village Administrator or
its designee to determine if they are in
accordance with the approved stormwater
management plan and ordinance. The Village
Administrator or its designee shall notify
the responsible party in writing of any
changes required in such practices to bring
them into compliance with the conditions of
this permit.
(e) The responsible party shall notify the
Village Administrator of any significant
modifications it intends to make to an
approved stormwater management plan. The
Village Administrator may require that the
proposed modifications be submitted to it for
approval prior to incorporation into the
stormwater management plan and execution by
the responsible party.
(f) The responsible party shall maintain all
stormwater management practices in accordance
with the stormwater management plan until the
practices either become the responsibility of
the Village Board, or are transferred to
subsequent private owners as specified in the
approved maintenance agreement.
(g) The responsible party authorizes the
Village Administrator to perform any work or
operations necessary to bring stormwater
management measures into conformance with the
approved stormwater management plan, and
consents to a special assessment or charge
against the property as authorized under
subch. VII of ch 66, Wis. Stats., or to
charging such costs against the financial
guarantee posted under §12.18(l).
(h) If so directed by the Village
Administrator, the responsible party shall
repair at the responsible party's own expense
all damage to adjoining municipal facilities
and drainage ways caused by runoff, where
such damage is caused by activities that are
not in compliance with the approved
stormwater management plan.
(i) The responsible party shall permit
property access to the Village Administrator
or its designee for the purpose of inspecting
the property for compliance with the approved
stormwater management plan and this permit.
(j) Where site development or redevelopment
involves changes in direction, increases in
peak rate and/or total volume of runoff from
a site, the Village Administrator may require
the responsible party to make appropriate
legal arrangements with affected property
owners concerning the prevention of
endangerment to property or public safety.
(k) The responsible party is subject to the
enforcement actions and penalties detailed in
§12.18(n), if the responsible party fails to
comply with the terms of this permit.
(5) Permit Conditions. Permits issued under this
subsection may include conditions established by
Village Administrator in addition to the
requirements needed to meet the performance
standards in §12.18(h) or a financial guarantee as
provided for in §12.18(l).
(6) Permit Duration. Permits issued under this
section shall be valid from the date of issuance
through the date the Village Administrator
notifies the responsible party that all stormwater
management practices have passed the final
inspection required under §12.18(i)(4)(d).
(j) Stormwater Management Plan.
(1) Stormwater Management Plan Requirements. The
stormwater management plan required under
§12.18(h)(2) shall contain at a minimum the
following information:
(a) Name, address, and telephone number for
the following or their designees landowner;
developer; project engineer for practice
design and certification; person(s)
responsible for installation of stormwater
management practices; and person(s)
responsible for maintenance of stormwater
management practices prior to the transfer,
if any, of maintenance responsibility to
another party.
(b) A proper legal description of the
property proposed to be developed, referenced
to the U.S. Public Land Survey system or to
block and lot numbers within a recorded land
subdivision plat.
(c) Pre-development site conditions,
including:
(1) One (1) or more site maps at a
scale of not less than one (1) inch
equals one hundred (100) feet. The site
maps shall show the following. site
location and legal property description;
predominant soil types and hydrologic
soil groups; existing cover type and
condition; topographic contours of the
site at a scale not to exceed two (2)
feet; topography and drainage network
including enough of the contiguous
properties to show runoff patterns onto,
through, and from the site; watercourses
that may affect or be affected by runoff
from the site; flow path and direction
for all stormwater conveyance sections;
watershed boundaries used in hydrology
determinations to show compliance with
performance standards; lakes, streams,
wetlands, channels, ditches, and other
watercourses on and immediately adjacent
to the site, limits of the one hundred
(100) year floodplain; location of wells
and wellhead protection areas covering
the project area and delineated pursuant
to §NR 811.16, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) Hydrology and pollutant loading
computations as needed to show
compliance with performance standards.
All major assumptions used in developing
input parameters shall be clearly
stated. The geographic areas used in
making the calculations shall be clearly
cross-referenced to the required map(s).
(d) Post-development site conditions,
including:
(1) Explanation of the provisions to
preserve and use natural topography and
land cover features to minimize changes
in peak flow runoff rates and volumes to
surface waters and wetlands.
(2) Explanation of any restrictions on
stormwater management measures in the
development area imposed by wellhead
protection plans and ordinances.
(3) One (1) or more site maps at a
scale of not less than one (1) inch
equals one hundred (100) feet showing
the following: post-construction
pervious areas including vegetative
cover type and condition; impervious
surfaces including all buildings,
structures, and pavement;
post-construction topographic contours
of the site at a scale not to exceed two
(2) feet; post-construction drainage
network including enough of the
contiguous properties to show runoff
patterns onto, through, and from the
site; locations and dimensions of
drainage easements; locations of
maintenance easements specified in the
maintenance agreement; flow path and
direction for all stormwater conveyance
sections; location and type of all
stormwater management conveyance and
treatment practices, including the
on-site and offsite tributary drainage
area; location and type of conveyance
system that will carry runoff from the
drainage and treatment practices to the
nearest adequate outlet such as a curbed
street, storm drain, or natural drainage
way; watershed boundaries used in
hydrology and pollutant loading
calculations and any changes to lakes,
streams, wetlands, channels, ditches,
and other watercourses on and
immediately adjacent to the site.
(4) Hydrology and pollutant loading
computations as needed to show
compliance with performance standards.
The computations shall be made for each
discharge point in the development, and
the geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly
cross-referenced to the required map(s).
(5) Results of investigations of soils
and groundwater required for the
placement and design of stormwater
management measures. Detailed drawings
including cross-sections and profiles of
all permanent stormwater conveyance and
treatment practices.
(e) A description and installation schedule
for the stormwater management practices
needed to meet the performance standards in
§17.23.
(f) A maintenance plan developed for the
life of each stormwater management practice
including the required maintenance activities
and maintenance activity schedule.
(g) Cost estimates for the construction,
operation, and maintenance of each stormwater
management practice.
(h) Other information requested in writing
by the Village Administrator to determine
compliance of the proposed stormwater
management measures with the provisions of
this ordinance.
(i) All site investigations, plans, designs,
computations, and drawings shall be certified
by a licensed professional engineer to be
prepared in accordance with accepted
engineering practice and requirements of this
ordinance.
(2) Alternate Requirements. The Village
Administrator may prescribe alternative submittal
requirements for applicants seeking an exemption
to on-site stormwater management performance
standards under §12.18(h)(5).
(k) Maintenance Agreement.
(1) Maintenance Agreement Required. The
maintenance agreement required under §12.18(i)(2)
for stormwater management practices shall be an
agreement between the Village Administrator and
the responsible party to provide for maintenance
of stormwater practices beyond the duration period
of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be
filed with the County Register of Deeds as a
property deed restriction so that it is binding
upon all subsequent owners of the land served by
the stormwater management practices
(2) Agreement Provisions. The maintenance
agreement shall contain the following information
and provisions and be consistent with the
maintenance plan required by §12.18(j)(1)(f).
(a) Identification of the stormwater
facilities and designation of the drainage
area served by the facilities.
(b) A schedule for regular maintenance of
each aspect of the stormwater management
system consistent with the stormwater
management plan required under §12.18(i)(2).
(c) Identification of the responsible
party(s), organization or city, county, town
or village responsible for long term
maintenance of the stormwater management
practices identified in the stormwater
management plan required under §12.18(i)(2).
(d) Requirement that the responsible
party(s), organization, or city, county, town
or village shall maintain stormwater
management practices in accordance with the
schedule included in §12.18(k)(2)(b).
(e) Authorization for the Village
Administrator to access the property to
conduct inspections of stormwater management
practices as necessary to ascertain that the
practices are being maintained and operated
in accordance with the agreement.
(f) A requirement on the Village
Administrator to maintain public records of
the results of the site inspections, to
inform the responsible party responsible for
maintenance of the inspection results, and to
specifically indicate any corrective actions
required to bring the stormwater management
practice into proper working condition.
(g) Agreement that the party designated
under §12.18(k)(2)(c), as responsible for
long term maintenance of the stormwater
management practices, shall be notified by
the Village Administrator of maintenance
problems which require correction. The
specified corrective actions shall be
undertaken within a reasonable time frame as
set by the Village Administrator.
(h) Authorization of the Village
Administrator to perform the corrected
actions identified in the inspection report
if the responsible party designated under
§12.18(k)(2)(c) does not make the required
corrections in the specified time period. The
Village Administrator shall enter the amount
due on the tax rolls and collect the money as
a special charge against the property
pursuant to subch. VII of ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
(l) Financial Guarantee.
(1) Establishment of the Guarantee. The Village
Administrator may require the submittal of a
financial guarantee, the form and type of which
shall be acceptable to the Village Administrator.
The financial guarantee shall be in an amount
determined by the Village Administrator to be the
estimated cost of construction and the estimated
cost of maintenance of the stormwater management
practices during the period which the designated
party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance
responsibility. The financial guarantee shall give
the Village Administrator the authorization to use
the funds to complete the stormwater management
practices if the responsible party defaults or
does not properly implement the approved
stormwater management plan, upon written notice to
the responsible party by the Village Administrator
that the requirements of this ordinance have not
been met.
(2) Conditions for Release. Conditions for the
release of the financial guarantee are as follows:
(a) The Village Administrator shall release
the portion of the financial guarantee
established under this section, less any
costs incurred by the Village Administrator
to complete installation of practices, upon
submission of "as built plans" or "record"
drawings by a licensed professional engineer.
The Village Administrator may make provisions
for a partial pro-rata release of the
financial guarantee based on the completion
of various development stages.
(b) The Village Administrator shall release
the portion of the financial guarantee
established under this section to assure
maintenance of stormwater practices, less any
costs incurred by the Village Administrator,
at such time that the responsibility for
practice maintenance is passed on to another
entity via an approved maintenance agreement.
(c) Under such other conditions as may be
stated in writing in an agreement between the
Village and the responsible party.
(m) Fee Schedule. The fees referred to in other
sections of this ordinance shall be established by the Village
Administrator and may from time to time be modified by
resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the Village
Administrator shall be available for review in office of the
Village Clerk/Treasurer.
(n) Enforcement.
(1) Any land disturbing construction activity or
post-construction runoff initiated after the
effective date of this ordinance by any person,
firm, association, or corporation subject to the
ordinance provisions shall be deemed a violation
unless conducted in accordance with the
requirements of this ordinance.
(2) The Village Administrator shall notify the
responsible party by certified mail of any noncomplying
land disturbing construction activity or
post-construction runoff. The notice shall
describe the nature of the violation, remedial
actions needed, a schedule for remedial action,
and additional enforcement action which may be
taken.
(3) Upon receipt of written notification from the
Village Administrator under §12.18(n)(2), the
responsible party shall correct work that does not
comply with the stormwater management plan or
other provisions of this permit. The responsible
party shall make corrections as necessary to meet
the specifications and schedule set forth by the
Village Administrator in the notice.
(4) If the violations to a permit issued pursuant
to this ordinance are likely to result in damage
to properties, public facilities, or waters of the
state, the Village Administrator may enter the
land and take emergency actions necessary to
prevent such damage. The costs incurred by the
Village Administrator plus interest and legal
costs shall be billed to the responsible party.
(5) The Village Administrator is authorized to
post a stop work order on all land disturbing
construction activity that is in violation of this
ordinance, or to request the Village Attorney to
obtain a cease and desist order in any court with
jurisdiction.
(6) The Village Administrator may revoke a permit
issued under this ordinance for non-compliance
with ordinance provisions.
(7) Any permit revocation, stop work order, or
cease and desist order shall remain in effect
unless retracted by the Village Administrator or
by a court with jurisdiction.
(8) The Village Administrator is authorized to
refer any violation of this ordinance, or a stop
work order or cease and desist order issued
pursuant to this ordinance, to the Village
Attorney for the commencement of further legal
proceedings in any court with jurisdiction.
(9) Any person, firm, association, or corporation
who does not comply with the provisions of this
ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than Fifty ($50.00) Dollars or more than Two
Hundred ($200.00) Dollars per offense, together
with the costs of prosecution. Each day that the
violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
(10) Compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance may also be enforced by injunction in
any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be
necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease
and desist order before resorting to injunctional
proceedings.
(11) When the Village Administrator determines
that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to
this ordinance has failed to follow practices set
forth in the stormwater management plan, or has
failed to comply with schedules set forth in said
stormwater management plan, the Village
Administrator or a party designated by the Village
Administrator may enter upon the land and perform
the work or other operations necessary to bring
the condition of said lands into conformance with
requirements of the approved stormwater management
plan. The Village Administrator shall keep a
detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of
performing this work. These costs and expenses
shall be deducted from any financial security
posted pursuant to §12.18(l) of this ordinance.
Where such a security has not been established, or
where such a security is insufficient to cover
these costs, the costs and expenses shall be
entered on the tax roll as a special charge
against the property and collected with any other
taxes levied thereon for the year in which the
work is completed.
(o) Appeals.
(1) Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals
created pursuant to §1.17 of the Village of
Paddock Lake ordinances pursuant to §61.354
(4)(b), Wis. Stats., shall hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged that there is error in any
order, decision or determination made by the
Village Administrator in administering this
ordinance. The Board shall also use the rules,
procedures, duties, and powers authorized by
statute in hearing and deciding appeals. Upon
appeal, the Board may authorize variances from the
provisions of this ordinance that are not contrary
to the public interest, and where owing to special
conditions a literal enforcement of the ordinance
will result in unnecessary hardship.
(2) Who May Appeal. Appeals to the Board of
Appeals may be taken by any aggrieved person or by
an officer, department, board, or bureau of the
Village of Paddock Lake affected by any decision
of the Village Administrator.
(p) Severability. If any section, clause, provision
or portion of this ordinance is judged unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
the ordinance shall remain in force and not be
affected by such judgment.
12.19 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS.
(a) Definitions. The following definitions shall be
applicable in this Section:
(1) Illicit Connection. Any drain or conveyance,
whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows
an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain
system including, but not limited to any
conveyances which allow any non-stormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater,
and wash water to enter the storm drain system and
any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether
said drain or connection had been allowed,
permitted, or approved by a government agency,
prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
(2) Person. Means any individual, association,
organization, partnership, firm, corporation or
other entity recognized by law and acting as
either the owner or as the owner’s agent.
(3) Storm Drain System. Publicly-owner
facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or
conveyed, including but not limited to any roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters,
curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins,
natural and human-made or altered drainage
channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
(b) Discharges Prohibited. No person shall discharge,
spill or dump substances or materials which are not entirely
composed of stormwater into receiving bodies of water or onto
driveways, sidewalks, parking lots or other areas that drain into
the storm drainage system.
(c) Connections Prohibited. The construction, use,
maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the
storm drainage system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly
includes, without limitation, illicit connections made prior to
the adoption of this ordinance, regardless of whether the
connections was permissible under law or practice applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection.
(d) Exemptions. The following activities are exempt
from the provisions of this section unless found to have an
adverse impact on the stormwater:
(1) Discharges authorized by a permit issued by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(2) Discharges resulting from fire fighting
activities.
(3) Discharges from uncontaminated ground water,
potable water source, roof drains, foundation
drain and sump pump, air conditioning
condensation, springs, lawn watering, individual
residential car washing, water main and hydrant
flushing and swimming pools if the water has been
dechlorinated.
(e) Enforcement. Whenever the Village of Paddock Lake
finds a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this section, the Village of Paddock Lake may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The elimination of illicit connections or
discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or
operations shall cease and desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater
pollution or contaminated hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
(4) In the event the person fails to eliminate
the illicit connects or discharge, fails to cease
and desist in discharge, practices or operations
in violation of this Section or fails to abate or
remediate the stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards, that person may be subject
to a forfeiture of not less than Fifty ($50.00)
Dollars nor more than Five Hundred ($500.00)
Dollars for each offense, together with the costs
of prosecution. Each day that the violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense. exists shall
constitute a separate offense.